flow. They cause the much-needed winter rains over the plains and snowfall in the mountains. Although the total amount of winter rainfall locally known as mahawat is small, they are of immense importance for the cultivation of Tabi crops. The peninsular region does not have a welldefined cold season. There is hardly any noticeable seasonal change in temperature pattern during winters due to the moderating influence of the sea. CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I Reprint 2025-26 AFGHANISTAN pare INDIA C. ~\ ey ADVANCING MONSOON & eer if ( Srinagar 9 ( t z ead i x Chandigarh E CHINA Cit Bel} PAKISTAN DELHI 4 te ad Sata wee 5 YS Lucknow D5, Shillong D ( ' , pe? 1 June Nagpur @ J g / ) MYANMAR ow ARABIAN SEA @ Hyderabad Bengaluru & e Y 9% ? o e : 4 ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS LAKSHADWEEP (INDIA) (INDIA) e 8 N & wee INDIAN \% Thinuvananthapuram , 72 E 76 Q Figure 4.1 : Advancing Monsoon OO = 29 Reprint 2025-26 The Hot Weather Season (Summer) Due to the apparent northward movement of the sun, the global heat belt shifts northwards. As such, from March to May, it is hot weather season in India. The influence of the shifting of the heat belt can be seen clearly from temperature recordings taken during MarchMay at different latitudes. In March, the highest temperature is about 38 Celsius, recorded on the Deccan plateau. In April, temperatures in Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh are around 42 Celsius. In May, temperature of 45 Celsius is common in the northwestern parts of the country. In peninsular India, temperatures remain lower due to the moderating influence of the oceans. The summer months experience rising temperature and falling air pressure in the northern part of the country. Towards the end of May, an elongated low-pressure area develops in the region extending from the Thar Desert in the northwest to Patna and Chotanagpur plateau in the east and southeast. Circulation of air begins to set in around this trough. Astriking feature of the hot weather season is the loo . These are strong, gusty, hot, dry winds blowing during the day over the north and northwestern India. Sometimes they even continue until late in the evening. Direct exposure to these winds may even prove to be fatal. Dust storms are very common during the month of May in northern India. These storms bring temporary relief as they lower the temperature and may bring light rain and cool breeze. This is also the season for localised thunderstorms, associated with violent winds, torrential downpours, often accompanied by hail. In West Bengal, these storms are known as the Kaal Baisalchi . Towards the close of the summer season, pre-monsoon showers are common especially, in Kerala and Karnataka. They help in the early ripening of mangoes, and are often referred to as mango showers . Advancing Monsoon (The Rainy Season) By early June, the low-pressure condition over the northern plains intensifies. It attracts, the trade winds