season for localised thunderstorms, associated with violent winds, torrential downpours, often accompanied by hail. In West Bengal, these storms are known as the Kaal Baisalchi . Towards the close of the summer season, pre-monsoon showers are common especially, in Kerala and Karnataka. They help in the early ripening of mangoes, and are often referred to as mango showers . Advancing Monsoon (The Rainy Season) By early June, the low-pressure condition over the northern plains intensifies. It attracts, the trade winds of the southern hemisphere. These south-east trade winds originate over the warm subtropical areas of the southern oceans. They cross the equator and blow in a southwesterly direction entering the Indian peninsula as the south-west monsoon. As these winds blow over warm oceans, they bring abundant moisture to the subcontinent. These winds are strong and blow at an average velocity of 30 km per hour. With the exception of the extreme north-west, the monsoon winds cover the country in about a month. The inflow of the south-west monsoon into India brings about a total change in the weather. Early in the season, the windward side of the Western Ghats receives very heavy rainfall, more than 250 cm. The Deccan Plateau and parts of Madhya Pradesh also receive some amount of rain in spite of lying in the rain shadow area. The maximum rainfall of this season is received in the north-eastern part of the country. Mawsynram in the southern ranges of the Khasi Hills receives the highest average rainfall in the world. Rainfall in the Ganga valley decreases from the east to the west. Rajasthan and parts of Gujarat get scanty rainfall. Another phenomenon associated with the monsoon is its tendency to have breaks in rainfall. Thus, it has wet and dry spells. In other words, the monsoon rains take place only for a few days at a time. They are interspersed with rainless intervals. These breaks in monsoon are related to the movement of the monsoon trough. For various reasons, the trough and its axis keep on moving northward or southward, which determines the spatial distribution of rainfall. When the axis of the monsoon trough lies over the plains, rainfall is good in these parts. On the other hand, whenever the axis shifts closer to the Himalayas, there are longer dry spells in the plains, and widespread rain occur in the mountainous catchment areas of the Himalayan rivers. These heavy rains bring in CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I Reprint 2025-26 AFGHANISTAN hm ett t A My 70 i ~ r ] 15 Sept. 4 @ Srinagar 9 t z Ct PAKISTAN ; ~ Chandigarh 7 a DELHI Ahmedabad Nagpur @ Mumbai ARABIAN SEA ! $ LAKSHADWEEP. (INDIA) Thiruvananthapuram INDIAN 72 E 76 INDIA RETREATING MONSOON d CHINA Sette ey al a | CMS af f BHUTAN % P f Shillong > tS em, Imphal 4 A (BANGLADESH J e/ , po fed be ly . I \n. i of Cancer MYANMAR Bhubaneswar ubane wa | E fy BENGAL ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS