(iii) Which part of India does experience the highest diurnal range of temperature and why? (iv) Which winds account for rainfall along the Malabar coast? (v) Define monsoons. What do you understand by break in monsoon? (vi) Why is the monsoon considered a unifying bond? 3. Why does the rainfall decrease from the east to the west in Northern India. CLIMATE Reprint 2025-26 1. 2. 4. Give reasons as to why. (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) Seasonal reversal of wind direction takes place over the Indian subcontinent? The bulk of rainfall in India is concentrated over a few months. The Tamil Nadu coast receives winter rainfall. The delta region of the eastern coast is frequently struck by cyclones. Parts of Rajasthan, Gujarat and the leeward side of the Western Ghats are drought-prone. 5. Describe the regional variations in the climatic conditions of India with the help of suitable examples. 6. Give an account of weather conditions and characteristics of the cold season. 7. Give the characteristics and effects of the monsoon rainfall in India. Map SKILLS On an outline map of India, show the following. (i) (ii) (iii) Areas receiving rainfall over 400 cm. Areas receiving less than 20 cm of rainfall. The direction of the south-west monsoon over India. | Provect / ACTIVITY (i) (ii) FOR DOING IT YOURSELF Find out which songs, dances, festivals and special food preparations are associated with certain seasons in your region. Do they have some commonality with other regions of India? Collect photographs of typical rural houses, and clothing of people from different regions of India. Examine whether they reflect any relationship with the climatic condition and relief of the area. Figure 1 : Temperature and Rainfall of Delhi w o In Table-I, the average mean monthly temperatures and amounts of rainfall of 10 representative stations have been given. It is for you to study on your own and convert them into temperature and rainfall graphs. A glance at these visual representations will help you to grasp instantly the smilarities BS and differences between them. One such 15 ise graph (Figure 1) is already prepared for & you. See if you can arrive at some broad 104 Lio generalisations about our diverse climatic conditions. We hope you are in for a great 54 Ls joy of learning. Do the following activities. Re-arrange the 10 stations in two different oJ Z AAPA Aun lo Jan, Feb, Mar. Apr. May. Jun, Jul, Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov, Dec, sequences: CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I Temperature ( Celsius) Reprint 2025-26 o bre nN St (i) According to their distance from the equator. (ii) According to their altitude above mean sealevel. 3. (i) Name two rainiest stations. (ii) Name two driest stations. ) ) (iii) Two stations with most equable climate. ) ) = (iv) Two stations with most extreme climate. (v) Two stations influenced by retreating monsoons. (vi) The two hottest stations in the months of (a) February (b) April (c) May (d) June Table I Temperature ( C) 20.5