region to the low-pressure areas over the oceans to the south. In summer, a low-pressure area develops over interior Asia, as well as, over northwestern India. This causes a complete reversal of the direction of winds during summer. Air moves from the high-pressure area over the southern Indian Ocean, in a south-easterly direction, crosses the equator, and turns right towards the low-pressure areas over the Indian subcontinent. These are known as the Southwest Monsoon winds. These winds blow over the warm oceans, gather moisture and bring widespread rainfall over the mainland of India. THE SEASONS The monsoon type of climate is characterised by a distinct seasonal pattern. The weather conditions greatly change from one season to the other. These changes are particularly noticeable in the interior parts of the country. The coastal areas do not experience much variation in temperature though there is variation in rainfall pattern. How many seasons are experienced in your place? Four main seasons can be identified in India - the cold weather season, the hot weather season, the advancing monsoon and the retreating monsoon with some regional variations. The Cold Weather Season (Winter) The cold weather season begins from midNovember in northern India and stays till February. December and January are the coldest months in the northern part of India. The temperature decreases from south to the north. The average temperature of Chennai, on the eastern coast, is between 24 25 Celsius, while in the northern plains, it ranges between 10 C and 15 Celsius. Days are warm and nights are cold. Frost is common in the north and the higher slopes of the Himalayas experience snowfall. During this season, the northeast trade winds prevail over the country. They blow from land to sea and hence, for most part of the country, it is a dry season. Some amount of rainfall occurs on the Tamil Nadu coast from these winds as, here they blow from sea to land. In the northern part of the country, a feeble high-pressure region develops, with light winds moving outwards from this area. Influenced by the relief, these winds blow through the Ganga valley from the west and the northwest. The weather is normally marked by clear sky, low temperatures and low humidity and feeble, variable winds. A characteristic feature of the cold weather season over the northern plains is the inflow of cyclonic disturbances from the west and the northwest. These low-pressure systems, originate over the Mediterranean Sea and western Asia and move into India, along with the westerly flow. They cause the much-needed winter rains over the plains and snowfall in the mountains. Although the total amount of winter rainfall locally known as mahawat is small, they are of immense importance for the cultivation of Tabi crops. The peninsular region does not have a welldefined cold season. There is hardly any noticeable seasonal change in temperature pattern during winters due to the moderating influence of the sea. CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I Reprint 2025-26 AFGHANISTAN pare INDIA C. ~\ ey ADVANCING