New New Delhi, January 31 Delhi to Varanasi, Lichchivi Express from New Delhi to Muzaffarpur, Bhupeneshwar Raj from New Delhi to Bhupeneshwar, Seldah Raj from New Delhi to Seldah, Sultanpur Express from Delhi to Sultanpur and Janta Express from Delhi to Howrah. THE MERCURY is soaring, paving the way for what could be an early onset of summer, the weatherman has said. It may touch 30 degrees Celsius within a couple of days in Delhi. The mercury settled at 28.4 degrees Celsius on Tuesday, nearly six degrees above the average, breaking a decadeold record. Cold comfort for New Year revellers G.C. Shekhar Chennai, December 30 IF 2004 was the year of the tsunami, 2005 turned out to be the year of rains and floods in Tamil Nadu. Unlike the tsunami, which affected a belt of six coastal districts in Tamil Nadu and Pondicherry, the floods wreaked havoc across the state. In five furious spells, the last two being cyclones that weakened before hitting the coast. the rain gods lashed Tamil Nadu from October to December with almost every district drenched and drowned. Chennai, which was flaunted as an alternative to Bangalore, found itself floating on water on three occasions. The rains and floods killed 350 A day Mumbai won't forget SORAB Ghaswalla Mumbai, December 30 The rain pi JULY 26, 2005 started off as just another soggy day in Mumbai. But, the rainfall was one of the heaviest Mumbai had seen over the past century. As citizens went about their morning chores, they had no inkling that by dusk the city would be swamped. By sunset, 435 residents had either Dadar, Juhu drowned in their houses or vehicles as rain- | RASHID Ahmad water started rising with alarming rapidity. |Stinae") . temperature takes normal course By night, the city and its people were de- | 1pyo, CelS1US UP; cea egmen ewes wares SD feated. No transport, no electricity and no place to go. Mumbai was on its knees. The weather bureau had predicted just another "normal" rainy day for the city. But it poured 944.2 m.m. (three feet of rain) feet in paper, LHUITES. Kashm fhe porthves temperatures your Co 23 degree Before 26/7, Mumbaiites, used to about 15cm of rain, would tease, "What's a Mumbai monsoon without some days of disruption?" On 26/7, the joke was on them. degree The g the minima the sale i Correspondent TOOM F jew Det, January Ur ars. par i i above normal) despite 4 to ee ae ms over 24 hours, the highest in 100 years. cord ou 2g in ame fart TIMER te it hal cated t cela a two de- lost its sting. Last three day: e Your tt cv norsal. vary ed, despite Poa. ae 1 he thwestern dent. = tua inet Gana a cripple ee umey cranked up For Thursday crippl. 5s ure Ma pst dropped to perature that hat Lace ical Neating icked up at about 1 p.m. Initial. and Kalina were flooded. _ | WINTER saiverinc