highest in 100 years. cord ou 2g in ame fart TIMER te it hal cated t cela a two de- lost its sting. Last three day: e Your tt cv norsal. vary ed, despite Poa. ae 1 he thwestern dent. = tua inet Gana a cripple ee umey cranked up For Thursday crippl. 5s ure Ma pst dropped to perature that hat Lace ical Neating icked up at about 1 p.m. Initial. and Kalina were flooded. _ | WINTER saiverinc tom fi BREAK terly onslaught, 0 ius, The minimum temperature Celsius (1 degree sowpe next two days. slightly better on nshine hh western dis: crank tne ment forecasts a minimurn im temperat of 6 degree Celsius ey sere apy lay 2) e cel rection of the win Ee : celsius. TOW 11 umess the water is warm, said Halima Begum, 45, a people. Fields were inundated, crops damaged, roads looked like backwaters. And this was the city that cried for water in summers. The rains showed up the state's failure to literally tap the resources as 90 tmc of water flowed into the sea. Irrigation tanks and reservoirs were breached.The suburbs were the worst hit as many localities remained under water from October to December. When the relief efforts began, that brought calamity of another order. Rush for rations resulted in one of the most avoidable tragedies as 48 people were killed in stampedes outside two relief centres. This was one rain cloud Fog is in, get ready for disruptions ly, nobody paid attention. The enormity of A thin blanket of fog the situation hit Mumbaiites at about 5 enveloped the city in the p.m. By then, many were dead and the low- early hours of Friday. lying areas of Kurla, Ghatkopar, Andheri, Visibility was reduced to 500 metres in most areas. There e e : : Freezing KAShIMNtr a pate e be: siteandt! ai. from ie eae arrival delay was Tel wrt theasterly or ed era re behind sched 2 degree Celsius. Ambala afdarjung by 1 todd h so 8 father forecast also gree ( ihe minimum on was 42 Wer about de: reco may hows Saturday, gree Celsius ANS. Activity After 2 days of biting cold, sun shines Expect a ballistic winter after western winds are in HT Correspondent New Delhi, November 30 ACROSS NORTH India, it s a winter of woes. Amristar is icy with a minimum temperature of 5 C. Snowfall, of up to 78 cm, has blanketed Srinagar. In Delhi, it s still a pleasant nip. This mild wintry condition, however, will definitely not last, says the Met. In a day or two, winds from Afghanistan, known as western disturbances, will lash the Capital. Conditions are perfect for harsh winter ahead, said Met officials, who have declared official winter in Delhi from Thursday. Wednesday s morning mist, moisture in the air, low night temperature and the cold winds that hit the city by evening are enough indications for the weather department to declare the onset