nip. This mild wintry condition, however, will definitely not last, says the Met. In a day or two, winds from Afghanistan, known as western disturbances, will lash the Capital. Conditions are perfect for harsh winter ahead, said Met officials, who have declared official winter in Delhi from Thursday. Wednesday s morning mist, moisture in the air, low night temperature and the cold winds that hit the city by evening are enough indications for the weather department to declare the onset of winter a day in advance, an official said. Winter may have been delayed in much of north India by about a fortnight, but it has set in on time in Delhi, he added. In vast swathes of north India, the past week has been colder than average. Winter trying to make up for the lost time, the weatherman added in a lighter vein. With temperatures consistently below the average for this year, there is a spectre of this year s winter being colder than usual. In the ski resort of Gulmarg, there s heavy snow. Night temperature dipped four degrees comfortable. Night temperature on Wednes si day hovered around 10 C. The western disturbances are unpre1 dictable. They might hit Delhi within the next 72 hours or may not for another week. < But it is time to get your woollens out. Tem about 7a No tight aenar- D@ratures will drop progressively in the days , to come, said Delhi Met chief R.D. Singh. - With mornings getting misty, the dreaded fog s may not be far behind. And with pollution levels at a five-year high, the fog this time may be worse. Delhi has been colder this fortnight com It; Pared to the same period last year. The temnal, perature pattern is similar to the record So, it s officially winter in the Capital Delhi Max: 25 C, Min: 8 In a day or two, winds from Afghanistan western disturbances will lash the Capital. Winter declared from Dec 1. Srinagar Max: 8 C, Min: -3 it s a sea of snow there. Like much of Kashmir, it is experiencing sub-zero temperatures and bitterly cold weather. Amritsar Max: 21 C, Min: 5 The great plains are extremely cold. The coming days will be worse with expected sub-zero temperatures. Shimla Max: 10 C, Min: -4 The Himachal capital is blanketed in heavy snow. Higher reaches are even colder. breaking winter of 2003 the worst in 40 years. The Met office says it cannot forecast so far ahead in future. It may not be record breaking winter, but it will definitely be chillier than an average winter, said a weather official. The official pointed out that snowfall in Kashmir and Shimla has been heavier and earlier than usual. The temperature in Shimla dropped two degrees below normal. Sundernagar at 4.3 C was cold too. Northerly cold winds have struck Rajasthan, affecting normal life last night with Churu and Sriganganagar shivering at 5 C each, about two-three degrees below normal. Nights in