may not be record breaking winter, but it will definitely be chillier than an average winter, said a weather official. The official pointed out that snowfall in Kashmir and Shimla has been heavier and earlier than usual. The temperature in Shimla dropped two degrees below normal. Sundernagar at 4.3 C was cold too. Northerly cold winds have struck Rajasthan, affecting normal life last night with Churu and Sriganganagar shivering at 5 C each, about two-three degrees below normal. Nights in Jodhpur, Bikaner, Ajmer and Jaipur divisions have become harsh. (i) On the basis of the news items above, find out the names of places and the seasons described. (ii) Compare the rainfall description of Chennai and Mumbai and explain the reasons for the difference. (iii) Evaluate flood as a disaster with the help of a case study. Reprint 2025-26 moderating influences, there are great variations in the temperature conditions. Nevertheless, the unifying influence of the monsoon on the Indian subcontinent is quite perceptible. The seasonal alteration of the wind systems and the associated weather conditions provide a rhythmic cycle of seasons. Even the uncertainties of rain and uneven distribution are very much typical of the monsoons. The Indian landscape, its animal and plant life, its entire agricultural calendar and the life of the people, including their festivities, revolve around this phenomenon. Year after year, people of India from north to south and from east to west, eagerly await the arrival of the monsoon. These monsoon winds bind the whole country by providing water to set the agricultural activities in motion. The river valleys which carry this water also unite as a single river valley unit. EXERCISE 1. Choose the correct answer from the four alternatives given below. (i) | Which one of the following places receives the highest rainfall in the world? (a) Silchar (c) Cherrapunji (b) Mawsynram (d) Guwahati (ii) The wind blowing in the northern plains in summers is known as: (a) Kaal Baisakhi (c) Trade Winds (b) Loo (d) None of the above (iii) _ Monsoon arrives in India approximately in: (a) Early May (c) Early June (b) Early July (d) Early August (iv) | Which one of the following characterises the cold weather season in India? (a) Warm days and warm nights (b) Warm days and cold nights (c) Cool days and cold nights (d) Cold days and warm nights 2. Answer the following questions briefly. (i) What are the controls affecting the climate of India? (ii) Why does India have a monsoon type of climate? (iii) Which part of India does experience the highest diurnal range of temperature and why? (iv) Which winds account for rainfall along the Malabar coast? (v) Define monsoons. What do you understand by break in monsoon? (vi) Why is the monsoon considered a unifying bond? 3. Why does the rainfall decrease from the east to the west in Northern India. CLIMATE Reprint 2025-26 1. 2. 4. Give reasons as to why. (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) Seasonal reversal of wind