Sept. 4 @ Srinagar 9 t z Ct PAKISTAN ; ~ Chandigarh 7 a DELHI Ahmedabad Nagpur @ Mumbai ARABIAN SEA ! $ LAKSHADWEEP. (INDIA) Thiruvananthapuram INDIAN 72 E 76 INDIA RETREATING MONSOON d CHINA Sette ey al a | CMS af f BHUTAN % P f Shillong > tS em, Imphal 4 A (BANGLADESH J e/ , po fed be ly . I \n. i of Cancer MYANMAR Bhubaneswar ubane wa | E fy BENGAL ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS (INDIA) 400 600 km o 92 9 Figure 4.2 : Retreating Monsoon CLIMATE Reprint 2025-26 their wake, devastating floods causing damage to life and property in the plains. The frequency and intensity of tropical depressions too, determine the amount and duration of monsoon rains. These depressions form at the head of the Bay of Bengal and cross over to the mainland. The depressions follow the axis of the monsoon trough of low pressure . The monsoon is known for its uncertainties. The alternation of dry and wet spells vary in intensity, frequency and duration. While it causes heavy floods in one part, it may be responsible for droughts in the other. It is often irregular in its arrival and its retreat. Hence, it sometimes disturbs the farming schedule of millions of farmers all over the country. Retreating/Post Monsoons (The Transition Season) During October-November, with the apparent movement of the sun towards the south, the monsoon trough or the low-pressure trough over the northern plains becomes weaker. This is gradually replaced by a high-pressure system. The south-west monsoon winds weaken and start withdrawing gradually. By the beginning of October, the monsoon withdraws from the Northern Plains. The months of October-November form a period of transition from hot rainy season to dry winter conditions. The retreat of the monsoon is marked by clear skies and rise in Do You Know: Mawsynram, the wettest place on the earth is also reputed for its stalagmite and stalactite caves. temperature. While day temperatures are high, nights are cool and pleasant. The land is still moist. Owing to the conditions of high temperature and humidity, the weather becomes rather oppressive during the day. This is commonly known as October heat . In the second half of October, the mercury begins to fall rapidly in northern India. The low-pressure conditions, over northwestern India, get transferred to the Bay of Bengal by early November. This shift is associated with the occurrence of cyclonic depressions, which originate over the Andaman Sea. These cyclones generally cross the eastern coasts of India cause heavy and widespread rain. These tropical cyclones are often very destructive. The thickly populated deltas of the Godavari, the Krishna and the Kaveri are frequently struck by cyclones, which cause great damage to life and property. Sometimes, these cyclones arrive at the coasts of Odisha, West Bengal and Bangladesh. The bulk of the rainfall of the Coromandel Coast is derived from depressions and cyclones. DISTRIBUTION OF RAINFALL Parts of western coast and northeastern India receive over about 400