India cause heavy and widespread rain. These tropical cyclones are often very destructive. The thickly populated deltas of the Godavari, the Krishna and the Kaveri are frequently struck by cyclones, which cause great damage to life and property. Sometimes, these cyclones arrive at the coasts of Odisha, West Bengal and Bangladesh. The bulk of the rainfall of the Coromandel Coast is derived from depressions and cyclones. DISTRIBUTION OF RAINFALL Parts of western coast and northeastern India receive over about 400 cm of rainfall annually. However, it is less than 60 cm in western Rajasthan and adjoining parts of Gujarat, Haryana and Punjab. Rainfall is equally low in the interior of the Deccan plateau, and east of the Sahyadris. Why do these regions receive low rainfall? A third area of low precipitation is around Leh in Jammu and Kashmir. The rest of the country receives moderate rainfall. Snowfall is restricted to the Himalayan region. Owing to the nature of monsoons, the annual rainfall is highly variable from year to year. Variability is high in the regions of low rainfall, such as parts of Rajasthan, Gujarat and the leeward side of the Western Ghats. As such, while areas of high rainfall are liable to be affected by floods, areas of low rainfall are drought-prone (Figure 4.3). Monsoon as A UNIFYING Bonp You have already known the way the Himalayas protect the subcontinent from extremely cold winds from central Asia. This enables northern India to have uniformly higher temperatures compared to other areas on the same latitudes. Similarly, the Peninsular plateau, under the influence of the sea from three sides, has moderate temperatures. Despite such CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I Reprint 2025-26 INDIA ~~ ) 2 ANNUAL RAINFALL PAKISTAN ~ \ * 32 a \ CHINA (TIBET) ARABIAN SEA Above 400 200 - 400 100 - 200 60 - 100 40 - 60 oan Df 20 - 40 wy oe , ie 0-20 LAKSHADWEEP. (INDIA) -_ A S INDIAN % 76 84 92 E Q Figure 4.3 : Annual Rainfall CLIMATE Reprint 2025-26 ve I-VIGNI AUVAOdNALNOD Devastated by deluge Haze hazard on road Chennai submerged Hint of an early summer FOG CHECK Flight operations at Delhi Airport was normal with the runway visibility at 1,500 metres. However, thick fog in the NCR made driving difficult in the early hours. DELAYED: 17 incoming trains; departure of six trains was rescheduled. 5 oO t Poorva Express from Howrah, Tuesday: 28.4 C Sampurna Kranti Express from Patna and Rajdhani + Special from Mumbai. HT Correspondent RESCHEDULED: Kashi Vishwanath from New New Delhi, January 31 Delhi to Varanasi, Lichchivi Express from New Delhi to Muzaffarpur, Bhupeneshwar Raj from New Delhi to Bhupeneshwar, Seldah Raj from New Delhi to Seldah, Sultanpur Express from Delhi to Sultanpur and Janta Express from Delhi to Howrah. THE MERCURY is soaring, paving the way for what could be an early onset of summer, the weatherman has said. It may touch 30 degrees Celsius within a couple of days in Delhi. The mercury settled at 28.4