a bare subsistence level. Picture 2.6 Can you remember how much did you pay when you asked him to mend your shoes or slippers? Moreover, the employment structure is characterised by self-employment in the primary sector. The whole family contributes in the field even though not everybody is really needed. So there is disguised unemployment in the agriculture sector. But the entire family shares what has been produced. This concept of sharing of work in the field and the produce raised reduces the hardship of unemployment in the rural sector. But this does not reduce the poverty of the family, gradually surplus labour from every household tends to migrate from the village in search of jobs. Let us discuss about the employment scenario in the three sectors mentioned earlier. Agriculture, is the most labour absorbing sector of the economy. In recent years, there has been a decline in the dependence of population on agriculture partly because of disguised unemployment discussed earlier. Some of the surplus labour in agriculture has moved to either the secondary or the tertiary sector. In the secondary sector, small scale manufacturing is the most labourabsorbing. In case of the tertiary sector, various new services are now appearing like biotechnology, information technology and so on. Let us read a story to know how people could become an asset for the economy of a village. Story of a Village There was a village inhabited by several families. Each family produced enough to feed its members. Each family met its needs by the members making their own clothes and teaching their own children. One of the families decided to send one of its sons to an agriculture college. The boy got his admission in the nearby college of agriculture. After some time he became qualified in agroengineering and came back to the village. He proved to be so creative that he could design an improved type of plough, which increased the yield of wheat. Thus a new job of agroengineer was created and filled in the village. The family in the village sold the surplus in a nearby neighbouring village. They earned good profit, which they shared among themselves. Inspired by this success all the families after some time held a meeting in the village. They all wanted to have a better future for their children too. They requested the panchayat to open a school in the village. They assured the panchayat that they would all send their children to school. The panchayat, with the help of government, opened a school. A teacher was recruited from a nearby town. All the children of this village started going to school. After sometime one of the families gave training to his daughter in 26 waeeeeere ECONOMICS QoS eee eee ee Ege eel P PRET PAN lee GREATER TEER DEDEDE OTE Reprint 2025-26 tailoring. She started stitching consume. Now they could sell what clothes for all the families of the they produced to others who came to village for everyone now wanted