a school. A teacher was recruited from a nearby town. All the children of this village started going to school. After sometime one of the families gave training to his daughter in 26 waeeeeere ECONOMICS QoS eee eee ee Ege eel P PRET PAN lee GREATER TEER DEDEDE OTE Reprint 2025-26 tailoring. She started stitching consume. Now they could sell what clothes for all the families of the they produced to others who came to village for everyone now wanted to their village markets. Over time, this buy and wear well-tailored clothes. village, which formally had no job Thus another new job, that of a tailor opportunities in the beginning, had was created. This had another many like teacher, tailor, agropositive effect. The time of the engineer and many more. This was farmers in going far for buying clothes was saved. As the farmers spent more time in the field, the yield of the farms went up. This was the beginning of prosperity. The farmers ae had more than what they could activities. & the story of a simple village where the rising level of human capital enabled it to evolve into a place rich with complex and modern economic b \ Summary You have seen how inputs like education and health helped in making people an asset for the economy. The chapter also discusses about the economic activities undertaken in the three sectors of the economy. We also study about the problem associated with unemployment. Finally the chapter ends with the story of a village which formally had no job but later had plenty. 5 Exercises _ _ 1. What do you understand by 'people as a resource ? N . Howis human resource different from other resources like land and physical capital? . What is the role of education in human capital formation? . What is the role of health in human capital formation? What part does health play in the individual s working life? What are the various activities undertaken in the primary sector, secondary sector and tertiary sector? . What is the difference between economic activities and non-economic activities? . Why are women employed in low paid work? 9. How will you explain the term unemployment? 10. What is the difference between disguised unemployment and seasonal unemployment? 11. Why is educated unemployed, a peculiar problem of India? 12. In which field do you think India can build the maximum employment opportunity? 13. Can you suggest some measures in the education system to mitigate the problem of the educated unemployed? 14. Can you imagine some village which initially had no job opportunities but later came up with many? 15. Which capital would you consider the best land, labour, physical capital and human capital? Why? eo) oN BH VHE VETS H PPG HHS HIT OHH TT LOOP IGT ITT LTO GH PPPS POPP PPO PSOE DODO People AS RESOULCE Peavsereeer 27 Os tee Reprint 2025-26 & References Gary, S. BEcKER. 1966. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis