[=] People as Resource 0970CHO2 Overview _ India s Green Revolution is a The chapter 'People as Resource' is an dramatic example of how the input effort to explain population as an asset of greater knowledge in the form of for the economy rather than a liability. improved production technologies can Population becomes human capital when rapidly increase the productivity of there is investment made in the form of scarce land resources. India s IT education, training and medical care. revolution is a striking instance of In fact, human capital is the stock of how the importance of human capital skill and productive knowledge embodied has come to acquire a higher position in them. than that of material, plant and People as Resource' is a way of machinery. referring to a country s working people in terms of their existing productive skills and abilities. Looking at the population from this productive aspect emphasises its ability to contribute to the creation of the Gross National Product. Like other resources population also is a resource a human resource . This is the positive side of a large population that is often overlooked when & A Lo we look only at the negative side, \ . considering only the problems of Source: Planning Commission, Govt. of India. & What is Human Resource Is it like land providing the population with food, education and access to health facilities. When the existing 'human resource is further developed by becoming more educated and healthy, we call it human capital formation' that adds to the productive power of the country just like physical capital formation . Investment in human capital (through education, training, medical care) yields a return just like investment in physical capital. This can be seen directly in the form of higher incomes earned because of higher productivity of the more educated or the better trained persons, as well as the higher productivity of healthier people. CS Capital ? Is it like Rupee, Paise or Dollar ? 16 ~arguagatwes ECONOMICS ~arqeqateesten gence QeteennegegereQgnnesegyeRgneeeneeneg gnnnnvoAeQennnnneennnnnegyerennygnynnneEnneDErgynnnnyegnngees Reprint 2025-26 Here is human capital Picture 2.1 giter's Discuss e Looking at the photograph can you explain how a doctor, teacher, engineer and a tailor are an asset to the economy? Not only do the more educated and the healthier people gain through higher incomes, society also gains in other indirect ways because the advantages of a more educated or a healthier population spreads to those also who themselves were not directly educated or given health care. In fact, human capital is in one way superior to other resources like land and physical capital: human resource can make use of land and capital. Land and capital cannot become useful on its own! For many decades in India, a large population has been considered a liability rather than an asset. But a large SAR VERT HELTAH ATH TPIT YRNOCH SLITS HITE Go eugennvarer People as ReESOUrce ~seyeeatees 17 Reprint 2025-26 population need not be a burden for the economy. It can