doctors are there in the hospital? How many nurses work in that hospital? Besides, try to gather the following additional information: How many hospitals are there in your locality? How many dispensaries are there in your locality? 4 Unemployment Sakal s mother Sheela looked after the domestic chores, children and helped her husband Buta in the field. Sakal s brother, Jeetu, and sister, Seetu, spend their time playing and roaming. Can you call Sheela or Jeetu or Seetu unemployed? If not, why? Unemployment is said to exist when people who are willing to work at the going wages cannot find jobs. Sheela is not interested in working outside her z 24 eaRRIERDVNY Economics a bh hn has pe eee he bbbes o> ddr bbl bbe bi baht Dhiba hah re hoa be bes ita ae Deed DT Daa) Da Reprint 2025-26 domestic domain. Jeetu and Seetu are too small to be counted in the work force population. Neither Jeetu, Seetu or Sheela can be counted as unemployed. The workforce population includes people from 15 years to 59 years. Sakal s brother and sister do not fall within this age group so they cannot be called unemployed. Sakal s mother Sheela works for the family. She is not willing to work outside her domestic domain for payment. She too cannot be called unemployed. Sakal s grandparents (although not mentioned in the story) cannot be called unemployed. In case of India we have unemployment in rural and urban areas. However, the nature of unemployment differs in rural and urban areas. In case of rural areas, there is seasonal and disguised unemployment. Urban areas have mostly educated unemployment. Seasonal unemployment happens when people are not able to find jobs during some months of the year. People dependant upon agriculture usually face such kind of problem. There are certain busy seasons when sowing, harvesting, weeding and threshing is done. Certain months do not provide much work to the people dependant on agriculture. In case of disguised unemployment people appear to be employed. They have agricultural plot where they find work. This usually happens among family members engaged in agricultural activity. The work requires the service of five people but engages eight people. Three people are extra. These three people also work in the same plot as the others. The contribution made by the three extra people does not add to the contribution made by the five people. If three people are removed the productivity of the field will not decline. The field requires the service of five people and the three extra people are disguised unemployed. In case of urban areas educated unemployment has become a common Reprint 2025-26 phenomenon. Many youth with matriculation, graduation and post graduation degrees are not able to find job. A study showed that unemployment of graduate and post-graduate has increased faster than among matriculates. A paradoxical manpower situation is witnessed as surplus of manpower in certain categories coexist with shortage of manpower in others. There is unemployment among