service of five people and the three extra people are disguised unemployed. In case of urban areas educated unemployment has become a common Reprint 2025-26 phenomenon. Many youth with matriculation, graduation and post graduation degrees are not able to find job. A study showed that unemployment of graduate and post-graduate has increased faster than among matriculates. A paradoxical manpower situation is witnessed as surplus of manpower in certain categories coexist with shortage of manpower in others. There is unemployment among technically qualified person on one hand, while there is a dearth of technical skills required for economic growth. Unemployment leads to wastage of manpower resource. People who are an asset for the economy turn into a liability. There is a feeling of hopelessness and despair among the youth. People do not have enough money to support their family. Inability of educated people who are willing to work to find gainful employment implies a great social waste. Unemployment tends to increase economic overload. The dependence of the unemployed on the working population increases. The quality of life of an individual as well as of society is adversely affected. When a family has to live on a bare subsistence level there is a general decline in its health status and rising withdrawal from the school system. Hence, unemployment has detrimental impact on the overall growth of an economy. Increase in unemployment is an indicator of a depressed economy. It also wastes the resource, which could have been gainfully employed. If people cannot be used as a resource they naturally appear as a liability to the economy. In case of India, statistically, the unemployment rate is low. A large number of people represented with low income and productivity are counted as employed. They appear to work throughout the year but in terms of their potential and income, it is not adequate for them. The work that they are pursuing SAH VE AVS STH MOH HTH AGTH VID YRNOCH SLT TH HITE GOI eugennvsrer People as ReESOUrce ~sweyeeatees 25 DEPP PTI ph pe PEER RE SIe DO DEPE TS RRES Capen pegs > PPPDE STR ISRRS ry ry 4 7 4 ys be ~ 4 54 y 4 Zz ys 7 NINN OS Manabe teat oe t re ewc er tt Prpangequr eDaDrreergdgdrerea 4 z 4 ? seems forced upon them. They may therefore want other work of their choice. Poor people cannot afford to sit idle. They tend to engage in any activity irrespective of its earning potential. Their earning keeps them on a bare subsistence level. Picture 2.6 Can you remember how much did you pay when you asked him to mend your shoes or slippers? Moreover, the employment structure is characterised by self-employment in the primary sector. The whole family contributes in the field even though not everybody is really needed. So there is disguised unemployment in the agriculture sector. But the entire family shares what has been produced. This concept of sharing of work in the field and the produce