capital is in one way superior to other resources like land and physical capital: human resource can make use of land and capital. Land and capital cannot become useful on its own! For many decades in India, a large population has been considered a liability rather than an asset. But a large SAR VERT HELTAH ATH TPIT YRNOCH SLITS HITE Go eugennvarer People as ReESOUrce ~seyeeatees 17 Reprint 2025-26 population need not be a burden for the economy. It can be turned into a productive asset by investment in human capital (for example, by spending resources on education and health for all, training of industrial and agricultural workers in the use of modern technology, useful scientific researches and so on). The two following cases illustrate how people can try to become a more productive resource: Story of Sakal There were two friends Vilas and Sakal living in the same village Semapur. Sakal was a twelve-yearold boy. His mother Sheela looked after domestic chores. His father Buta Chaudhary worked in an agricultural field. Sakal helped his mother in domestic chores. He also looked after his younger brother Jeetu and sister Seetu. His uncle Shyam had passed the matriculation examination, but, was sitting idle in the house as he had no job. Buta and Sheela were eager to teach Sakal. They forced him to join the village school which he soon joined. He started studying and completed his higher secondary examination. His father persuaded him to continue his studies. He raised a loan for Sakal to study a vocational course in computers. Sakal was meritorious and interested in studies from the beginning. With great vigour and enthusiasm he completed his course. After some time he got a job in a private firm. He even designed a new kind of software. This software helped him increase the sale of the firm. His boss acknowledged his services and rewarded him with a promotion. DROPPIN ae ope hehe a he he hw Se ee ee PATH SeyPOVWaw SQ hacen SE eS ee ee Se tl DRAPER aa pe PRePR RODDED Drea ne per gph rertO@ he heeren 4 Z z 4 ? Picture 2.2 Stories of Vilas and Sakal Fo oN Let s Discuss Story of Vilas Vilas was an eleven-year old boy residing in the same village as Sakal. Vilas s father Mahesh was a fisherman. His father passed away when he was only two years old. His mother Geeta sold fish to earn money to feed the family. She bought fish from the landowner s pond and sold it in the nearby mandi. She could earn only Rs 150 a day by selling fish. Vilas became a patient of arthritis. His mother could not afford to take him to the doctor. He could not go to school either. He was not interested in studies. He helped his mother in cooking and also looked after his younger brother Mohan. After some time his mother fell sick and there was no one to look after