their child. This is because they have realised the importance of education for themselves. They are also conscious of proper nutrition and hygiene. They accordingly look after their children s needs for education at school and good health. A virtuous cycle is, thus, created in this case. In contrast, a vicious cycle may be created by disadvantaged parents, who themselves uneducated and lacking in hygiene, keep their children in a similarly disadvantaged state. Countries, like Japan, have invested in human resource. They did not have any natural resource. These countries are developed/rich. They import the natural resource needed in their country. How did they become rich/developed? They have invested on people, especially in the field of education and health. These people have made efficient use of other resources, like land and capital. Efficiency and the technology evolved by people have made these countries rich/developed. BH ATTA HPP HOH SANITY HHT HLOLOOD GTI YITT OL LOG HIPPEST EPPI PA PTTL DSP POY People AS RESOULCE Peavsereer 19 Economic Activities by Men and Women Like Vilas and Sakal, people have been engaged in various activities. We saw that Vilas sold fish and Sakal got a job in the firm. The various activities have been classified into three main sectors i.e., primary, secondary and tertiary. Primary sector includes agriculture, forestry, animal husbandry, fishing, poultry farming, mining and quarrying. Manufacturing is included in the secondary sector. Trade, transport, communication, banking, education, health, tourism, services, insurance, etc. are included in the tertiary sector. The activities in this sector result in the production of goods and services. These activities add value to the national income. These activities are called economic activities. Economic activities have two parts market activities and non-market activities. Market activities involve remuneration to anyone who performs i.e., activity performed for pay or profit. These include production of goods or services, including government service. Non-market activities are the production for self-consumption. These can be Picture 2.3 Based on the picture can you classify these activities into three sectors? Reprint 2025-26 oa) consumption and processing of primary product and own account production of fixed assets. Activity Visit a village or colony located near to your residential area and note down the _ various activities undertaken by the people of that village or colony. If this is not possible, ask your neighbour what is their profession? In which of the three sectors will you categorise their work? Say whether these activities are economic or non-economic activities: Vilas sells fish in the village market. Vilas cooks food for his family. Sakal works in the private firm. Sakal looks after his younger brother and sister. & Due to historical and cultural reasons there is a division of labour between men and women in the family. Women generally look after domestic chores and men work in the fields. Sakal s mother Sheela cooks food, cleans utensils, washes clothes, cleans the house and looks after her children. Sakal s father Buta cultivates the field, sells the produce in the market