for his family. Sakal works in the private firm. Sakal looks after his younger brother and sister. & Due to historical and cultural reasons there is a division of labour between men and women in the family. Women generally look after domestic chores and men work in the fields. Sakal s mother Sheela cooks food, cleans utensils, washes clothes, cleans the house and looks after her children. Sakal s father Buta cultivates the field, sells the produce in the market and earns money for the family. Sheela is not paid for the services delivered for upbringing of the family. Buta earns money, which he spends on rearing his family. Women are not paid for their service delivered in the family. The household work done by women is not recognised in the National Income. Geeta, mother of Vilas, earned an income by selling fish. Thus women are paid for their work when they enter the labour market. Their earning like that of their male counterpart is determined on Education helps individual to make better use of the economic opportunities available before him. Education and skill are the major determinants of the earning of any individual in the market. A majority of women have meagre education and low skill formation. Women are paid low compared to men. Most women work where job security is not there. Various activities relating to legal protection is meagre. Employment in this sector is characterised by irregular and low income. In this sector there is an absence of basic facilities like maternity leave, childcare and other social security systems. However, women with high education and skill formation are paid at par with the men. Among the organised sector, teaching and medicine attract them the most. Some women have entered administrative and other services including job, that need high levels of scientific and technological competence. Ask your sister or your classmate what she would like to take up as a career? Quality of Population The quality of population depends upon the literacy rate, health of a person indicated by life expectancy and skill formation acquired by the people of the country. The quality of the poulation ultimately decides the growth rate of the country. Literate and healthy population are an asset. Education Sakals education in the initial years of his life bore him the fruits in the later years in terms of a good job and salary. We saw education was an important input for the growth of Sakal. It opened new horizon for him, provided new aspiration and developed values of life. Not only for Sakal, education contributes towards the growth of society also. It enhances the the basis of education and _ skill. Cyam 20 eanegagatees ECONOMICS ~ssqQeqateastann genre GeHeeAnnngnnegeQgnneg ese gegeeneeeen gan yvGnenrennnngeornnnngegne nnn nnnngnennnDa ge POpnngyygonyee Reprint 2025-26 aa Picture 2.4 Sc. national income, cultural richness and increases the efficiency of governance. There is a provision made for providing universal access, retention and quality in ... human being is a positive asset and a