by chemical or electrochemical reactions. The composition of a compound is the same throughout. We can also observe that the texture and the colour of the compound are the same throughout. Thus, we can summarise the physical and chemical nature of matter in the following graphical organiser: combining elements. Cannot be broken down to simpler substances Have fixed composition Can be broken down into elements by chemical or electrochemical reactions Homogeneous Heterogeneous Non-uniform composition Uniform composition for example, sugar in water, salt in water, sulphur in carbon disulphide, water in alcohol, etc. for example, copper, oxygen, iron, hydrogen, mercury, etc. ES What Ni) you have y-/ learnt A mixture contains more than one substance (element and/ or compound) mixed in any proportion. for example, sand and salt, sugar and salt, water in oil, etc. for example, water, methane, sugar, salt, etc. Is MatrER AROUND Us PURE? 21 Reprint 2025-26 Mixtures can be separated into pure substances using appropriate separation techniques. A solution is a homogeneous mixture of two or more substances. The major component of a solution is called the solvent, and the minor, the solute. The concentration of a solution is the amount of solute present per unit volume or per unit mass of the solution. Materials that are insoluble in a solvent and have particles that are visible to naked eyes, form a suspension. A suspension is a heterogeneous mixture. Colloids are heterogeneous mixtures in which the particle size is too small to be seen with the naked eye, but is big enough to scatter light. Colloids are useful in industry and daily life. The particles are called the dispersed phase and the medium in which they are distributed is called the dispersion medium. Pure substances can be elements or compounds. An element is a form of matter that cannot be broken down by chemical reactions into simpler substances. A compound is a substance composed of two or more different types of elements, chemically combined in a fixed proportion. Properties of a compound are different from its constituent elements, whereas a mixture shows the properties of its constituting elements or compounds. 1. | Which separation techniques will you apply for the separation of the following? (a) Sodium chloride from its solution in water (b) Ammonium chloride from a mixture containing sodium chloride and ammonium chloride (c) Small pieces of metal in the engine oil of a car (d) Different pigments from an extract of flower petals (e) Butter from curd () Oil from water (g) Tea leaves from tea (h) Iron pins from sand (i) Wheat grains from husk (j) Fine mud particles suspended in water 22 SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 Is MatrER AROUND Us PURE? Write the steps you would use for making tea. Use the words solution, solvent, solute, dissolve, soluble, insoluble, filtrate and residue. Pragya tested the solubility of three different substances at different temperatures and collected the data as given below (results are given in the following table, as grams of substance dissolved in 100