C hapter 2 How do we judge whether milk, ghee, butter, salt, spices, mineral water or juice that we buy from the market are pure? SALT EXTRA FREE FLOW IODISED SALT Fig. 2.1: Some consumable items Have you ever noticed the word pure written on the packs of these consumables? For a common person pure means having no adulteration. But, for a scientist all these things are actually mixtures of different substances and hence not pure. For example, milk is actually a mixture of water, fat, proteins, etc. When a scientist says that something is pure, it means that all the constituent particles of that substance are the same in their chemical nature. A pure substance consists of a single type of particle. In other words, a substance is a pure single form of matter. As we look around, we can see that most of the matter around us exists as mixtures of two or more pure components, for example, sea water, minerals, soil, etc., are all mixtures. 2.1 What is a Mixture? Mixtures are constituted by more than one kind of pure form of matter. We know that dissolved sodium chloride can be separated from water by the physical process of evaporation. However, sodium chloride is itself 0964CHO2 Is MATTER ArRounD Us PURE? a pure substance and cannot be separated by physical process into its chemical constituents. Similarly, sugar is a substance which contains only one kind of pure matter and its composition is the same throughout. Soft drink and soil are not single pure substances. Whatever the source of a pure substance may be, it will always have the same characteristic properties. Therefore, we can say that a mixture contains more than one pure substance. 2.1.1 TYPES OF MIXTURES Depending upon the nature of the components that form a mixture, we can have different types of mixtures. Activity __ 2.1 e Let us divide the class into groups A, B, C and D. Group A takes a beaker containing 50 mL of water and one spatula full of copper sulphate powder. Group B takes 50 mL of water and two spatula full of copper sulphate powder in a beaker. e Groups C and D can take different amounts of copper sulphate and potassium permanganate or common salt (sodium chloride) and mix the given components to form a mixture. e Report the observations on the uniformity in colour and texture. Groups A and B have obtained a mixture which has a uniform composition throughout. Such mixtures are called homogeneous mixtures or solutions. Some other examples of such mixtures are: (i) salt dissolved in water and (ii) sugar dissolved in water. Compare the Reprint 2025-26 colour of the solutions of the two groups. Though both the groups have obtained copper sulphate solution but the intensity of colour of the solutions is different. This shows that a homogeneous mixture can have a variable composition. Groups C and D have obtained mixtures, which contain physically distinct parts and have non-uniform compositions. Such