as compared to that obtained by group B. Activity e Take approximately 50 mL of water each in two separate beakers. e Add salt in one beaker and sugar or barium chloride in the second beaker with continuous stirring. e When no more solute can be dissolved, heat the contents of the beaker to raise the temperature by about 5 C. Start adding the solute again. Is the amount of salt and sugar or barium chloride, that can be dissolved in water at a given temperature, the same? At any particular temperature, a solution that has dissolved as much solute as it is capable of dissolving, is said to be a saturated solution. In other words, when no more solute can be dissolved in a solution at a given temperature, it is called a saturated solution. The amount of the solute present in the saturated solution at this temperature is called its solubility. If the amount of solute contained in a solution is less than the saturation level, it is called an unsaturated solution. What would happen if you were to take a saturated solution at a certain temperature and cool it slowly. We can infer from the above activity that different substances in a given solvent have different solubilities at the same temperature. The concentration of a solution is the amount (mass or volume) of solute present in a given amount (mass or volume) of solution. There are various ways of expressing the concentration of a solution, but here we will learn only three methods. (i) Mass by mass percentage of a solution Mass of solute - Mass of solution SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 (ii) Mass by volume percentage ofa solution Mass of solute 100 - Volume of solution (iii) Volume by volume percentage of a solution Volume of solute = __ _ x100 Volume of solution Example 2.1 A solution contains 40 g of common Salt in 320 g of water. Calculate the concentration in terms of mass by mass percentage of the solution. Solution: Mass of solute (salt) = 40g Mass of solvent (water) = 320 g We know, Mass of solution = Mass of solute + Mass of solvent =40 +320 = 360 g Mass percentage of solution _ Mass of solute 100 - Mass of solution = 4 x 100 =11.1% 2.2.2 WHAT IS A SUSPENSION? Non-homogeneous systems, like those obtained by group C in activity 2.2, in which solids are dispersed in liquids, are called suspensions. A suspension is a heterogeneous mixture in which the solute particles do not dissolve but remain suspended throughout the bulk of the medium. Particles of a suspension are visible to the naked eye. Properties of a Suspension e Suspension is a heterogeneous mixture. e The particles of a suspension can be seen by the naked eye. Is MatrER AROUND Us PURE? e The particles of a suspension scatter a beam of light passing through it and make its path visible. e The solute particles settle down when a suspension