mixtures or solutions. Some other examples of such mixtures are: (i) salt dissolved in water and (ii) sugar dissolved in water. Compare the Reprint 2025-26 colour of the solutions of the two groups. Though both the groups have obtained copper sulphate solution but the intensity of colour of the solutions is different. This shows that a homogeneous mixture can have a variable composition. Groups C and D have obtained mixtures, which contain physically distinct parts and have non-uniform compositions. Such mixtures are called heterogeneous mixtures. Mixtures of sodium chloride and iron filings, salt and sulphur, and oil and water are examples of heterogeneous mixtures. Activity 2.2 Let us again divide the class into four groups A, B, C and D. Distribute the following samples to each group: Few crystals of copper sulphate to group A. One spatula full of copper sulphate to group B. Chalk powder or wheat flour to group C. Few drops of milk or ink to group D. Each group should add the given sample in water and stir properly using a glass rod. Are the particles in the mixture visible? Direct a beam of light from a torch through the beaker containing the mixture and observe from the front. Was the path of the beam of light visible? Leave the mixtures undisturbed for a few minutes (and set up the filtration apparatus in the meantime). Is the mixture stable or do the particles begin to settle after some time? Filter the mixture. Is there any residue on the filter paper? Discuss the results and form an opinion. Groups A and B have got a solution. Group C has got a suspension. Group D has got a colloidal solution. Is MatrErR AROUND Us PURE? Glass rod Liquid decanted in the funnel fitted with a filter paper Funnel (b) (c) Filter paper Cone of (folded) a filter paper Fig. 2.2: Filtration Now, we shall learn about solutions, suspensions and colloidal solutions in the following sections. uestions 1. What is meant by assubstance? 2. List the points of differences between homogeneous and heterogeneous mixtures. 2.2 What is a Solution? A solution is a homogeneous mixture of two or more substances. You come across various types of solutions in your daily life. Lemonade, soda water, etc., are all examples of solutions. Usually we think ofa solution as a liquid that contains either a solid, liquid or a gas dissolved in it. But, we can also have solid solutions (alloys) and gaseous solutions (air). In a solution there is homogeneity at the particle level. For example, lemonade tastes the same throughout. This shows that particles of sugar or salt are evenly distributed in the solution. Alloys: Alloys are mixtures of two or more metals or a metal and anon-metal and cannot be separated into their components by physical methods. But still, an alloy is considered as a mixture because it shows the properties of its constituents and can have variable composition. For example, brass is a mixture of approximately 30% zinc