current, through water and the water breaking down into hydrogen and oxygen gases, dissolving common salt in water, e making a fruit salad with raw fruits, and Is MatrER AROUND Us PURE? burning of paper and wood. 2. Try segregating the things around you as pure substances or mixtures. 2.4 What are the Types of Pure Substances? On the basis of their chemical composition, substances can be classified either as elements or compounds. 2.4.1 ELEMENTS Robert Boyle was the first scientist to use the term element in 1661. Antoine Laurent Lavoisier (1743-94), a French chemist, was the first to establish an experimentally useful definition of an element. He defined an element as a basic form of matter that cannot be broken down into simpler substances by chemical reactions. Elements can be normally divided into metals, non-metals and metalloids. Metals usually show some or all of the following properties: e They have a lustre (shine). e They have silvery-grey or golden-yellow colour. e They conduct heat and electricity. e They are ductile (can be drawn into wires). e They are malleable (can be hammered into thin sheets). e They are sonorous (make a ringing sound when hit). Examples of metals are gold, silver, copper, iron, sodium, potassium etc. Mercury is the only metal that is liquid at room temperature. Non-metals usually show some or all of the following properties: e They display a variety of colours. e They are poor conductors of heat and electricity. e They are not lustrous, sonorous or malleable. Examples of non-metals are hydrogen, oxygen, iodine, carbon (coal, coke), bromine, Reprint 2025-26 chlorine etc. Some elements have intermediate properties between those of metals and nonmetals, they are called metalloids; examples are boron, silicon, germanium, etc. The number of elements known at present are more than 100. Ninety-two elements are naturally occurring and the rest are man-made. Majority of the elements are solid. Eleven elements are in gaseous state at room temperature. Two elements are liquid at room temperature mercury and bromine. Elements, gallium and cesium become liquid at a temperature slightly above room temperature (303 K). = ae = i?) = = 2.4.2 COMPOUNDS A compound is a substance composed of two or more elements, chemically combined with one another in a fixed proportion. What do we get when two or more elements are combined? Activity Divide the class into two groups. Give 5 g of iron filings and 3 g of sulphur powder in a china dish to both the groups. Group I Mix and crush iron filings and sulphur powder. Group II Mix and crush iron filings and sulphur powder. Heat this mixture strongly till red hot. Remove from flame and let the mixture cool. Groups I and II Check for magnetism in the material obtained. Bring a magnet near the material and check if the material is attracted towards the magnet. e Compare the texture and colour of the material obtained by the groups. e Add carbon disulphide to one part of the material