the particle level. For example, lemonade tastes the same throughout. This shows that particles of sugar or salt are evenly distributed in the solution. Alloys: Alloys are mixtures of two or more metals or a metal and anon-metal and cannot be separated into their components by physical methods. But still, an alloy is considered as a mixture because it shows the properties of its constituents and can have variable composition. For example, brass is a mixture of approximately 30% zinc and 70% copper. More to know Reprint 2025-26 A solution has a solvent and a solute as its components. The component of the solution that dissolves the other component in it (usually the component present in larger amount) is called the solvent. The component of the solution that is dissolved in the solvent (usually present in lesser quantity) is called the solute. Examples: (i) A solution of sugar in water is a solid in liquid solution. In this solution, sugar is the solute and water is the solvent. (ii) A solution of iodine in alcohol known as tincture of iodine , has iodine (solid) as the solute and alcohol (liquid) as the solvent. (iii) Aerated drinks like soda water, etc., are gas in liquid solutions. These contain carbon dioxide (gas) as solute and water (liquid) as solvent. (iv) Air is a mixture of gas in gas. Airisa homogeneous mixture of a number of gases. Its two main constituents are: oxygen (21%) and nitrogen (78%). The other gases are present in very small quantities. Properties of a Solution e Asolution is a homogeneous mixture. e The particles of a solution are smaller than 1 nm (10 metre) in diameter. So, they cannot be seen by naked eyes. e Because of very small particle size, they do not scatter a beam of light passing through the solution. So, the path of light is not visible in a solution. e Thesolute particles cannot be separated from the mixture by the process of filtration. The solute particles do not settle down when left undisturbed, that is, a solution is stable. 2.2.1 CONCENTRATION OF A SOLUTION In activity 2.2, we observed that groups A and B obtained different shades of solutions. So, we understand that in a solution the relative proportion of the solute and solvent can be varied. Depending upon the amount of solute present in a solution, it can be called dilute, concentrated or saturated solution. Dilute and concentrated are comparative terms. In activity 2.2, the solution obtained by group A is dilute as compared to that obtained by group B. Activity e Take approximately 50 mL of water each in two separate beakers. e Add salt in one beaker and sugar or barium chloride in the second beaker with continuous stirring. e When no more solute can be dissolved, heat the contents of the beaker to raise the temperature by about 5 C. Start adding the solute again. Is the amount of salt and sugar or barium chloride, that can be dissolved