iron filings and sulphur powder. Group II Mix and crush iron filings and sulphur powder. Heat this mixture strongly till red hot. Remove from flame and let the mixture cool. Groups I and II Check for magnetism in the material obtained. Bring a magnet near the material and check if the material is attracted towards the magnet. e Compare the texture and colour of the material obtained by the groups. e Add carbon disulphide to one part of the material obtained. Stir well and filter. Add dilute sulphuric acid or dilute hydrochloric acid to the other part of the material obtained.(Note: teacher supervision is necessary for this activity). Perform all the above steps with both the elements (iron and sulphur) separately. answer Did the material obtained by the two groups look the same? Which group has obtained a material with magnetic properties? Can we separate the components of the material obtained? e On adding dilute sulphuric acid or dilute hydrochloric acid, did both the groups obtain a gas? Did the gas in both the cases smell the same or different? The gas obtained by Group I is hydrogen, it is colourless, odourless and combustible- it is not advised to do the combustion test for hydrogen in the class. The gas obtained by Group II is hydrogen sulphide. It is a colourless gas with the smell of rotten eggs. You must have observed that the products obtained by both the groups show different properties, though the starting materials were the same. Group I has carried out the activity involving a physical change whereas in case of Group II, a chemical change (a chemical reaction) has taken place. e The material obtained by group I is a mixture of the two substances. The substances given are the elements iron and sulphur. e The properties of the mixture are the same as that of its constituents. SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 Table 2.2: Mixtures and Compounds Compounds 1. Elements or compounds just mix Elements react to form new compounds. together to form a mixture and no new compound is formed. 2. Amixture has a variable composition. The composition of each new substance 3, Amixture shows the properties of the 4. constituent substances. The constituents can be seperated fairly easily by physical methods. The material obtained by group Il is a compound. On heating the two elements strongly we get a compound, which has totally different properties compared to the is always fixed. The new substance has totally different properties. The constituents can be separated only by chemical or electrochemical reactions. The composition of a compound is the same throughout. We can also observe that the texture and the colour of the compound are the same throughout. Thus, we can summarise the physical and chemical nature of matter in the following graphical organiser: combining elements. Cannot be broken down to simpler substances Have fixed composition Can be broken down into elements by chemical or electrochemical reactions Homogeneous Heterogeneous Non-uniform composition Uniform composition for example, sugar in