of filtration. But, a special technique of separation known as centrifugation can be used to separate the colloidal particles. The components of a colloidal solution are the dispersed phase and the dispersion medium. The solute-like component or the dispersed particles in a colloid form the dispersed phase, and the component in which the dispersed phase is suspended is known as the dispersing medium. Colloids are classified according to the state (solid, liquid or gas) of the dispersing medium and _ the dispersed phase. A few common examples are given in Table 2.1. From this table you can see that they are very common everyday life. 1. Differentiate between homogeneous and heterogeneous mixtures with examples. 2. Howare sol, solution and suspension different from each other? 3. Tomakea saturated solution, 36 g of sodium chloride is dissolved in 100 g of water at 298 K. Find its concentration at this temperature. Table 2.1: Dispersed phase Dispersing Medium Common examples of colloids Example Aerosol Fog, clouds, mist Aerosol Smoke, automobile exhaust Foam Shaving cream Emulsion Milk, face cream Sol Milk of magnesia, mud Foam Foam, rubber, sponge, pumice Gel Jelly, cheese, butter Solid Sol Coloured gemstone, milky glass SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 2.3 Physical and Chemical Changes In the previous chapter, we have learnt about a few physical properties of matter. The properties that can be observed and specified like colour, hardness, rigidity, fluidity, density, melting point, boiling point etc. are the physical properites. The interconversion of states is a physical change because these changes occur without a change in composition and no change in the chemical nature of the substance. Although ice, water and water vapour all look different and display different physical properties, they are chemically the same. Both water and cooking oil are liquid but their chemical characteristics are different. They differ in odour and inflammability. We know that oil burns in air whereas water extinguishes fire. It is this chemical property of oil that makes it different from water. Burning is a chemical change. During this process one substance reacts with another to undergo a change in chemical composition. Chemical change brings change in the chemical properties of matter and we get new substances. A chemical change is also called a chemical reaction. During burning of a candle, both physical and chemical changes take place. Can you distinguish these? uestions 1. Classify the following as chemical or physical changes: cutting of trees, melting of butter in a pan, rusting of almirah, boiling of water to form steam, passing of electric current, through water and the water breaking down into hydrogen and oxygen gases, dissolving common salt in water, e making a fruit salad with raw fruits, and Is MatrER AROUND Us PURE? burning of paper and wood. 2. Try segregating the things around you as pure substances or mixtures. 2.4 What are the Types of Pure Substances? On the basis of their chemical composition, substances can be classified either as elements or compounds. 2.4.1 ELEMENTS Robert Boyle was the first