of an electron is considered to be negligible and its charge is minus one. It seemed that an atom was composed of protons and electrons, mutually balancing their charges. It also appeared that the protons were in the interior of the atom, for whereas electrons could easily be removed off but not protons. Now the big question was: what sort of structure did these particles of the atom form? We will find the answer to this question below. Reprint 2025-26 uestions 1. What are canal rays? 2. Ifan atom contains one electron and one proton, will it carry any charge or not? 4.2 The Structure of an Atom We have learnt Dalton s atomic theory in Chapter 3, which suggested that the atom was indivisible and indestructible. But the discovery of two fundamental particles (electrons and protons) inside the atom, led to the failure of this aspect of Dalton s atomic theory. It was then considered necessary to know how electrons and protons are arranged within an atom. For explaining this, many scientists proposed various atomic models. J.J. Thomson was the first one to propose a model for the structure of an atom. 4.2.1 THOMSON S MODEL OF AN ATOM Thomson proposed the model of an atom to be similar to that of a Christmas pudding. The electrons, in a sphere of positive charge, were like currants (dry fruits) in a spherical Christmas pudding. We can also think of a watermelon, the positive charge in the atom is spread all over like the red edible part of the watermelon, while the electrons are studded in the positively charged sphere, like the seeds in the watermelon (Fig. 4.1). Positive sphere Electron Fig.4. 1: Thomson s model of an atom STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM Thomson proposed that: (i) An atom consists of a positively charged sphere and the electrons are embedded in it. (ii) The negative and positive charges are equal in magnitude. So, the atom as a whole is electrically neutral. Although Thomson s model explained that atoms are electrically neutral, the results of experiments carried out by other scientists could not be explained by this model, as we will see below. 4.2.2 RUTHERFORD S MODEL OF AN ATOM Ernest Rutherford was interested in knowing how the electrons are arranged within an atom. Rutherford designed an experiment for this. In this experiment, fast moving alpha (a)-particles were made to fall on a thin gold foil. e Heselected a gold foil because he wanted as thin a layer as possible. This gold foil was about 1000 atoms thick. a-particles are doubly-charged helium ions. Since they have a mass of 4 u, the fast-moving a-particles have a considerable amount of energy. e It was expected that a-particles would be deflected by the sub-atomic particles in the gold atoms. Since the a-particles were much heavier than the protons, he did not expect to see large deflections. Reprint 2025-26 Gold atoms a-particles Fig. 4.2: Scattering of a-particles by a gold foil But, the a-particle scattering