times less than the radius of the atom. On the basis of his experiment, Rutherford put forward the nuclear model of an atom, which had the following features: (i) There is a positively charged centre in an atom called the nucleus. Nearly all the mass of an atom resides in the nucleus. (ii) The electrons revolve around the nucleus in circular paths. (iii) The size of the nucleus is very small as compared to the size of the atom. Drawbacks of Rutherford s model of the atom The revolution of the electron in a circular orbit is not expected to be stable. Any particle ina circular orbit would undergo acceleration. During acceleration, charged particles would radiate energy. Thus, the revolving electron would lose energy and finally fall into the nucleus. If this were so, the atom should be highly unstable and hence matter would not exist in the form that we know. We know that atoms are quite stable. SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 4.2.3 BOHR S MODEL OF ATOM In order to overcome the objections raised against Rutherford s model of the atom, Neils Bohr put forward the following postulates about the model of an atom: (i) Only certain special orbits known as discrete orbits of electrons, are allowed inside the atom. (ii) While revolving in discrete orbits the electrons do not radiate energy. These orbits or shells are called energy levels. Energy levels in an atom are shown in Fig. 4.3. N shell (n=4) M shell (n=3) L shell (n=2) K shell (n=1) Nucleus Fig. 4.3: A few energy levels in an atom These orbits or shells are represented by the letters K,L,M,N,... or the numbers, n=1,2,3,4,.... STRUCTURE OF THE ATOM uestions 1. On the basis of Thomson's model ofan atom, explain how the atom is neutral as a whole. 2. On the basis of Rutherford s model of an atom, which subatomic particle is present in the nucleus of an atom? 3. Draw a sketch of Bohr s model ofan atom with three shells. 4. What do you think would be the observation if the a-particle scattering experiment is carried out using a foil of a metal other than gold? 4.2.4 NEUTRONS In 1932, J. Chadwick discovered another subatomic particle which had no charge and a mass nearly equal to that of a proton. It was eventually named as neutron. Neutrons are present in the nucleus of all atoms, except hydrogen. In general, a neutron is represented as n . The mass of an atom is therefore given by the sum of the masses of protons and neutrons present in the nucleus. uestions 1. Name the three sub-atomic particles ofan atom. 2. Helium atom has an atomic mass of 4 u and two protons in its nucleus. How many neutrons does it have? 4.3 Howare Electrons Distributed in Different Orbits (Shells)? The distribution of electrons into different orbits of an atom was suggested by Bohr and Bury. The following rules are followed for writing the number of electrons in