of an atom is close to its full capacity, then valency is determined in a different way. For example, the fluorine atom has 7 electrons in the outermost shell, and its valency could be 7. But it is easier for Reprint 2025-26 fluorine to gain one electron instead of losing seven electrons. Hence, its valency is determined by subtracting seven electrons from the octet and this gives you a valency of one for fluorine. Valency can be calculated in a similar manner for oxygen. What is the valency of oxygen that you get from this calculation? Therefore, an atom of each element has a definite combining capacity, called its valency. Valency of the first eighteen elements is given in the last column of Table 4.1. uestion 1. How will you find the valency of chlorine, sulphur and magnesium? 4.5 Atomic Number and Mass Number 4.5.1 ATOMIC NUMBER We know that protons are present in the nucleus of an atom. It is the number of protons of an atom, which determines its atomic number. It is denoted by Z . All atoms of an element have the same atomic number, Z. In fact, elements are defined by the number of protons they possess. For hydrogen, Z = 1, because in hydrogen atom, only one proton is present in the nucleus. Similarly, for carbon, Z = 6. Therefore, the atomic number is defined as the total number of protons present in the nucleus of an atom. 4.5.2 Mass NUMBER After studying the properties of the subatomic particles of an atom, we can conclude that mass of an atom is practically due to protons and neutrons alone. These are present in the nucleus of an atom. Hence protons and neutrons are also called nucleons. Therefore, the mass of an atom resides in its nucleus. For example, mass of carbon is 12 u because it has 6 protons and 6 neutrons, 6u+6u= 12 u. Similarly, the mass of aluminium is 27 u (13 protons+14 neutrons). The mass number is defined as the sum of the total number of protons and neutrons present in the nucleus of an atom. It is denoted by A . In the notation for an atom, the atomic number, mass number and symbol of the element are to be written as: Mass Number A Symbol of element x Z Atomic Number For example, nitrogen is written as 7N. uestions 1. Ifnumber of electrons in an atom is 8 and number of protons is also 8, then (i) what is the atomic number of the atom? and (ii) what is the charge on the atom? 2. With the help of Table 4.1, find out the-mass number of oxygen and sulphur atom. 4.6 Isotopes In nature, a number of atoms of some elements have been identified, which have the same atomic number but different mass numbers. For example, take the case of hydrogen atom, it has three atomic species, namely protium (}H), deuterium (7H or D) and tritium G H or T).