rane 13.3.3 Magnetic field of the Earth In Curiosity, Grade 6, we learnt that a freely suspended magnet always settles in a fixed direction. This is because the Earth itself behaves like a giant magnet. You have also seen in Chapter 4 that the region around a magnet where its effect is felt has a magnetic field. It is believed that the movement of molten iron in Earth s core may be the origin for Earth s magnetic field. Earth is constantly hit by tiny, high-energy particles that come from space. Some come from far across the universe and are called cosmic rays. Other particles come from the Sun and are called the solar wind. These particles can be harmful as they can damage the atmosphere, reduce the ozone layer, and let in more harmful UV rays, which can affect life on Earth. Thankfully, the Earth s magnetic field acts like a protective shield. It pushes many of these harmful particles away from the Earth, keeping our atmosphere, and hence life on our planet safe. Earth s unique position in the solar system allows the presence of liquid water along with its size, atmosphere, and magnetic field, all help make it a planet where life can emerge and thrive. But, how is life supported and sustained on Earth? Does the magnetic field of the Earth have any role in sustaining life on Earth? 13.4 What Allows Life to Be Sustained on Earth? Earth has the right conditions for life, but it is the beautiful connections between living and non-living things that help life to thrive. In Curiosity, Grades 6 and 7, you learnt about key natural resources, such as, air, water, sunlight, soil, and minerals. You also learnt about the important life processes in plants and animals. Now, let us explore how all these elements interact to support and sustain life on Earth. 13.4.1 Air, water, and sunlight We know that the atmosphere contains oxygen, which humans, animals, and plants use for respiration. In the presence of sunlight, plants take carbon dioxide from the air and water from 6/28/2025 6:15:59 PM the soil to prepare food by photosynthesis. In the process, oxygen is released, which is needed for respiration. We have learnt, radiation from the Sun heats the Earth. Some of this heat is trapped by the atmosphere due to the greenhouse effect. This effect though mild, keeps the temperature just high enough for water to remain in the liquid state. In Curiosity, Grade 7, you also learnt about heat transfer by radiation. Without an atmosphere, the Earth would lose heat to space and become too cold. So the greenhouse effect helps keep the Earth warm. Water is essential for life. You have learnt that it covers about 70 per cent of the Earth s surface and is found in ponds, lakes, rivers, springs, seas, oceans, and groundwater. _z@ All this water forms the hydrosphere. In Chapter 7, you learnt that water is a good solvent. In Curiosity, Grade 7,