us find out e Collect information about the temperature and size of the planets in the solar system, and check if they have an atmosphere. e You may collect this information from books in your school library, trusted websites, or discuss with your teachers. e Fill out the missing information in Table 13.2. Table 13.2: Planets in our solar system Average Radius, Planet temperature | compared to ( C) the Earth Has an atmosphere? Mercury 2. Venus 450 0.95 Yes 3. Earth 15 1 Yes 4. 5. 11 6. 7. 8. -200 4 We know that all planets in the solar system get their energy from the Sun. Thus, when a planet is close to the Sun, it would be very hot. As we move away from the Sun, planets should get colder. Is this what you found in Table 13.2? This is generally correct, except that Venus, the second planet from the Sun has the highest average temperature and is the hottest planet. Why is this so? Venus is the hottest planet not because it is the closest to the Sun, but because its thick atmosphere traps heat. 6/28/2025 6:15:36 PM Theairon Venus is almostentirely made up ofcarbon dioxide gas, which does not let the heat escape. This is called the greenhouse effect (Fig. 13.2), and it fi makes Venus even hotter than Mercury, which is v5 relatively closer to the Sun. On the Earth also, gases aC like carbon dioxide in the atmosphere trap heat a by absorbing the radiation given off by the Earth, after it gets warmed by the Sun. Thus, greenhouse Fig. 13.2: Schematic of greenhouse _ effect plays an important role in maintaining just effect on Earth the right temperature on Earth. A step further The greenhouse effect that causes a planet like Venus and Earth to trap heat does not work the same way as a greenhouse for growing plants in a cool climate. On Venus or Earth, gases like carbon dioxide in the atmosphere trap heat by absorbing the radiation given off by the Earth, after it gets warmed by the Sun. A plant greenhouse, on the other hand, traps warmed air simply because it is a closed space, usually with glass walls (Fig. 13.3). It heats up during the day, but the air stays in and the heat does not escape easily. So while both keep things warm, they do it differently! Fig. 13.3: Greenhouse for plants 13.3 What Makes the Earth Suitable for Life to Exist ? 13.3.1 Position of the Earth The most important reason why the Earth can support life is its distance from the PD a eke Sun. It is just at the right distance, where the temperature allows water to exist in a Tootobs! Jusbrighits. | liquid form. If the Earth were closer to the \, | -Toq cold Sun, it would be too hot and all the water would evaporate; if it were farther away, it would be too cold, and all the water would