book set came together. Anther Sexual reproduction in plants Plants use different parts of their flowers to produce male and female gametes. Pollen grains found inside the anther of a flower are the male gametes, while ovules, found deep inside the flower, are the female gametes. Pollen is carried to another flower by wind, insects, or Fig. 13.13: A flower animals this process is called pollination. When the male and female gametes combine, it is called fertilisation, forming a zygote that becomes the seed. The fleshy part of the flower around the ovule develops into a fruit (Fig. 13.13). When birds or animals eat the fruit, the seeds often get dropped far from the original plant a helpful way for plants to spread. That s how a banyan seed, dropped by a bird that ate a fruit and excreted the seed, might sprout in a crack in a wall after the rains. When seeds get water, they use stored nutrients to grow roots and shoots. Remember in Grade 6 you had studied the germination of seeds where you observed tiny shoots and the first leaves appear. Ovule Sexual reproduction in animals Egg cell In animals, gametes are called sperm (male) and eggs (female). Fertilisation may take place in water, for example, male and female fish or frogs eject sperm and eggs, Fertilisation respectively, into the water where they combine to form a the zygote. In these animals, the development of the zygote into an embryo also takes place in water (Fig. 13.14). In birds and mammals, including humans, sperm Sperm cell are deposited inside the female and fertilisation takes place when the sperm swim towards the egg produced by the female. After this step, birds and mammals follow different processes. uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade )ILIIICVIICIIIIS Chapter 13.indd 222 6/28/2025 6:16:18 PM Zygote Fig. 13.14: Formation of zygote Chapter 13.indd 223 WUIIIVIIVIA cranes 13 Our Home: Earth, a Unique Life Sustaining rane In birds, the fertilised egg (zygote) is laid by the female. The development of the zygote into an embryo happens after the egg is laid during the hatching process. Think about how much food the female parent has to put into each egg it has to last for the developing embryo until it hatches. This is one strategy to ensures supply of nutrition to the embryo. In most mammals, the development of the zygote into an embryo takes place inside the body of the female. The mother s body provides all the food and oxygen the baby needs to grow until it is born. This is a different way of giving nutrition to the developing baby, compared to animals like birds that lay eggs. What are the advantages and disadvantages of giving birth to young ones vs. laying eggs? Do you think animals like dogs, cows, or humans could lay eggs like birds? Why or why not? 13.6 What Are the Threats to Life on Earth? We know that life on Earth depends on a delicate balance