are some other important factors that make the Earth habitable. In our solar system, the orbits of most planets, including the Earth are almost circular. This keeps the amount of Chapter 13.indd 215 6/28/2025 6:15:50 PM sunlight and heat nearly steady throughout the year, preventing extreme summers and winters at most places. However, moderate temperature due to the right distance from the Sun isn t the only factor that makes the Earth habitable. The planet is also the right size to support an atmosphere. As you learnt earlier, the atmosphere is the layer of gases that surrounds the Earth, and it plays a major role in sustaining life. You also learnt in Chapter 5 that the Earth s gravity pulls objects towards it. If Earth were much smaller (but with the same average density), its gravity would have been too weak to hold on to the gases in our atmosphere, and they would have escaped into space. On Mars, the atmosphere is 100 times thinner than on Earth, and Mercury has no atmosphere at all. On the other hand, if the planet was too large, and gravity was much stronger, it would perhaps pull us down to the planet with such a large force that our bones could get crushed! Due to the right size of the Earth, it is able to support atmosphere which is essential for life. The presence of oxygen in the Earth s atmosphere allows us to breathe, and is needed by almost all forms of life on Earth. But oxygen has another important role. Some of the oxygen in our atmosphere, gets converted to another form called ozone (a three-atom oxygen molecule), and forms an important part of the atmosphere called the ozone layer. This layer acts like a shield, blocking harmful ultraviolet (UV) rays from the Sun that can damage living cells. Our scientific heritage India s Mangalyaan (Mars Orbiter Mission), launched in 2013 by Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO), was a big step in exploring Mars (Fig. 13.7). It carried tools to study the planet s atmosphere, surface, and signs of past water. Some of these / sensors help scientists ask big questions like was Mars Fig. 13.7: Mangalyaan ever suitable for life? Mangalyaan showed the world that India could do space science with smart, low-cost technology and it helped bring Mars closer to all of us. uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade )ILIIICVIICIIIIS Chapter 13.indd 216 6/28/2025 6:15:58 PM Chapter 13.indd 217 WUIIIVIIVIA cranes 13 Our Home: Earth, a Unique Life Sustaining rane 13.3.3 Magnetic field of the Earth In Curiosity, Grade 6, we learnt that a freely suspended magnet always settles in a fixed direction. This is because the Earth itself behaves like a giant magnet. You have also seen in Chapter 4 that the region around a magnet where its effect is felt has a magnetic field. It is believed that the movement of molten iron in Earth s core may be the origin for Earth s magnetic field. Earth