to observe. e Make sure they get all the conditions they need to grow like water, air, and sunlight. e Watch them every day and note how many days it takes for roots stem and leaves to appear. Also observe when the first new leaf appears. Ever heard of ... ) ; Fig. 13.11: Vegetative Not just plants microbes and simple animals also reproduce propagation (a) asexually. For example, single-celled organisms like bacteria and Ginger; (b) Potato amoeba divide into two identical individuals. Some multicellular organisms like algae can regrow from small cut parts. f & How do bamboo and sugarcane grow into new plants? I have never seen their seeds. td Hydra, another simple animal, grows tiny buds on its body that breaks off and grow into new individuals. Planaria (Fig. 13.12), a type of flatworm, can -( . regrow from a fragment of its body! Scientists study this organism to understand regeneration in animals. | ~ Fig. 13.12: Planaria 13.5.2 Sexual reproduction In this type of reproduction, two parents are involved usually called male and female. This is easy to observe in animals, but did you know even flowering plants have male and female parts? Some microorganisms like bacteria and yeast also have two mating types that act like the two parents. Special cells for reproduction You might wonder if both parents pass on their genetic material for making a new organism, won t the child end up with double the amount of instructions? And would not this keep doubling every generation? This does not happen because each parent makes specialised reproductive cells, called gametes. These carry only half of the parent s genetic material . When male and female gametes join, they form a new cell with a complete set of instructions half from each parent. Chapter 13.indd 221 6/28/2025 6:16:14 PM Babies do not look exactly like their mother or father. Even brothers and sisters in the same family can look different from each other. This is because every baby gets a mix of genetic information from both parents through gametes. Each gamete carries a different set ofinstructions for things like eye colour, hair type, and more. These instructions mix in different ways when the sperm and eggs joins to form a baby. These instructions mix in different ways each time, so each child is unique. No wonder one child may inherit a nose similar to mother and another may inherit eyes similar to father. It all depends on which pieces of the parent s instruction book set came together. Anther Sexual reproduction in plants Plants use different parts of their flowers to produce male and female gametes. Pollen grains found inside the anther of a flower are the male gametes, while ovules, found deep inside the flower, are the female gametes. Pollen is carried to another flower by wind, insects, or Fig. 13.13: A flower animals this process is called pollination. When the male and female gametes combine, it is called fertilisation, forming a zygote