habitable zone or Goldilocks zone. Further, the Earth orbits the Sun in a nearly circular orbit ensuring that the Earth is not too hot or too cold during any part of the year. The Earth s gravity is just enough to not let atmosphere escape into space. It is also not too high where creatures would be crushed by their own weight. @ Presence of ozone in the atmosphere prevents harmful ultraviolet rays from reaching the surface of the Earth. @ The magnetic field of the Earth shields it from high-energy particles that would otherwise hit the Earth and destroy life. @ The atmosphere (consisting of air), hydrosphere (consisting of water), geosphere (consisting of the solid part of the Earth), and biosphere (consisting of life) interact and together sustain life on the Earth. Reproduction is essential to ensure the continuity of life on Earth. Reproduction can be either asexual or sexual. Inasexualreproduction, a single parent produces new individuals that are exact copies of itself. @ Sexual reproduction make it possible for new features to appear in the following generation. In different animals, the development of the zygote into an embryo takes place either inside or outside the body. Climate change, biodiversity loss, and pollution are threatening life on Earth. Together, these challenges are known as the triple planetary crisis. 6/28/2025 6:16:27 PM Keep the curiosity alive 1. What is one major reason Mars cannot currently support life like Earth? (i) It has too many volcanoes. (ii) It is too close to the Sun. (iii) It lacks a thick atmosphere and liquid water. (iv) Its magnetic field is too strong. 2. Which of these is an example of geodiversity? (i) Variety of bird chirping in a forest. (ii) Different landforms like mountains, valleys, and deserts. (iii) Changing weather during monsoons. (iv) Number of different types of fish in a pond. 3. If the Earth were smaller with the same density, what might happen to its atmosphere? (i) It would become thicker and hotter. (ii) It would escape into space due to weaker gravity. (iii) It would become frozen. (iv) It would cause stronger winds. 4. In sexual reproduction, why are offspring different from their parents? (i) They grow in different climates. (ii) They eat different food. (iii) They acquire new instructions after birth. (iv) They get mixed instructions (genes) from both parents. 5. Younotice tiny green plants growing in cracks on your school wall after the monsoon. Where do you think the seeds came from? What conditions helped these plants grow there? 6. A city has recently cut down a large patch of forest to build new roads and buildings. Discuss the possible effects this could have on the local climate and biodiversity? How might this affect water availability or quality in the area? 7. A friend says, The Earth has always had climate changes in the past, so today s global warming is nothing new. How would you respond using what you ve learnt in this and other chapters of