apple s Fig. 13.1: The Earth s crust is like the thin skin of an apple skin as shown in Fig. 13.1. This delicate, life supporting layer is what makes Earth truly special. 01-07-2025 12:21:24 I wonder what makes the Earth unique for living beings to grow and survive! Let us conduct an activity to list out some features of the Earth that you think make it special. | Activity 13.1: Let us find out e List some features of the Earth that we often take for granted, but are interesting and important to us. Write them in Table 13.1. We have filled in a few for you. Table 13.1: Interesting features about the Earth Interesting features of the Earth The air we breathe doesn t fly off and disappear into space. 1. (We learnt in Chapter 7 that the particles of a gas move freely, and gases do not have a fixed volume) We can stand on the ground held by gravity (as we learnt in Chapter 5), but our heart can pump blood up to our head. Discuss the features you have listed with your teacher and friends. You may realise that the Earth is interesting and important to us in many ways. It provides us with the air that we breathe, the water that we drink, and the soil that helps in growing crops. The Earth also provides us materials like rock and timber with which we build our homes, buildings, and roads. You must be curious to know what makes the Earth a unique planet which not only allows life like us to exist but also sustains it. 13.2 What Do the Planets of Our Solar System Look Like? In Curiosity, Grade 6, you had studied the solar system in the chapter Beyond Earth . Let us recall some of the things we had learnt. Our solar system has eight planets that go around the Sun in nearly circular orbits. In order of their increasing distance from the Sun, they are Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade )ILIIICVIICIIIIS Chapter 13.indd 212 6/28/2025 6:15:36 PM Chapter 13.indd 213 WUIIIVIIVIA cranes 13 Our Home: Earth, a Unique Life Sustaining rane Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. Out of all these planets, Mercury, Venus, Earth, and Mars, are relatively small and rocky planets, while Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune are large planets, mostly made of gases. Let us find out more about the planets in the solar system by performing Activity 13.2. | Activity 13.2: Let us find out e Collect information about the temperature and size of the planets in the solar system, and check if they have an atmosphere. e You may collect this information from books in your school library, trusted websites, or discuss with your teachers. e Fill out the missing information in Table 13.2. Table 13.2: Planets in our solar system Average Radius, Planet temperature | compared to ( C) the Earth Has an atmosphere? Mercury 2. Venus 450 0.95 Yes