little less or more of oxygen in air, or a little lower or higher temperature of the Earth, or a little less of ozone in the atmosphere, could endanger life on the Earth. Fig. 13.15: Air pollution Ever heard of ... Countries around the world have made global agreements to protect the environment. The Montreal Protocol (1987) helped reduce harmful chemicals like Chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), allowing the ozone layer to slowly recover. The Earth Summit (1992) led to international efforts on climate change and biodiversity. Later, the Kyoto Protocol (2005) and Paris Agreement (2015) committed countries to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. The Paris Agreement set a goal to limit global warming to below 1.5 C, but as of 2025, the world is not on track to meet that goal. Much more action is needed to avoid any more adverse effects of climate change. Water and soil pollution are serious threats to life (Fig. 13.16). Factory, farm and plastic waste harm aquatic life and make water unsafe. Excess fertilisers and poor waste disposal pollute soil, reduce crop yield, and spread harmful substances through the food chain. Protecting them requires better waste management and_ sustainable farming practices. We have seen above that all the Earth system, such as hydrosphere, biosphere, atmosphere and geosphere are connected so damage to one can affect the others. Protecting the climate means cutting down on greenhouse gases by using renewable energy like solar and wind, improving energy use, and choosing environmentally friendly ways to travel. At the same time, preserving Fig. 13.16: Water pollution uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade )ILIIICVIICIIIIS Chapter 13.indd 224 6/28/2025 6:16:25 PM Chapter 13.indd 225 WUIIIVIIVIA cranes 13 Our Home: Earth, a Unique Life Sustaining rane biodiversity is key as diverse ecosystems are stronger and more balanced. Local communities can play a big role in using natural resources sustainably. Everyone can help. Reusing, repairing, and recycling items like clothes and plastic reduce pollution and waste. Small actions like saving energy and water add up. Learning more, sharing ideas, and encouraging others also makes a difference. In conclusion, sustaining life on Earth needs action from all of us from local communities to global leaders. By working together and living responsibly, we can protect this unique planet and its future. Snapshots Our Earth is a unique planet in the solar system as it supports life. Earth orbits the Sun at a distance where the temperature is neither too hot nor too cold, which allows water to exist in liquid form. This region is called the habitable zone or Goldilocks zone. Further, the Earth orbits the Sun in a nearly circular orbit ensuring that the Earth is not too hot or too cold during any part of the year. The Earth s gravity is just enough to not let atmosphere escape into space. It is also not too high where creatures would be crushed by their own weight. @ Presence of ozone in the atmosphere prevents harmful ultraviolet rays from reaching the surface of the Earth.