there? 6. A city has recently cut down a large patch of forest to build new roads and buildings. Discuss the possible effects this could have on the local climate and biodiversity? How might this affect water availability or quality in the area? 7. A friend says, The Earth has always had climate changes in the past, so today s global warming is nothing new. How would you respond using what you ve learnt in this and other chapters of your science book? Prepare some questions based on your learnings so far ... Chapter 13.indd 226 6/28/2025 6:16:33 PM Discover, design, and debate Chapter 13.indd 227 WUIIIVIIVIA cranes 13 Our Home: Earth, a Unique Life Sustaining rane ae 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. Reflect on the questions framed by your friends and try to answer... Imagine Earth s magnetic field suddenly disappeared. What kinds of problems could arise for life on Earth? Explain. You are tasked with designing a new settlement for humans on Mars. Name three things you would need to recreate from Earth to support human life there. Which of these do you think is the hardest to replicate, and why? In a village, the temperature has been increasing and rainfall has become unpredictable over the past few years. What could be causing this change? Suggest two ways the village could adapt to these new conditions. If there were no atmosphere on the Earth, would it affect life, temperature, and water on the planet? Explain. Discuss five examples of vegetative propagation. Design an Earth Survival Kit . Imagine you re building a tiny model of Earth for another planet. What must it have to support life, and why? India is planning for a challenging lunar mission, Chandrayaan-4, which will bring back samples of soil from the Moon. If the Moon had water, could plants grow in that soil? Think of some experiment that could help you explore whether plant growth is possible on the Moon. Flowers are often brightly coloured and have apleasant smell. How do you think these features help the plant reproduce? Why do animals like fish and frogs lay hundreds or even thousands of eggs at a time, while other animals lay only a few? What might be the advantages and disadvantages of laying so many eggs? Birds like sparrows build nests and care for their eggs and chicks, while reptiles like snakes usually lay their eggs and leave them without protection. How might this difference in parental care affect the chances of survival for the young ones in each case? But w' e thought ... _ tit 6/28/2025 6:16:47 PM | It s never the end, my friend! And we have arrived at the final page of our Grade 8 science journey. But remember, this is not the end of your exploration. Throughtout the year, we hope you have learnt to ask deeper questions, design investigations, and think like real scientists do. Whether you wondered about how forces work, explored the remarkable balance of