instructions that are passed down from parents to offpsrings. Sometimes, these changes help a plant or animal survive better in a new environment. For example, over time, camels developed humps to store fat and survive in deserts. Even microbes evolve some bacteria, as you learnt in the chapter on health, have become resistant to antibiotics, helping them persist. Over many generations, such changes can lead to new features or even completely new types of living beings. So, reproduction not only keeps each kind continuing, but also helps life adapt change, and continue in new forms (Fig. 13.10). But how can the same process lead both to similarity (an animal gives birth to similar individual, such as a cow gives birth to a cow) and variation (shows different characteristics like difference in color and height of to individuals of some kind)? That is a fascinating puzzle. There are two types of reproductive processes one in which the young are almost exactly like their parent and another in which they look slightly different from their parents. In asexual reproduction, a single Fig. 13.10: Development of calf to cow parent produces new individuals that are exact copies of itself (exact in terms of the instructions inside the cell). In sexual reproduction, instructions from two parents combine to create offspring that are not exactly like either of the parent. They share some traits with both parents, but also have differences. This mixing helps keep useful features while allowing new ones to appear. Over many generations, these small differences can add up leading to big differences, and even new life forms. Let s explore how reproduction takes place in plants and animals, and how it helps living beings develop special features and sometimes change over time. 13.5.1 Asexual reproduction Many plants can reproduces when any part of the plants leaf, stem, or root is planted in soil. This kind of reproduction is called vegetative propagation. uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade )ILIIICVIICIIIIS Chapter 13.indd 220 6/28/2025 6:16:06 PM WUIIIVIIVIA cranes 13 Our Home: Earth, a Unique Life Sustaining rane ar Can you observe and list some plants around you that grow this way? | Activity 13.3: Let us find out e Take some parts of plants like stem cutting of a money plant, the eyes of a sprouted potato, or a piece of ginger (Fig. 13.11b). e Plant each of them separately in moist soil (not too deep). For money plant, you can just put a cutting in a glass container which makes it easy to observe. e Make sure they get all the conditions they need to grow like water, air, and sunlight. e Watch them every day and note how many days it takes for roots stem and leaves to appear. Also observe when the first new leaf appears. Ever heard of ... ) ; Fig. 13.11: Vegetative Not just plants microbes and simple animals also reproduce propagation (a) asexually. For example, single-celled organisms like bacteria and Ginger; (b) Potato amoeba divide into