soil, rocks, and water, aren t just a background they help shape the story of life itself. 13.4.3 Plants, animals, and microorganisms From the chapter on microbes to the chapter on ecology, we have seen that the Earth is full of life from trees, shrubs, herbs, to animals, insects, and tiny organisms invisible to the naked eye. All living beings, along with the places where they live, make up the biosphere. This includes land, water, and air, where life interacts with its surroundings to survive and grow. As you learnt in Chapter 12, living beings depend on one another and their environment. Plants make food through photosynthesis, animals eat plants or other animals, and decomposers break down dead matter and return nutrients to the soil. Nature works together as a system to support life. 13.4.4 The importance of balance Have you ever wondered how so many things on Earth stay in balance? Earth is like a giant teamwork project between nature, weather, and life itself. It is a vast, living system where land, air, water, and living things support and affect one another. Even a small change in one part like cutting down a forest can impact rainfall, soil, air quality, and the animals that live there. Life on Earth survives not because of just one thing, but because everything works together in balance. It is this balance that keeps our planet habitable. That s why preserving and protecting clean air, water, soil, and all forms of life isn t just important but essential for keeping Earth healthy for the future. 13.5 What Keeps Life from Disappearing? If plants and animals didn t reproduce, life would eventually disappear from Earth. Reproduction ensures that each type of organism continues to exist, maintaining the continuity of life. We usually expect that animals will produce young ones that resemble them cows have calves, and cats have kittens. This happens because parents pass on instructions to their offspring about how to develop from a single cell. These instructions, Fig. 13.9: Geodiversity 6/28/2025 6:16:03 PM called genetic material or genes, are stored inside every cell of a living being. You can think of genes as a detailed instruction manual inside each cell. Some instructions tell the cell how to make blood, while others guide the formation of bones, muscles, or skin. Together, these instructions ensure that a calf grows into a cow, or a kitten grows into a cat. Butreproduction does morethanjustcreate more ofthesamekind of living beings. It also allows for small changes in the instructions that are passed down from parents to offpsrings. Sometimes, these changes help a plant or animal survive better in a new environment. For example, over time, camels developed humps to store fat and survive in deserts. Even microbes evolve some bacteria, as you learnt in the chapter on health, have become resistant to antibiotics, helping them persist. Over many generations, such changes can lead to new features or even completely new types of living beings. So, reproduction not only