example, what is a fair development goal), which you can refer to. Also, examples and activities drawn from the local environment are a must while discussing this section. This might include contexts that have not been covered in the chapter, such as the impact of imports on local farmers, etc. Collective brainstorming sessions can be conducted to analyse such situations. Sources for Information The call for a fairer globalisation has been given, among others, by the International Labour Organisation www.ilo.org. Another interesting resource is the WTO website http:/ /www.wto.org. It gives access to the variety of agreements that are being negotiated at the WTO. For company related information, most MNCs have their own websites. If you want to critically look at the MNCs, one recommended website is Wwuwww.corporatewatch.org.uk. UNDERSTANDING ECONOmiC DEVELOPMENT Reprint 2025-26 CHAPTER 4 GLOBALISATION | As consumers in today s world, some of us have a wide choice of goods and services before us. The latest models of digital cameras, mobile phones and televisions made by the leading manufacturers of the world are within our reach. Every season, new models of automobiles can be seen on Indian roads. Gone are the days when Ambassador and Fiat were the only cars on Indian roads. Today, Indians are buying cars produced by nearly all the top companies in the world. A similar explosion of brands can be seen for many other goods: from shirts to televisions to processed fruit juices. Such wide-ranging choice of goods in our markets is a relatively recent phenomenon. You wouldn t have found such a wide variety of goods in Indian markets even two decades back. In a matter of years, our markets have been transformed! How do we understand these rapid transformations? What are the factors that are bringing about these changes? And, how are these changes affecting the lives of the people? We shall dwell on these questions in this chapter. { . Reprint 2025-26 PRODUCTION ACROSS COUNTRIES Until the middle of the twentieth century, production was largely organised within countries. What crossed the boundaries of these multinational corporations (MNCs) emerged on the scene. A MNC is a company that owns or controls production in more than one nation. countries were raw material, food stuff and finished products. Colonies such as India exported raw materials and food stuff and imported finished goods. Trade was the main channel connecting distant countries. This was before large companies called MNCs set up offices and factories for production in regions where they can get cheap labour and other resources. This is done so that the cost of production is low and the MNCs can earn greater profits. Consider the following example. Spreading Producttow by ae MNC A large MNC, producing industrial equipment, designs its products in research centres in the United States, and then has the components manufactured in China. These are then shipped to Mexico and Eastern Europe where the products are assembled and the finished products are sold all over the world. Meanwhile, the company