get these large orders, Indian garment exporters try hard to cut their own costs. As cost of raw materials cannot be reduced, exporters try to cut labour costs. Where earlier a factory used to employ workers on a permanent basis, now they employ workers only on a temporary basis so that they do not have to pay workers for the whole year. Workers also have to put in very long working hours and work night shifts on a regular basis during the peak season. Wages are low and workers are forced to work overtime to make both ends meet. While this competition among the garment exporters has allowed the MNCs to make large profits, workers are denied their fair share of benefits brought about by globalisation. A Garment Worker 35 year old Sushila has spent many years asa worker in garment export industry of Delhi. She was employed as a permanent worker entitled to health insurance, provident fund, overtime at a double rate, when Sushila s factory closed in the late 1990s. After searching for a job for six months, she finally got a job 30 km. away from where she lives. Even after working in this factory for several years, she is a temporary worker and earns less than half of what she was earning earlier. Sushila leaves her house every morning, seven days a week at 7:30 a.m. and returns at 10 p.m. A day off from work means no wage. She has none of the benefits she used to get earlier. Factories closer to her home have widely fluctuating orders and therefore pay even less. Reprint 2025-26 The conditions of work and the hardships of the workers described above have become common to many industrial units and services in India. Most workers, today, are employed in the unorganised sector. Moreover, increasingly conditions of work in the organised sector have come to resemble the unorganised sector. Workers in the organised sector such as Sushila no longer get the protection and benefits that they enjoyed earlier. LET S WORK THESE OUT 1. In what ways has competition affected workers, Indian exporters and foreign MNCs in the garment industry? 2. What can be done by each of the following so that the workers can get a fair share of benefits brought by globalisation? (a) government (bo) employers at the exporting factories (c) MNCs (d) workers. 3. One of the present debates in India is whether companies should have flexible policies for employment. Based on what you have read in the chapter, summarise the point of view of the employers and workers. THE STRUGGLE FOR A FAIR GLOBALISATION The above evidence indicates that not everyone has benefited from globalisation. People with education, skill and wealth have made the best use of the new opportunities. On the other hand, there are many people who have not shared the benefits. Since globalisation is now a reality, the question is how to make globalisation more fair ? Fair globalisation would create opportunities for all,