not only in markets located within the country but can also compete in markets located in other countries of the world. Similarly, for the buyers, import of goods produced in another country is one way of expanding the choice of goods beyond what is domestically produced. Reprint 2025-26 oS Ss oe a | Tae GIFTS *TO S IMPRE! SHin= - TOYS & GAMES tte a*SPORTS & COURIE L TVS: SPORTS GIFT ITEMS STATIONERY, BIRTHDAY RETURN GIFTS & COURIERS SHOP NOLO, SECTOR S70, CHD SHOP WO 150 SEC SACO a S780 HOB Let us see the through the examp ffect of foreign trade Je of Chinese toys in the Indian markets. Chinese Toys iw India Chinese manufacturers learn of an opportunity to export toys to India, where toys are sold at a high price. They start exporting plastic toys to India. Buyers in India now have the option of choosing between Indian and the Chinese toys. Because of the cheaper prices and new designs, Chinese toys become more popular in the Indian markets. Within a year, 70 to 80 per cent of the toy shops have replaced Indian toys with Chinese toys. Toys are now cheaper in the Indian markets than earlier. What is happening here? As a result of trade, Chinese toys come into the Indian markets. In the competition between Indian and Chinese toys, Chinese toys prove better. Indian buyers have a greater choice of toys and at lower prices. For the Chinese toy makers, this provides an opportunity to expand business. The opposite is true for Indian toy makers. They face losses, as their toys are selling much less. Reprint 2025-26 In general, with the opening of trade, goods travel from one market to another. Choice of goods in the markets rises. Prices of similar goods in the two markets tend to become equal. And, producers in the two countries now closely compete against each other even though they are separated by thousands of miles! Foreign trade thus results in connecting the markets or integration of markets in different countries. Small traders of readymade garments facing stiff competition from both the MNC brands and imports. LET S WORK THESE OUT 1. What was the main channel connecting countries in the past? How is it different now? 2. Distinguish between foreign trade and foreign investment. 3. In recent years China has been importing steel from India. Explain how the import of steel by China will affect. (a) steel companies in China. (6) steel companies in India. (c) industries buying steel for production of other industrial goods in China. 4. How will the import of steel from India into the Chinese markets lead to integration of markets for steel in the two countries? Explain. WHAT IS GLOBALISATION? In the past two to three decades, more and more MNCs have been looking for locations around the world which would be cheap for their production. Foreign investment by MNCs in these " BE CAREFUL! THATS countries has been rising. At the same