other resources. This is done so that the cost of production is low and the MNCs can earn greater profits. Consider the following example. Spreading Producttow by ae MNC A large MNC, producing industrial equipment, designs its products in research centres in the United States, and then has the components manufactured in China. These are then shipped to Mexico and Eastern Europe where the products are assembled and the finished products are sold all over the world. Meanwhile, the company s customer care is carried out through call centres located in India. This is a call centre in Bengaluru, equipped with telecom facilities and access to the Internet to provide information and support to customers abroad. See.) . eee UNDERSTANDING ECoNnomic DEVELOPMENT Reprint 2025-26 In this example the MNC is not only selling its finished products globally, but more important, the goods and services are produced globally. As aresult, production is organised in increasingly complex ways. The production process is divided into small parts and spread out across the globe. In the above example, China provides the advantage of being a cheap manufacturing location. Mexico and Eastern Europe are useful for their closeness to the markets in the US and Europe. India has highly skilled engineers who can understand the technical aspects of production. It also has educated English speaking youth who can provide customer care services. And all this probably can mean 50-60 per cent cost-savings for the MNC! The advantage of spreading out production across the borders to the multinationals can be truly immense. LET S WORK THIS OUT Complete the following statement to show how the production process in the garment industry is spread across countries. The brand tag says Made in Thailand but they are not Thai products. We dissect the manufacturing process and look for the best solution at each step. We are doing it globally. In making garments, the company may, for example, get cotton fibre from Korea, ... INTERLINKING PRODUCTION ACROSS COUNTRIES In general, MNCs set up production where it is close to the markets; where there is skilled and unskilled labour available at low costs; and where the availability of other factors of production is assured. In addition, MNCs might look for government policies that look after their interests. You will read more about the policies later in the chapter. Having assured themselves of these conditions, MNCs set up factories and offices for production. The money that is spent to buy assets such as land, building, machines and other equipment is called investment. Investment made by MNCs is called foreign investment. Any investment is made with the hope that these assets will earn profits. GLOBALISATION AND THE INDIAN ECONOMY At times, MNCs set up production jointly with some of the local companies of these countries. The benefit to the local company of such joint production is two-fold. First, MNCs can provide money for additional investments, like buying new machines for faster production. Second, MNCs might bring with them the latest technology for