chapter, summarise the point of view of the employers and workers. THE STRUGGLE FOR A FAIR GLOBALISATION The above evidence indicates that not everyone has benefited from globalisation. People with education, skill and wealth have made the best use of the new opportunities. On the other hand, there are many people who have not shared the benefits. Since globalisation is now a reality, the question is how to make globalisation more fair ? Fair globalisation would create opportunities for all, and also ensure that the benefits of globalisation are shared better. The government can play a major role in making this possible. Its policies must protect the interests, not only of the rich and the powerful, but all the people in the country. You have read about some of the possible steps that the government can take. For instance, the government can ensure that labour laws are properly implemented and the workers get their rights. It can support small producers to improve their performance till the time they become strong enough to compete. If necessary, the government can use trade and investment barriers. It can negotiate at the WTO for fairer rules . It can also align with other developing countries with similar interests to fight against the domination of developed countries in the WTO. In the past few years, massive campaigns and representation by people s organisations have influenced important decisions relating to trade and investments at the WTO. This has demonstrated that people also can play an important role in the struggle for fair globalisation. ee 1) eee UNDERSTANDING Economic DEVELOPMENT Reprint 2025-26 ~ , : = = Pn ah A demonstration against WTO in Hong Kong, 2005 In this chapter, we looked at the present phase of globalisation. Globalisation is the process of rapid integration of countries. This is happening through greater foreign trade and foreign investment. MNCs are playing a major role in the globalisation process. More and more MNCs are looking for locations around the world that are cheap for their production. As a result, production is being organised in complex ways. Technology, particularly IT, has played a big role in organising production across countries. In addition, liberalisation of trade and GLOBALISATION AND THE INDIAN Economy & investment has facilitated globalisation by removing barriers to trade and investment. At the international level, WTO has put pressure on developing countries to liberalise trade and investment. While globalisation has benefited well-off consumers and also producers with skill, education and wealth, many small producers and workers have suffered as a result of the rising competition. Fair globalisation would create opportunities for all, and also ensure that the benefits of globalisation are shared better. Reprint 2025-26 EXERCISES What do you understand by globalisation? Explain in your own words. . What were the reasons for putting barriers to foreign trade and foreign investment by the Indian government? Why did it wish to remove these barriers? . How would flexibility in labour laws help companies? . What are the various ways