This has made much faster delivery of goods across long distances possible at lower costs. Reprint 2025-26 Containers for transport of goods Goods are placed in containers that can be loaded intact onto ships, railways, planes and trucks. Containers have led to huge reduction in port handling costs and increased the speed with which exports can reach markets. Similarly, the cost of air transport has fallen. This has enabled much greater volumes of goods being transported by airlines. eee yee UNDERSTANDING Economic DEVELOPMENT Even more remarkable have been the developments in information and communication technology. In recent times, technology in the areas of telecommunications, computers, Internet has been changing rapidly. Telecommunication facilities (telegraph, telephone including mobile phones, fax) are used to contact one another around the world, to access information instantly, and to communicate from remote areas. This has been facilitated by satellite communication devices. As you would be aware, computers have now entered almost every field of activity. You might have also ventured into the Information and co (or IT in short) has played a maj spreading out prod across cour IT LOOKS LIKE A VERY NICE MAGAZINE. BUT WHY ISN T MY TEXTBOOK PRINTED LIKE THIS? | CAN HARDLY READ THE WORDS IN MY BOOK! GLOBALISATION AND THE INDIAN ECONOmyY Hs NO, MY CHILD! THIS PRINTING PRESS IS NOT FOR ORDINARY INDIANS! amazing world of internet, where you can obtain and share information on almost anything you want to know. Internet also allows us to send instant electronic mail (e-mail) and talk (voice-mail) across the world at negligible costs. BUT WHERE [5 THE ELECTRICITY2... mmunication technology or role in uction of services tries. Let us see how. A news magazine published for London readers is to be designed and printed in Delhi. The text of the magazine is sent through Internet to the Delhi office. The designers in the Delhi office get orders on how to design the magazine from the office in London using telecommunication facilities. The designing is done on a computer. After printing, the magazines are sent by air to London. Even the payment of money for designing and printing from a bank in London to a bank in Delhi is done instantly through the Internet (e-banking)! LET S WORK THESE OUT 1. In the above example, underline the words describing the use of technology in production. . How is information technology connected with globalisation? Would globalisation have been possible without expansion of IT? Reprint 2025-26 Liberalisation of foreign trade and foreign investment policy Let us return to the example of imports of Chinese toys in India. Suppose the Indian government puts a tax on import of toys. What would happen? Those who wish to import these toys would have to pay tax on this. Because of the tax, buyers will have to pay a higher price on imported toys. Chinese toys will no longer be as cheap in the Indian markets and imports from China will automatically reduce. Indian toy-makers will prosper. Tax on