for the manufacture of television sets. However, competition from the MNC brands forced the Indian television companies to move into assembling activities for MNCs. Even when some of them bought capacitors, they would prefer to import as the price of the tmported item was half the price charged by people like Ravi. Ravi now produces less than half the capacitors that he produced in the year 2000 and has only seven workers Working for him. Many of Ravi s friends in the same business in Hyderabad and Chennai have closed their units. Batteries, capacitors, plastics, toys, tyres, dairy products, and vegetable oil are some examples of industries where the small manufacturers have been hit hard due to competition. Several of the units have shut down rendering many workers jobless. The small and medium industries in India employ the largest number of workers (11 crores) in the country, next only to agriculture. LET S WORK THESE OUT 1. What are the ways in which Ravi s small production unit was affected by rising competition? 2. Should producers such as Ravi stop production because their cost of production is higher compared to producers in other countries? What do you think? 3. Recent studies point out that small producers in India need three things to compete better in the market (a) better roads, power, water, raw materials, marketing and information network (b) improvements and modernisation of technology (c) timely availability of credit at reasonable interest rates. Can you explain how these three things would help Indian producers? Do you think MNCs will be interested in investing in these? Why? Do you think the government has a role in making these facilities available? Why? Can you think of any other step that the government could take? Discuss. Reprint 2025-26 Competition and Uncertain Employment Globalisation and the pressure of competition have substantially changed the lives of workers. Faced with growing competition, most employers these days prefer to employ workers flexibly . This means that workers jobs are no longer secure. Let us see how the workers in the garment export industry in India are having to bear this pressure of competition. Factory workers folding garments for export. Though globalisation has created opportunities for paid work for women, the condition of employment shows that women are denied their fair share of benefits. Large MNCs in the garment industry in Europe and America order their products from Indian exporters. These large MNCs with worldwide network look for the cheapest goods in order to maximise their profits. To get these large orders, Indian garment exporters try hard to cut their own costs. As cost of raw materials cannot be reduced, exporters try to cut labour costs. Where earlier a factory used to employ workers on a permanent basis, now they employ workers only on a temporary basis so that they do not have to pay workers for the whole year. Workers also have to put in very long working hours and work night shifts on a regular basis