. WTO establishes rules regarding for all countries, and sees that In practice, trade between countries is not . Developing countries like India have , whereas developed countries, in many cases, have continued to provide protection to their producers. . What do you think can be done so that trade between countries is more fair? . Inthe above example, we saw that the US government gives massive sums of money to farmers for production. At times, governments also give support to promote production of certain types of goods, such as those which are environmentally friendly. Discuss whether these are fair or not. In the last twenty years, globalisation of the Indian economy has come a long way. What has been its effect on the lives of people? Let us look at some of the evidence. Globalisation and _ greater competition among producers - both local and foreign producers - has been of advantage to consumers, particularly the well-off sections in the urban areas. There is greater choice before these consumers who now enjoy improved quality and lower prices for several products. As a result, these people today, enjoy much higher standards of living than was possible earlier. IMPACT OF GLOBALISATION IN INDIA Among producers and workers, the impact of globalisation has not been uniform. Firstly, MNCs have increased their investments in India over the past 20 years, which means investing in India has been beneficial for them. MNCs have been interested in industries such as cell phones, automobiles, electronics, soft drinks, fast food or services such as banking in urban areas. These products have a large number of well-off buyers. In these industries and services, new jobs have been created. Also, local companies supplying raw materials, etc. to these industries have prospered. Finally, the global lifestyle Stepy to Attract Foreign Imwestment In recent years, the central and state governments in India are taking special steps to attract foreign companies to invest in India. Industrial zones, called Special Economic Zones (SEZs), are being set up. SEZs are to have world class facilities: electricity, water, roads, transport, storage, recreational and educational facilities. Companies who set up production units in the SEZs do not have to pay taxes for an initial period of five years. Government has also allowed flexibility in the labour laws to attract foreign investment. You have seen in Chapter 2 that the companies in the organised sector have to obey certain rules that aim to protect the workers rights. In the recent years, the government has allowed companies to ignore many of these. Instead of hiring workers on a regular basis, companies hire workers flexibly for short periods when there is intense pressure of work. This is done to reduce the cost of labour for the company. However, still not satisfied, foreign companies are demanding more flexibility in labour laws. NOW, WE ARE READY TO INVEST! Secondly, several of the top Indian companies have been able to benefit from the increased competition. They have invested in newer technology and