WORK THESE OUT Ford Motors, an American company, is one of the world's largest automobile Read the passage on the left and answer the questions. 1. Would you say Ford Motors is a MNC? Why? 2. What is foreign investment? How much did Ford Motors invest in India? manufacturers with production spread over 26 3. By setting up their production plants in India, MNCs such as Ford countries of the world Motors tap the advantage not only of the large markets that countries such as India provide, but also the lower costs of production. Explain Ford Motors came to India the statement. in 1995 and spent Rs. 1700 crore to set up a large plant near Chennai. This was done in collaboration with Mahindra and Mahindra, a major Indian manufacturer of jeeps and trucks. By the year 2017, Ford Motors was selling 88,000 cars in the Indian markets, while another 1,851,000 cars were exported from India to South Africa, Mexico, Brazil and United States of America. In recent years, Ford Company stopped producing cars for selling in India but export cars and car engines on a small scale to other countries. 4. Why do you think the company wants to develop India as a base for manufacturing car components for its global operations? Discuss the following factors: (a) cost of labour and other resources in India (b) the presence of several local manufacturers who supply autoparts to Ford Motors (c) closeness to a large number of buyers in India and China 5. In what ways will the production of cars by Ford Motors in India lead to interlinking of production? 6. In what ways is a MNC different from other companies? 7. Nearly all major multinationals are American, Japanese or European, such as Nike, Coca-Cola, Pepsi, Honda, Nokia. Can you guess why? FOREIGN TRADE AND INTEGRATION OF MARKETS For a long time foreign trade has been To put it simply, foreign trade the main channel connecting countries. In history you would have read about the trade routes connecting India and South Asia to markets both in the East and West and the extensive trade that took place along these routes. Also, you would remember that it was trading interests which attracted various trading companies such as the East India Company to India. What then is the basic function of foreign trade? GLOBALISATION AND THE INDIAN ECONOMY OSS creates an opportunity for the producers to reach beyond the domestic markets, i.e., markets of their own countries. Producers can sell their produce not only in markets located within the country but can also compete in markets located in other countries of the world. Similarly, for the buyers, import of goods produced in another country is one way of expanding the choice of goods beyond what is domestically produced. Reprint 2025-26 oS Ss oe a | Tae GIFTS *TO S IMPRE! SHin= - TOYS & GAMES tte a*SPORTS & COURIE L TVS: SPORTS GIFT ITEMS STATIONERY, BIRTHDAY RETURN GIFTS & COURIERS SHOP NOLO,