investment. Investment made by MNCs is called foreign investment. Any investment is made with the hope that these assets will earn profits. GLOBALISATION AND THE INDIAN ECONOMY At times, MNCs set up production jointly with some of the local companies of these countries. The benefit to the local company of such joint production is two-fold. First, MNCs can provide money for additional investments, like buying new machines for faster production. Second, MNCs might bring with them the latest technology for production. WE WILL SHIFT THIS FACTORY TO ANOTHER COUNTRY. IT HAS BECOME EXPENSIVE HERE! gy CMT ONT HIGHER WAGES Reprint 2025-26 Women at home in Ludhiana making footballs for large MNCs ee t But the most common route for MNC investments is to buy up local companies and then to expand production. MNCs with huge wealth can quite easily do so. To take an example, Cargill Foods, a very large American MNC, has bought over smaller Indian companies such as Parakh Foods. Parakh Foods had built a large marketing network in various parts of India, where its brand was well-reputed. Also, Parakh Foods had four oil refineries, whose control has now shifted to Cargill. Cargill is now the largest producer of edible oil in India, with a capacity to make 5 million pouches daily! In fact, many of the top MNCs have wealth exceeding the entire budgets of the developing country governments. With such enormous wealth, imagine the power and influence of these MNCs! There s another way in which MNCs control production. Large MNCs in developed countries place orders for production with small producers. Garments, footwear, sports items are examples of industries where production is carried out by a large number of small producers around the world. Reprint 2025-26 Jeans produced in developing countries being sold in USA for Rs 6500 ($145) The products are supplied to the MNCs, which then sell these under their own brand names to the customers. These large MNCs have tremendous power to determine price, quality, delivery, and labour conditions for these distant producers. Thus, we see that there are a variety of ways in which the MNCs are spreading their production and interacting with local producers in various countries across the globe. By setting up partnerships with local companies, by using the local companies for supplies, by closely competing with the local companies or buying them up, MNCs are exerting a strong influence on production at these distant locations. As a result, production in these widely dispersed locations is getting interlinked. LET S WORK THESE OUT Ford Motors, an American company, is one of the world's largest automobile Read the passage on the left and answer the questions. 1. Would you say Ford Motors is a MNC? Why? 2. What is foreign investment? How much did Ford Motors invest in India? manufacturers with production spread over 26 3. By setting up their production plants in India, MNCs such as Ford countries of the world Motors tap the advantage not only of the large