used as trade barriers? Do you think this should be used? Discuss. eee Yee UNDERSTANDING Economic DEVELOPMENT Reprint 2025-26 WORLD TRADE ORGANISATION We have seen that the liberalisation of foreign trade and investment in India was supported by some very powerful international organisations. These organisations say that all barriers to foreign trade and investment are harmful. There should be no barriers. Trade between countries should be free . All countries in the world should liberalise their policies. World Trade Organisation (WTO) is one such organisation whose aim is to liberalise international trade. Started at the initiative of the developed countries, WTO establishes rules regarding international trade, and sees that these rules are obeyed. About 160 countries of the world are currently members of the WTO. Though WTO is supposed to allow free trade for all, in practice, it is seen that the developed countries have unfairly retained trade barriers. On the other hand, WTO rules have forced the developing countries to remove trade barriers. An example of this is the current debate on trade in agricultural products. Debate ow Trade Practicey You have seen in Chapter 2, that the agriculture sector provides the bull of employment and a significant portion of the GDP in India. Compare this to a developed country such as the US with the share of agriculture in GDP at 1% and its share in total employment a tiny 0.5%! And yet this very small percentage of people Developing countries are, therefore, asking the developed country governments, We have reduced trade barriers as per WTO rules. But you have ignored the rules of WTO and have continued to pay your farmers vast sums of money. You have asked our governments to stop supporting our farmers, but you are doing so yourselves. Is this free and fair trade? who are engaged in A typical cotton farm in USA consists of thousands of acres owned by agriculture in the US receive massive sums of money from the US government for production and for exports to other countries. Due to this massive money that they receive, US farmers can sell the farm products at abnormally low prices. The surplus farm products are sold in other country markets at low prices, adversely affecting farmers in these countries. a huge corporation that will sell cotton abroad at lowered prices. GLOBALISATION AND THE INDIAN ECONOMY xo Reprint 2025-26 LET S WORK THESE OUT 1. Fill in the blanks. WTO was started at the initiative of countries. The aim of the WTO is to . WTO establishes rules regarding for all countries, and sees that In practice, trade between countries is not . Developing countries like India have , whereas developed countries, in many cases, have continued to provide protection to their producers. . What do you think can be done so that trade between countries is more fair? . Inthe above example, we saw that the US government gives massive sums of money to farmers for production. At times, governments also give support