steel for production of other industrial goods in China. 4. How will the import of steel from India into the Chinese markets lead to integration of markets for steel in the two countries? Explain. WHAT IS GLOBALISATION? In the past two to three decades, more and more MNCs have been looking for locations around the world which would be cheap for their production. Foreign investment by MNCs in these " BE CAREFUL! THATS countries has been rising. At the same OUR WORLD YOU'RE time, foreign trade between countries ALLY PLAYING WITHI so F N SOMEDAY YOU'LL has been rising rapidly. A large part HAVE TO PAY THE of the foreign trade is also controlled PRICE! by MNCs. For instance, the car manufacturing plant of Ford Motors in India not only produces cars for the Indian markets, it also exports cars to other developing countries and exports car components for its many factories around the world. Likewise, activities of most MNCs involve substantial trade in goods and also services. GLOBALISATION [5 FUN! GLOBALISATION AND THE INDIAN ECONOmyY Hs Reprint 2025-26 The result of greater foreign investment and greater foreign trade has been greater integration of production and markets across countries. Globalisation is this process of rapid integration or interconnection between countries. MNCs are playing a major role in the globalisation process. More and more goods and services, investments and technology are moving between countries. Most regions of the world are in closer LET S WORK THESE OUT What is the role of MNCs in the globalisation process? 1. 2. What are the various ways in which countries can be linked? . Choose the correct option. Globalisation, by connecting countries, shall result in (a) lesser competition among producers. (6) greater competition among producers. (c) no change in competition among producers. Technology Rapid improvement in technology stimulated the globalisation process. FACTORS THAT HAVE ENABLED GLOBALISATION contact with each other than a few decades back. Besides the movements of goods, services, investments and technology, there is one more way in which the countries can be connected. This is through the movement of people between countries. People usually move from one country to another in search of better income, better jobs or better education. In the past few decades, however, there has not been much increase in the movement of people between countries due to various restrictions. Se snedeaaes WEVE SEEN GREAT IMPROVEMENTS IN TRANSPORTATION... has been one major factor that has For instance, the past fifty years have seen several improvements in transportation technology. This has made much faster delivery of goods across long distances possible at lower costs. Reprint 2025-26 Containers for transport of goods Goods are placed in containers that can be loaded intact onto ships, railways, planes and trucks. Containers have led to huge reduction in port handling costs and increased the speed with which exports can reach markets. Similarly, the cost of air transport has fallen. This has enabled much greater volumes of goods being transported by airlines. eee yee