Tue Day THE RIVER SPOKE

Let us do these activities before we read.

I Close your eyes and quietly listen to the sounds around you for a minute.

1. Are they trying to tell you something?

2. Do you think the things around you also listen to you all day long? f

Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher.

II Jahnavi was a bright young girl who lived with her parents and three
brothers in a coastal village in India. Her parents worked on the farm.
She had a dream.

1. What could that dream be?
2. How could she make her dream come true?

3. What is your dream? What can you do to make your
dream come true?

i Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher.

Poorvi

splashed: fell in
drops, making a
sound

slithered: moved
by sliding from
side to side

murmuring:
speaking ina
low voice

startled:
surprised

thicket: a 4

group of bushes
and trees

shrieked: made
a high-pitched
sound
PA

Qs

I

A big bright tear splashed down her nose. And another.
A kingfisher swept down, its wings an arrow of blue in the
sunlight. And a green lizard slithered down to the river s edge
to bask in the sun.

 Dear, dear! said a sleepy, murmuring voice, What s the
matter? 

Jahnavi was startled, because she was sure she had been quite
alone. It couldn t have been the lizard. And the kingfisher was
up in the thicket of bamboo eating the fish it had caught. It
couldn t be the parrots, because parrots shrieked and this was
such a sleepy voice. She looked around her. There wasn t a
soul in sight. She was rather scared and wanted to run away.

 You shouldn t cry, you know, the voice went on. And you
really shouldn t be scared, when you have been coming here
to see me every day, well, almost every day. 

06-Mar-25 2:47:08 PM

She was puzzled. It was such a voice, like
the river. It couldn t be the river!

 Well, tell me all about it, said the River,
for it was the River. I ve got to hurry to reach
the sea, you know. 

 They won t let me go to school, said Jahnavi.
 Tasked my mother, Why can t I go to school
like Ettan and Meena? And Mother had
replied, You are too small, baby. Maybe
later. But when she was five, little
Ramu was born and Mother still said,
 Maybe next year. Jahnavi, mind your

little brother while I go to the fields. 
Now, she was nearly ten and minding
Little Appu, who was the smallest. They
don t want me. They only... she stopped with a sob...

 Tam scared to go to school. And I m so old now, they ll never
let me go. But I want to go. I want to learn to read like Ettan
and Meena. Jahnavi called her brother Ettan . Ettan means
 Elder brother , but his real name was Gopi. I want to know
why spiders are yellow in yellow flowers, why bamboo
trees rustle, why the moon always comes from

behind the hills, never the other way, why
the baby fish in the field water become

frogs, why... 

 Stop! said the River. You make me
breathless. So many whys! I can tell
you where the moon goes, the River

said conspiratorially. It goes down

towards the sea. I ve seen; it always
takes the same way over the
mountains and down to the sea,
like me! 

Let us discuss
1. What was Jahnavi s dream? Was it
important to her? Why?

2. Do you think the river can help
her in fulfilling her dream? How?

| Unit lindd 3

LEARNING TOGETHER

rustle: light
sound made by
leaves rubbing
against each
other

conspiratorially:
secretly

Poorvi

clump:

a small group of
trees growing
together

rattling: noise
made by shaking
things

catamaran: a
kind of boat

wailed: (here)
complained ina
loud voice

| Unit liindd 4

&

I

 Even little Ramu goes to school, said Jahnavi, pity, the school
isn t by the sea, said the River. Then I could take you along,
you know. But, I suppose I couldn t really. You d get your feet
wet. And that would never do! I m afraid there s only one thing
you can do. 

 Can I do something? asked Jahnavi. Well, it s up to you, 
said the River. Seems to me little girls can do as much as little
boys they swim as fast as little boys. You just slip along one
morning and sit there in the school and listen to what s going
on, and maybe the teacher will let you stay. 

 TI couldn t, gasped Jahnavi. I couldn t! They'd scare me!
They d chase me out. 

The River laughed. You? Scared? the River said, when you re
not afraid of the green lizard, or of the snake in the bamboo
clump, Jahnavi startled) or the big trains rattling past that
bridge. Trains are noisy; I prefer ships, said the River.

Jahnavi never knew the snake lived in the bamboo clump.
 What are ships? she asked.

 Big boats, said the River, so big that they can take hundreds
of people, and they sail along the sea with lights that shine all
night. 

Jahnavi held her breath. Will they come here? she asked.

 T m afraid not, said the River. Too large, you know. Chandu s
catamaran is good enough for me. Chandu can take you to see
a ship, someday. 

 They'd never let me! wailed Jahnavi.

 Try going to school first, said the River. Remember it s up
to you! 

Unit lindd 5

Jahnavi gathered courage. The next day she reached the school,
panting and out of breath and stood by the door listening while
the teacher read out the lesson. It was a story about a prince
called Ashoka, who became a great king. Little Appu had fallen
asleep on her shoulder. She crept nearer and nearer till she was
in the back row, squatting with the others on the earthen floor.
Little Appu made no noise and she listened.

 Where did you spring from, little girl? asked the teacher. And
what is your name? You re new in my class. 

 She s Gopi s sister, Gopi is in the next class, said one of the boys.
 It s Jahnavi, said another. So, you re Gopi s little sister? Nice
lad, Gopi. 

 If you really, really want to come to my school, Jahnavi, the
teacher had said, we ll talk to your father about it. Don t you
worry. We'll find a way. 

Jahnavi saw the teacher walking up the steps to their gate the
next evening when she was lighting the lamp. She could see her
father scratching his cheek the way he did when he was worried
and the teacher was nodding and saying something she couldn t
make out. And Mother said, Little Jahnavi, I shall miss you when
you go to school. Girls should learn as much as they want. When I
was your age, I wanted to go to school, but your grandmother said
 No , but now, I am glad the teacher came to talk to your father. 

LEARNING TOGETHER

06-Ma

\
MWe 2:47:12 PM |

Poorvi
&

| Unit lindd 6

And Jahnavi said, Mother, when I grow up, Ill be
a teacher and I'll go from house to house in our
village and ask all the little girls to come to my
school. And Ill teach them all that I m going to
learn. 

And she went down the path between the fields
the next morning before school began, to meet
the River. I did it! she told the River. I was
scared, but I did it! And they re letting me go. m
going to learn to write my name and do sums and
find out why our little fishes in the rice fields turn
into frogs. She heard the river s sleepy chuckle,
 Come again, little girl, and I ll tell you all about
e ships that sail the sea. 

KaMALA NaIR
act ada pted fi rom The Day the River Spoke)

Let us discuss

Complete the table given below with Jahnavi s questions in Column 1 and
the River s answers in Column 2. Check your answers with the teacher.

..why the moon always comes

from behind the hills...?
... little girls can do as much as
little boys.

Big boats, so big that they can take
hundreds of people, and they sail
along the sea with lights that shine
all night.

06-Mar-25 2:47:13 PM

LEARNING TOGETHER

O

Let us think and reflect

Ly 3

I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow.

1. You shouldn t cry, you know, the voice went on. And you really
shouldn t be scared, when you have been coming here to see me every
day, well, almost every day. She was puzzled. It was such a voice,
like the river. It couldn t be the river! Well, tell me all about it, said
the River, for it was the River. I ve got to hurry to reach the sea, you
know. 

(i) Complete the sentence with the correct option from those given
in the brackets.

The tone of the River in the given extract is
(assuring/sympathising)

(ii) Select a phrase from the extract which shows that Jahnavi was
a frequent visitor to the spot.

(iii) Choose the correct option to complete the sentence.

The use of an exclamation mark at the end of the line, It
couldn t be the river! expresses

A. excitement B. hesitation C. irritation D. disbelief

(iv) Choose three qualities of the River highlighted in the extract
from the words in the box given below.

2. Can I do something? asked Jahnavi. Well, it s up to you, said the
River. Seems to me little girls can do as much as little boys they swim
as fast as little boys. You just slip along one morning and sit there in
the school and listen to what s going on, and maybe the teacher will let
you stay. 

 T couldn t, gasped Jahnavi. I couldn t! They d scare me! They d chase
me out. 

(i) Complete the sentence with an appropriate reason.

According to the River, there was no difference between girls
and boys because

(ii) Identify whether the following statement is true or false.

The River encourages Jahnavi to have faith in herself and fulfill
her desire to go to school.

\
Unit lindd 7 domabad 

4 2:47:13 PM |

g

(iii) Choose the correct option to complete the sentence.

When the River suggests that Jahnavi should slip along , it
means that she should move

A. quickly B. casually _ C. quietly D. confidently

(iv) What does the repetition of the phrase J couldn t, tell us?

II Answer the following questions.

1. Why does the writer describe different aspects of nature in great
detail at the beginning of the story? Why do you think the writer
does this?

2. How did the River know so much about Jahnavi?

3. Jahnavi says, And I m so old now, they ll never let me go. What can
you infer about Jahnavi and the school from this line?

4. Why did the River laugh when Jahnavi said she would be scared at
school?

5. Why should Jahnavi follow the River s advice?

6. How does the conversation between Jahnavi and the River make the
story more appealing?

7. What is the main message that the writer intends to convey?

* Let us learn

I You have learnt that naming words are called nouns and only
proper nouns begin with a capital letter. Why has the author used
a capital letter for the River even when it is a common noun?
(Clue: Has the River been given qualities of ahuman being?)

II There are a few words related to sound in the text. Pick the words from
the text and write them next to the correct definition.
1. made a high-pitched piercing sound DQ
. to cause liquid to strike or fall on something
. alowcontinuous background noise
. cry with loud uncontrollable gasps

. to make a soft dry sound, like paper or leaves moving

n na F&F WwW WD

. tooka short quick breath through the mouth due to surprise, pain or
shock

7. shaking rapidly to make continuous short, sharp sounds

yg \

06-Mar-25 2:47:13 PM

8. making a lot of noise

9. made a long, high cry, usually because of pain or sadness
Now, fill in the blanks with suitable sound words from exercise (II).

The classroom grew (i) as the students noticed the teacher
carrying the answer papers. As the teacher turned the pages with a (ii)
, the children (iii) , wondering what comments awaited.
Someone (iv) in frustration, and the (v) of the students
steadily increased. Finally, when the teacher praised the students for
 their excellent performance, the students (vi) with excitement.

III The word catamaran is used in the text. The word originates from Tamil
language kattu maram meaning tied wood .

Find out the meanings of these words. From which Indian language
these words were borrowed. An example has been given.

1. karma (Sanskrit) 2. sahib 3. chutney 4. guru

5. verandah 6. jungle 7. areca 8. palanquin

IV Chandu, the fisherman, has a catamaran that the River preferred to a ship.
Given below are some boats that are used in different parts of our country.

3. coracle 4. shikara

(i) Which one would you like to travel in?

(ii) Make a colourful drawing of a boat that you would like to travel in.

Unit l.indd 9

Poorvi

V Solve the crossword puzzle based on words related to water transport.

Across

1. a large vessel used for transporting goods or passengers by sea

2. a small vessel for travelling on water, typically propelled by oars, sails,
or an engine

3. a flat floating structure for travelling across water
4. aboat or ship driven by steam

Down

5. a small, light, narrow boat, pointed at both ends and moved using a
paddle

6. a boat with a powerful engine which can change direction easily and
is used to pull large ships into and out of port

7. a boat with sails and sometimes an engine, used for either racing or
travelling for pleasure, rhymes with cot 

VI Read the highlighted words in the following lines from the text.

 She goes down towards the sea. I ve seen her; she always takes the
same way over the mountains and down to the sea, like me! 

Prepositions are words that indicate the relationship between nouns
or pronouns and other elements in a sentence. They show direction,
location, time or logical relationships between ideas.

Unit l.indd 10 06-Mar-25 2:47:15 PM

fi She found a seat 4. (among/between/from) two friendly

Unit lindd 11

Now, fill in the blanks with suitable prepositions given within the
brackets.

Jahnavi takes the River s advice and goes to school. On her first day
1. (at/in/on) school, Jahnavi stood nervously 2. (in/
outside/above) the gate, clutching her bag close to her. The bell rang and
she hurried 3. (outside/through/inside) the bustling classroom.

classmates. The teacher greeted them warmly and started the lesson 5.
(about/in/for) numbers. Jahnavi listened attentively, feeling
excited 6. (at/about/for) the new adventure ahead.

VII Read the highlighted words in the following sentence from the text.

A kingfisher swept down, its wings an
arrow of blue in the sunlight.

Words like on, off, up, down can function
both as preposition and as adverb.

For example:

 She ran up the stairs. (preposition) * She rang me up. (adverb)

ww
Remember, a position will always be followed by an object (noun)
whereas erb will tell you more about the action (verb). 1

Fill in the blanks with prepositions or adverbs.

1. The cat jumped the table. (preposition)
2. The children played until dark. (adverb) TWA
3. She quickly ran the park. (preposition)

Poorvi

| Unit lindd 12

I

_

-_

. The helicopter was hovering . (adverb)
. We were just walking , chatting. (adverb)
. After thoroughly wiping his shoes, he stepped ___ . (adverb)

. She drove slowly the sharp curve. (preposition)

oN DMD WH BS

. He placed the keys the mat before leaving. (preposition)

D Let us listen

Read the words given in the box below. You will listen to five people
speak about school life. As you listen, circle the words that are used by
the speakers. There are two words you do not need. (Transcript for the
teacher on pg. 39 )

lawyer desks homemaker principal _ posters
newspapers marriage advertisements careers books

{ 1
I I
I I
( !
You will once again listen to the five speakers. As you listen, match each

statement 1-7 to each speaker (i)-(v). There are two statements that you
do not need.

Statements Speaker No.

1. Promotes active participation for all
in school activities

2. Comments on how school makes
learning Mathematics joyful

3. Believes in the power of education
that leads to freedom of choice

4. Shares that school also means
companionship

5. Understands that boys and girls have
different abilities

6. Persuades the parent to grant
permission to attend school

7. Believes that learning skills is not
gender-based

JUUUUUU

06-Mar-25 2:47:16 PM

LEARNING TOGETHER

Let us speak

I Read the sentence given below.

 Dear, dear! What s the matter? ... You shouldn t cry, you know. And you
really shouldn t be scared, when you have been coming here to see me
every day, well, almost every day. 

The River spoke to Jahnavi in a sleepy voice. Work in pairs and take
turns to speak the same sentence in other voices. Some hints are given
below.

II Janhavi asks the River for advice and the River gives
advice. Read the given situations and work in pairs to ask
for and give advice. Take turns to change your roles. Use
the prompts given below.

1. Situation (i) : You wish to play football at school but
it has an all-boys team only.

2. Situation (ii) : You have been unable to score well
in Mathematics due to nervousness
during exams.

3. Situation (iii) : You really enjoy music classes but do
not get enough time to practise for it.

4. Situation (iv) : You cannot see the blackboard 
clearly from the last bench.

Asking for advice Giving advice

. problem . I think you should...

seed a you think I * Why don t you...?

>

anny ml * The best thing to do is...
 problem ET

Do you think I should...? were you,

I would / wouldn't...

 problem

What would you do in my

position?
 problem

I'd appreciate your
advice on this issue.

Unit lindd 13

Poorvi

OBSERVING NATURE

Take some time to observe the world around
you. Over the next few days, pay attention to
the colours, shapes, patterns, and textures
found in nature. Look closely at the plants,
trees, flowers, birds, and even the sky. Make
detailed notes of what you observe, focusing on
textures, movements, and how light plays with
these elements. Record your observations in
detail and the features that draw your attention
the most whether it s the soft ripple of water,
the vibrant flutter of a butterfly or the colour of
the birds or flowers.

Now, write a descriptive paragraph based on
what you ve observed. Highlight the colours,
shapes, textures, and unique details that made
an impression on you.

Give a title to your paragraph.

 Every day, I see...
 I find it very interesting that...

e J like... because...
e | feel... as...

 I want to tell you that...
 My advice to all is...

I Discuss why rivers in India are considered to be sacred and most of
them are referred to as female. Some rivers are referred to as male, for
example, the Brahmaputra and the Sone.

II Whole Class Activity 
A\
~. 1. India is a multilingual country, and many of us can speak two to
_ s_ three languages easily. Make a list of the languages that everyone in
, , the.class can speak and display it on a chart paper in the classroom.
\ XN

\

 <2.'In which language do you enjoy reading and learning the most?

06-Mar-25 2:47:17 PM

Unit lindd 15

/
\

The Happiness

of a Nation lies
in the Dignity of

1. What are the things you can observe in the poster?
2. Why do you think the girls look happy?

3. Dignity means self-respect . What is the relation between dignity any
and happiness ? J

4. How does a Nation prosper when its daughters are happy?

IV The Government has launched many schemes

for the education of the girl child. Some of them
are Beti Bachao Beti Padhao , Balika Samridhi
Yojana , Samagra Shiksha Scheme-Kasturba
Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas , etc.

Find out more such schemes a >
from the internet or from your
teacher and spread awareness
in your neighbourhood.

Poorvi

Try AGAIN

Let us do these activities before we read.

I Who inspires you to do your best?

II Work in pairs, identify what you see in the pictures given below. What
can we learn from them? Share your answers with your classmates and
the teacher.

16 ay

Unit lindd 16 06-Mar-25 2:47:21 PM

LEARNING TOGETHER

On
<
1D,
SB

s= > Let usread

King Bruce of Scotland flung himself down
In a lonely mood to think;

 Tis true he was monarch, and wore a crown,
But his heart was beginning to sink.

For he had been trying to do a great deed,
To make his people glad;

He had tried and tried, but couldn t succeed
And so he became quite sad.

He flung himself down in low despair,
As grieved as man could be;

And after a while he pondered there,
 Tl give it all up, said he.

Now just at that moment a spider dropped,

With its silken, filmy clue;

And the King, in the midst of his thinking, stopped
To see what the spider would do.

 Twas a long way up to the ceiling dome,

And it hung by a rope so fine;

That how it would get to its cobweb home,

King Bruce could not divine. L
=

Ze

A

Unit lindd 17 06-Mar' i

2:47:22 PM |

Poorvi

a

| Unit lindd 18

It soon began to cling and crawl

Straight up with strong endeavour;

But down it came with a slippery sprawl,
As near to the ground as ever.

Up, up it ran, not a second to stay,
To utter the least complaint;

Till it fell still lower, and there it lay,
A little dizzy and faint.

Its head grew steady again it went,
And travelled a half-yard higher;
 Twas a delicate thread it had to tread,
And a road where its feet would tire.

Again it fell and swung below,

But again it quickly mounted;

Till up and down, now fast, now slow,
Nine brave attempts were counted.

 Sure, cried the King, that foolish thing
Will strive no more to climb;

When it toils so hard to reach and cling,
And tumbles every time. 

But up the insect went once more,

Ah me! tis an anxious minute;

He s only a foot from his cobweb door,
Oh say, will he lose or win it?

Steadily, steadily, inch by inch,

Higher and higher he got;

And a bold little run at the very last pinch
Put him into his native cot.

 Bravo, bravo! the King cried out,
 All honour to those who try;

The spider up there, defied despair;
He conquered, and why shouldn t I? 

And Bruce of Scotland braced his mind,
And gossips tell the tale,

That he tried once more as he tried before,
And that time did not fail.

Exiza Cook

-Mar
-25 2:47:24 PM

Unit lindd 19

Let us discuss

I Complete the summary of the poem by filling in the blanks with suitable
words from the text given in the box below. Share your answers with the
teacher. An example has been given.

' tried mounted despair attempts great
' conquered low strive

The poem, written in a narrative style, tells the story of King Bruce of
Scotland, who was feeling 1. ___ after failing multiple times
to achieve something 2. for his people. In a moment of
3.0 , he observed a spider trying to reach its web high above.
The spider 4. every time it fell after getting close to its
goal. It made nine 5. _ and finally succeeded. The king said
that the spider had 6. and so would he. Inspired by the
spider s determination, King Bruce decided to 7. . When he
8. ___ this time, he ultimately succeeded.

II Complete the following sentences suitably.

1. We can say that the poet uses the narrative style because _

2. The central idea of the poem is

III Pick three examples from the poem for each of the following:
1. lines that describe the spider s efforts
2. alliteration (the repetition of the same consonant sounds at the
beginning of closely connected words)
IV Why does the poet repeat the following words or phrases in the poem?

tried and tried; steadily, steadily; up, up

V Fill in the blanks by choosing the correct answer from within the

brackets.

1. The rhyme scheme of the poem is . (AABB/ABBA/ABAB)

2. Bravo is an example of . (conjunction/interjection/
adjective)

3. The poet uses twas and tis for the sake of __ . (rhythm/
rhyme/contraction)

LEARNING TOGETHER

\
do-mahdd24725 PM |

Poorvi

VI The spider s climbing is compared to King Bruce s own
struggles. Just as the spider repeatedly attempts to reach its
web, Bruce is trying to achieve a great deed for his people.
This poetic device is called metaphor. It strengthens the poem s message
about perseverance keep trying till we succeed.

Ametaphor isa figure of speech that involves an implied comparison
between two unlike things without using like , as , or as...as . It
suggests that one thing is another, highlighting similarities between
them to add deeper meaning or understanding.

1. Read the following sentences and identify metaphors and similes.
Write M for metaphor and for simile.
(i) | Heranas fast as a cheetah.
(ii) The world is a stage.
(iii) The night was as dark as coal.
(iv) Hesang like an angel.
(v) Her voice was music to his ears.
(vi) The classroom was a zoo.
(vii) The baby slept like a log.

(viii) Her smile was as bright as the sun.

(JUUUVUUVUU

(ix) The lake was a mirror, reflecting the sky.

. Read the following sentences and transform the similes to metaphors
and metaphors to similes. Two examples have been given.

(i) Knowledge spreads like the branches of a mighty tree.

Knowledge is a spreading branch of a mighty tree.

(ii) His courage was a beacon, guiding us through the storm.

 His courage was as bright as a beacon guiding us through the
storm.

 His courage was like a beacon guiding us through the storm.
(iii) The book was a treasure chest, filled with endless adventures.

(iv) Her laughter was a melody that brightened the darkest days.
&

| Unit lindd 20 06-Mar-25 2:47:25 PM

N
a

LEARNING TOGETHER

(v) The mountain stood as a guard, watching over the valley below.
(vi) The night was like a velvet cloak, wrapping the world in mystery.

(vii) Her thoughts were like butterflies in a summer meadow.

Let us think and reflect

I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow.

1. He flung himself down in low despair,
As grieved as man could be;
And after a while he pondered there,
 Tl give it all up, said he.

Now just at that moment a spider dropped,
With its silken, filmy clue;

(i) Select the phrase which shows the physical
expression of the King s emotional state.

(ii) Why does the poet use the word low before despair?
(iii) Choose the correct option to complete the sentence.

In the line, And after a while he pondered there , the word
 pondered means

A. paused B. thought C. noticed OD. rested

(iv) Choose the correct option from the words given in the brackets.

The phrase silken filmy clue creates an image of something
that is (long and light/very delicate and
soft).

2. ..when it toils so hard to reach and cling, And tumbles every time. 

But up the insect went once more,

Ah me! tis an anxious minute;

He s only a foot from his cobweb door,
Oh say, will he lose or win it?

(i) Choose the correct option to complete the analogy.

toil: hard::
A. roll: tumble B. tumble: circle
C. compress: roll D. jump: tumble

\ \
Unit l.indd 21 d-mahdd 24726 PM |

\

Poorvi

(ii) List any two characteristics of the spider highlighted in the line,
 But up the insect went once more .

(iii) Choose the correct option to complete the sentence.

The expression Ah me! in the extract indicates a sense of

A. happiness B. stress

C. relief D. loneliness
(iv) Complete the sentence with an appropriate reason.

Readers are able to relate to this extract because

II Answer the following questions.
1. How does the first stanza help in setting the mood of the poem?

2. Describe how King Bruce s attitude changes from the beginning
towards the end of the poem.

3. The poet describes every action of the spider in great detail. What
does this tell us about his attitude towards the spider?

4. How does the spider inspire us to overcome despair and not give up?

5. The poem teaches us that failures are stepping stones to success.
Explain.

6. The spider s journey tells us that anyone can bea source of inspiration
in our lives. Elaborate.

 
ute,
ww

> Let us learn

I Write the opposites of the following words
taken from the poem.

1. up x
2. fast x
3. glad x
4. win x

5. succeed x

Unit l.indd 22 06-Mar-25 2:47:26 PM

Unit l.indd 23

II

Ill

A

Choose the correct meaning of the underlined words in the following
sentences from the box given below. Frame sentences of your own for
these words.

1. work very hard and/or for a long time

2. prepared themselves for something difficult
3. an attempt to do something new or difficult
. to try very hard to achieve something

== === =e ee ee

(i) Please make every endeavour to arrive on time.
(ii) Ants toil tirelessly to save food for rainy season.

(iii) We encourage all students to strive to do their best.

(iv) The sailors braced themselves against the strong wind.

The poem uses words that show distance.
For example:
a long way up, inch by inch, higher and higher, half-yard higher

Classify the words or phrases in the box given below based on the
distance (far or near) and write in the space provided. You may take the
help of a dictionary.

| proximity nowhere vicinity adjacent

I

' remoteness Q yarn a stone s throw
hair

light year farther

Poorvi

IV Read the following line from the poem.
 Twas a delicate thread it had to tread,

Now repeat the lines five to six times. Are you able to say it clearly?
Create more tongue twisters of your own.

9 Let us listen

I You will listen to a story about an ant. Read the questions given below
and before you listen, guess the answers to these questions. (Transcript
for the teacher on pg. 40)

1. What was the ant known for?
(i) determination (ii) strength (iii) wisdom

2. Why was the ant unable to take the roti home?

(i) It was stuck under a rock.

(ii) It was too heavy to carry.

(iii) It was pulled by other ants.
3. What was the bird doing? %

(@i)_ playing with the ant

(ii) searching for food

(ili) picking up leaves
4. How did the bird make the ant feel?

(Gi) proud (ii) inspired (iii) relaxed oe
5. How did the fellow ants help?

(i) by advising the ant continuously

(ii) by standing still near the ant

(iii) by joining the ant in her efforts Ne.

II_ Now, listen to the story once again and as you listen, check whether your

answers are correct.

| Unit lindd 24 06-Mar-25 2:47:27 PM

LEARNING TOGETHER

Let us speak

Narrate a personal experience about a time when you were
motivated by someone or something to carry on and never give up.
Your perseverance helped you.

Use the following sentence prompts as a guide for your narration.
Use as per your topic.

1. Introduction:

I remember a time when I felt like giving up. It was when...

There was a moment in my life when I faced a big challenge. It
happened when...

2. Describe the challenge:

The challenge I faced was...
I was struggling with...
The problem seemed too big because...

3. Feeling disheartened:

At first, I felt discouraged and thought about giving up because...
I didn t think I could succeed because...
I felt upset and wanted to leave because...

4. The source of motivation:

But then, I saw/heard/read about...
Someone/something inspired me to keep going. It was...
I remembered the poem... do not quit...

5. Taking action:

After feeling inspired, I decided to...

I gathered my strength and...

With a new sense of willpower, I...

I asked for help from...

6. The result:

In the end, I was able to...

Thanks to standing firm and never giving up, I achieved...
I felt proud because...

It was worth it because...

7. Reflection:

This experience taught me that...

I learned that perseverance is the key to success...
Now, I always remember to...

The lesson I learnt from this is...

Unit lindd 25 bao h

\29 2:47:27 PM |

Poorvi

Let us write

King Bruce was inspired by the spider that kept on trying till it was successful.
Think about the steps you can take to overcome a difficult situation and write
them down.

Now, write a letter to your cousin on how you plan to overcome any difficult
situation. Also, advise not to quit and persevere.

Remember to use transition words like To begin with..., Next..., After
that..., Then..., Finally... to share the steps of your plan.

You may begin this way:
20, Rajendra Nagar
Jeevanpur
23 August 20XX

Dear Monika,
Thank you for your letter asking me about...

You may end this way:

Yours affectionately,

Deepa

'
\

<4)

ye
- -yf Let us-explore .
I Collect folk songs in your own language that connect us with nature and

compile them as a class project. )

II Did you know that spiders are not insects? They belong to a group called
the arachnids. Observe a spider and an ant from a distance and note
down the differences between them. Share your observations with your
classmates. Ask your Science teacher for more information to know
about spiders better.

III Let us learn how to weave a spider web.
1. Take three sticks (each about eight inches long) and a roll of old wool.
2. Tie the sticks together in the centre with the wool (Fig. 1).
3. Start weaving the web by putting a loop around every stick

(Figs. 2 and 3). ae

06-Mar-25 2:47:28 PM

\
4. Complete the web and tie the thread in a knot on the stick where the *. _

web is complete (Fig. 4).
Now, decorate it with words and phrases you learnt about the spider in

the poem or anything else that you like.

Fig. 2

Fig. 1

Fig. 4 .
roe

Fig. 3

Unit lindd 27

Poorvi

THREE Days TO SEE

Let us do these activities before we read.
I Work in pairs. Recall a visit to a place that you liked. Discuss the details
of that place and write about the following:
1. Name of the place
2. The person(s) you went with
3. The things that you could:

 see listen * smell * taste * touch and feel

II How does this memory make you feel?

III Do you think your visit/experience would be different if you could not
see or hear? Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher.

Did you know that our five senses are essential for us to experience and
make sense of the world around us?

Unit lindd 28 06-Mar-25 2:47:30 PM

Unit lindd 29

<

<7 Vi

Cry C
roe

= Let us read

I, who cannot see, find hundreds of things to interest me

through mere touch. I feel the delicate symmetry of a

leaf. I pass my hands lovingly about
the smooth skin of a silver birch, or
the rough, shaggy bark of a pine. In
spring, I touch the branches of trees
hopefully in search of a bud, the first
sign of awakening Nature after her
winter s sleep. Occasionally, I am very
fortunate; I place my hand gently ona
small tree and feel the happy quiver of
a bird in full song.

At times, my heart cries out with
longing to see all these things. If I can
get so much pleasure from mere touch,
how much more beauty must be revealed by sight. And
I have imagined what I should most like to see if I were
given the use of my eyes, say, for just three days.

I should divide the period into three parts. On the first
day, I should want to see the people whose kindness and
companionship have made my life worth living. I do not
know what it is to see into the heart of a friend through
that window of the soul , the eye.

I can only see through my fingertips the outline of a face.
I can detect laughter, sorrow and other obvious emotions.
I know my friends from the feel of their faces.

LEARNING TOGETHER

symmetry:
evenness

birch: a slender
tree with thin
peeling bark

shaggy: hairy

quiver: shiver

Poorvi

behold: see
panorama: scene
glimpse: brief
look

pageant: display

condensed:
brief

carcasses:
remains

mastodons: a
large animal
similar to an
elephant, but
with fur

stature:
physique, build
haunts: regular
meeting places

merely: just

|

i
\

[

The next day I should arise with the dawn and see the thrilling
miracle by which night is transformed into day. I should
behold with awe the magnificent panorama of light with
which the sun awakens the sleeping earth. This day I should
devote to a hasty glimpse of the world, past and present. I
should want to see the pageant of man s progress, and so I
should go to the museums. There my eyes would see the
condensed history of the earth animals and the races
of men pictured in their native environment; gigantic
carcasses of dinosaurs and mastodons that roamed

the earth before man appeared, with his

tiny stature and powerful brain, to

conquer the animal kingdom.

The following morning, I should again
greet the dawn, anxious to discover
new delights, new revelations of

(OrY
beauty. Today, this third day, I shall

spend in the workaday world, amid the 4

haunts of men going about the business

of life. The city becomes my destination.

First, I stand at a busy corner, merely

looking at people, trying by sight of them

to understand something of their daily [ {>
lives. I see smiles, and I am happy. \ j

I see serious determination, and t

I am proud. I see suffering, and I
am compassionate.

i
rile:

We ay

Unit l.indd 31

At midnight, permanent night would close in on me again.
Naturally in those three short days I should not have seen all
I wanted to see. Only when darkness had again descended
upon me should I realise how much I had left unseen.

I who am blind can give one hint to those who can see: use
your eyes as if tomorrow you would be stricken blind. And
the same method can be applied to your other senses. Hear
the music of voice, the song of a bird, the mighty strains of an
orchestra, as if you would be stricken deaf tomorrow. Touch
each object as if tomorrow your tactile sense would fail. Smell
the perfume of flowers, taste with relish each morsel, as if
tomorrow you could never smell and taste again. Make the
most of every sense; glory in all the facets of pleasure and
beauty, which the world reveals to you through the several
means of contact, which Nature provides. But of all the senses,
Iam sure that sight must be the most delightful.

HELEN KELLER

Let us discuss

I Work in pairs. Identify the statements that are true from the ones
given below. Share your answers with the teacher.

1. The author expresses a deep longing to experience the world
through the sense of hearing.

2. The author would like exploring the city only to observe how
people are suffering.

3. The author would spend the first day seeing the people whose
kind-heartedness and friendship have enriched her life.

4, The author acknowledges that even in three days, she would not
be able to see everything.

5. The author feels that everyone can find the greatest joy merely by
the sense of touch.

6. The author advises those who can see to appreciate every moment
as if they might lose their senses tomorrow.

7. On the third day, the author would like to observe people in their
daily lives and understand their experiences.

LEARNING TOGETHER

strains: tunes

tactile sense:
sense of touch

morsel: a small

piece of food

facets: aspects

06-Mar

\

Poorvi

II Complete the table given below with what Helen Keller wanted to do on
the three days if she had sight.

see the people, know

rise with the dawn,
her friends fromthe | 978 Wit eda

feel of their faces, ...

III The author says that you need eyes to be able to see the true self of
a person. Therefore, she refers to the eye as window of the soul .
How is the narrator able to understand the feelings of a person?

 Let us think and reflect

I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow.

1. I feel the delicate symmetry of a leaf. I pass my hands lovingly about
the smooth skin of a silver birch, or the rough, shaggy bark of a pine.
In spring, I touch the branches of trees hopefully in search of a bud, the
first sign of awakening Nature after her winter s sleep. Occasionally, I
am very fortunate; I place my hand gently ona small tree and feel the
happy quiver of a bird in full song.

(i) What does the delicate symmetry of a leaf ? symbolise?

(ii) List two phrases from the extract that describe the texture of
objects in nature.

(iii) Complete the sentence appropriately.

The phrase awakening Nature after her winter s sleep refers
to

(iv) What is the tone of the writer in this extract?
A. nostalgic B. proud
C. admiring D. celebratory

2. The next day I should arise with the dawn and see the thrilling miracle
by which night is transformed into day. I should behold with awe
the magnificent panorama of light with which the sun awakens the
sleeping earth. This day I should devote to a hasty glimpse of the world,
past and present. I should want to see the pageant of man s progress,
and so I should go to the museums.
&

| Unit l.indd 32 06-Mar-25 2:47:31 PM

N oy

LEARNING TOGETHER

(i) The word thrilling has been used with miracle .

Which of the following words does not match with the word

 thrilling ?

A. experience BB. tale C. knowledge D. adventure
(ii) Why does the writer refer to the earth as sleeping earth ?
(iii) Complete the sentence with an appropriate reason.

The writer wishes to dedicate the day to a brief look at the
present and past world because

(iv) Why does the writer use should multiple times in the extract?

II Answer the following questions.

1. The sense of touch makes up for the loss of sight and hearing. Explain
this statement with reference to the text.

2. Why does the author believe that the sense of sight is the most
wonderful?

3. How might the author s opinion on making the most of our senses
guide us to be kinder towards people with special abilities?

4, What is the significance of imagining the loss of a sense, according to
the author?

5. How does the author encourage people to approach their everyday
sensory experiences?

6. What do the author s choices for the three days tell us about her
values and priorities? ms

\

Unit l.indd 33

s
 )
ate,
ree

, Let us learn

I Sensory words are descriptive they describe how we experience the
world: how we see, hear, smell, taste or feel something.

Complete the following table with sensory words from the text in Column
2 for the five senses in Column 1. Add new words in Column 3.

What you see panorama

What you hear music

esouwe mh)

II Read the following sentences from the text and underline the verbs.
 I should divide the period into three parts. 4,
* On the first day, I should want to see...

 The next day I should arise with the dawn...
 I should behold with awe...

The words you have underlined are a combination of two verbs. In
each of these sentences, should is the modal verb (suggestion), and the
second verb (divide, want, arise, behold) is the main verb.

 _
Modal verbs are auxiliary verbs that express necessity, possibility,
permission, or ability. They are used before the main verb to give

additi ormation about the function of the main verb. COmmon
modal verbs include can, could, may, might, shall, should, will, would,
 must, and ought to.

III Identify the modal verbs in the following sentences. Choose the functions.
they express from those given in the box below.

see ee ee Be ew ee ee ee ee Be ee ee ee eB eB ee ee eB ee eB eB eB ee ee ee eK

1. You can learn a lot from this experience.

2. They might arrive late due to traffic.

06-Mar-25 2:47:32 PM

3. She must finish her homework before dinner.

4. They ought to apologise for their mistake.

5. He would like to have some lassi, please.

LEARNING TOGETHER

IV Read the situations in Column 1 and functions in Column 2. Fill in the
blanks in the sentences in Column 4 with appropriate modal verbs from
Column 3. After filling in the blanks, explain the function of each modal
verb you used to your classmates and the teacher.

Column 1

1. You want to
leave work
early.

2. You have an
important
deadline
tomorrow.

3. Your friend
is thinking
whether to join
Art class.

4. There are dark
clouds in the
sky.

5. Asking someone
to pass the salt
at the dinner
table

6. Advising
someone to
apologise for a
mistake

7. Deciding where
to go for picnic

Unit l.indd 35

Column 2

permission

obligation

advice

possibility

polite
request

| moral
obligation

suggestion

Column 3
(i)

| (ii)
|

| (iii)
| can, |
| could, may, |
might, }

must, ought | (iv)
to,

| shall,
} should, (v)
will, would
(vi)

(vii) We

Column 4

I
leave early today
if I finish all my
tasks?

I

finish this report |
by tomorrow.

 
You

consider all the
pros and cons
before making a
decision.

It
rain later today.

you
pass the salt,
please?

You

apologise for
the mistake you
made.

go to any park
nearby for
picnic.

do-mtahse 2:47:32 PM |

Poorvi

&

| Unit lindd 36

Let us listen

You will listen to a conversation between a mother and son. As you listen,
select four true statements from 1-7 given below. (Transcript for the teacher
on pg. 41)

ws

Statements

. Anuj finds the concept of Braille fascinating and

wants to learn more about it.

. Mother is unsure of the school s efforts to include

students with visual impairment.

. Anuj initially thinks that Digital India is only

about learning how to use computers.

. Mother believes that screen readers are very

effective for persons who are visually impaired.

. Anuj already knew that persons who are visually

impaired can use computers and smartphones.

. Anuj wants to know about the effectiveness

of assistive technologies for persons who are
visually impaired.

. Mother believes a right mindset is the best support

for persons who are visually impaired.

True or False

Let us speak

Work in pairs. Take turns to speak for a minute on any one of the senses you
value the most. Use the given prompts to frame your response before you
speak.

e Ivalue my sense of sight/ sound/ touch/ smell / taste the most because...

One of my favourite experiences is...

This is so because...

I appreciate being able to see/ hear/touch/ smell/ taste...

God forbid, if I were to lose the sense of sight/ sound/ touch/ smell /

taste, it would make me feel...

I would not be able to...

I thank God that I am able to see/ hear/ touch/ smell / taste.

06-Mar-25 2:47:32 PM

LEARNING TOGETHER

Remember to
 speak clearly and confidently
e glance at your notes for reference rather than reading
e make eye contact
 use gestures if you wish to
* pronounce words clearly and avoid mumbling

e speak at a steady, moderate pace

Let us write

A descriptive paragraph describes a person, place, object or event to create
a memorable experience for the reader. Write a descriptive paragraph
describing a place that you visited recently.

Follow the guidelines given below to draft this paragraph.

1. In the opening line, begin with something interesting to capture the
reader s attention. Introduce the place you visited.

2. In the supporting lines, describe the place using adjectives and specific
details that appealed to your five senses sight, sound, smell, taste, and
touch. You may include alliterations, similes, and personifications to
hold the reader s attention.

3. In the concluding lines, summarise the description to provide a final
impression. Mention what was the most important thing about that
place which others should also experience.

I

Do you know how persons with
visual challenges are able to read
and write? They read through
touch with the help of Braille, a
code of raised dots that represents
the letters of the alphabet. This
tactile code was developed over

/ a period of nine years by Louis
\ Braille, who became blind at a very
er young age due to an accident.
\ . so |
 S Louis Braille
ie ~y (Courtesy FMT)

Unit lindd 37

Poorvi \ Ny Lc

Study the code given below and write your name using it. You may use
bindis or grains of daal to make the dots that you can touch and feel.

AB C D E F G H I J K L M
@0 @0 ee ee @o ee ee @o Coe oe @o @o ee
CoO @O loko) oe oe t Xe) ee ee @o ee loko) @o lox)
00 OO loko) loko) loko) loxe) 1oXe) loko) exe) oo @o @o @o
NO P Q R S T UV W XK Y Z
ee @0 ee ee @o lex) Coe @o @o oe ee ee @o
es es 85 88 6886 (68S C88 te Se 8S kts

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
 @ e @@e *@e@r> +000 @0e0e @@e eee e008 @@e @ e
e008 e@ee @@e e@ee @ e @+e @@e eee eee ee
@@ere @@ee @@ree O80 @@ere @@ee @@ee @@ee @@ee @@e

II Have you heard about the International Day of Persons with Disabilities?

Find out when and how it is observed in India. Write your findings on a
sheet and put it up on the class board.

III Do you want to know about sign language? Go to the link given below to 
learn about the Indian sign language. xe

https://ncert.nic.in/pdf/accessibility/ISL_200word_v15.pdf -?

\ / W@W Ministry of Education | Z
ah Government of India A

J the World of

ndian Sign anguage

| Unit l.indd 38 06-Mar-25 2:47:33 PM

LEARNING TOGE

TRANSCRIPTS
Let us listen (refer to page 12)

I Read the words given in the box below. You will listen to five people
speak about school life. As you listen, circle the words that are used by
the speakers. There are two words you do not need.

SPEAKER (i): (Father) Should girls attend school? Yes, they
should. I do my best to ensure that both my son and
daughter get equal opportunities. I look forward
to their successful careers and rewarding lives. I
feel education gives freedom to make choices in
life. Whether my daughter wants to work in an
organisation or be a homemaker, it should be her
choice and the same applies to my son.

SPEAKER (ii): (Grandmother) I went to school but many girls at
that time could not attend school because some
elders in the village felt that girls should help in
the house and take care of their little brothers and
sisters. I am happy that the situation has changed
today.

SPEAKER (iii):(Teacher) The school prepares students for
meaningful and useful participation in the world
of work by learning hands-on abilities and skills,
developing equal respect for head-hands-heart,
valuing the dignity of labour, and understanding
vocational choices for the future.

SPEAKER (iv): (Student) I like to go to school. I feel that by coming
to school and reading the books, I learn about things
from all over the world. I also have friends with
whom I can share my feelings.

Unit lindd 39

SPEAKER (v): (Principal) Everyone should attend school. You
must ve noticed that the girls are doing very well.
However, as the Head of an institution, I know that
all students can work hard. My message to students
is that they should attend school regularly and take
part in every school activity without bothering
whether it is for girls or boys. The idea is to focus on
learning.

II You will once again listen to the five speakers. As you listen, match each
statement 1-7 to each speaker (i)-(v). There are two statements that you

do not need.

Let us listen (refer to page 24)

1. You will listen to a story about an ant. Read the questions given below
and before you listen, guess the answers to these questions.
Hello everyone,
I m sure you have enjoyed learning about King Bruce and the spider. Let
me share another story with you.

In a thick green forest, there lived a little ant. She was known for
her determination and never-give-up attitude. One sunny day,
the ant found a delicious piece of roti that was too big for her to
carry alone.

 This crumb is huge, but I must get it back to the anthill. My
family will be so happy! she thought to herself.

She tried to lift the crumb with all her might, but it was too heavy.
She tried pushing it, pulling it and even rolling it, but nothing
seemed to work. Exhausted and saddened, she sat down and
began to cry.

As the ant sat there, feeling beaten, she noticed a small bird
nearby. The bird was trying to build a nest. It picked up twigs
and leaves, but every time it tried to place them, the wind would
blow them away. However, the bird did not give up. It kept trying,
over and over again, until finally, it managed to build a strong
nest.

06-Mar-25 2:47:33 PM

LEARNING To

 If that bird can keep trying and succeed, then I shouldn t give
up either, she thought, feeling inspired.

Determined once more, the ant gathered all her strength and
decided to try again. She called her fellow ants for help. Together,
they formed a chain and lifted the crumb with their combined
strength. Slowly but surely, they carried the crumb back to the
anthill.

 We did it! Thank you, everyone! We showed that with teamwork
and never giving up, we can achieve anything! the ant shouted,
excited and grateful.

She and her friends celebrated their success.

We too should learn this lesson from the ant s experience never
give up, no matter how difficult the situation may seem.

Hope you all liked the story.
Thank you!

2. Now, listen to the story once again and as you listen, check whether your
answers are correct. Rectify wherever needed.

Let us listen (refer to page 36)

ye)

You will listen to a conversation between a mother and son. As you listen,
select four true statements from 1-7 given below.

Anuy : Ma, we have a new student in our class, Tara. She s
quite talkative and pleasant. You know, the writing in
her books doesn t look like ours. It s different. She told
us that it s called Braille.

Motuer: It s great to know that your school has facilities to
address the needs of the visually impaired. Thanks to
the Digital India Initiative, which is paving the way for
inclusion of the visually impaired.

Unit lindd 41

Anyy : Oh, Digital India! That s about being computer literate,
isn t it?

Motuer: Well, Digital India is about more than just internet
access. It aims to include everyone, including people
with disabilities, by providing digital infrastructure
and services. For the visually impaired, it means access
to assistive technologies like screen readers, voice-overenabled smartphones and apps that can make daily
activities easier.

Anuyy : Ohh... interesting. What is a screen reader, Ma?

Motuer: I knew you d ask about it! Well, a screen reader is a
software application that helps people who are visually
impaired use computers and smartphones. It reads out
the text displayed on the screen and provides audio
feedback.

Anyy__: That s amazing! So, Tara can use a computer just like
we do?

Motue_r: Yes, she can.
Anuj _ : So, it makes a big difference in their daily lives.

Motuer: It certainly does. It ensures that people who are visually
impaired can use digital services independently, without
help from others. This can improve their quality of life.
It also opens up more job opportunities in fields like IT,
banking, and more, where they can work just efficiently
like anybody else.

Anuj: Wow! So that means people who are visually impaired
can work and do things on their own? I m so proud of
my school.

Motuer: Yes, and this way, we can ensure that the benefits of
Digital Indiareach everyone, helping them to participate
fully in all areas of life.

Remember, inclusion is not just about having the right tools, but also
about having the right mindset.

06-Mar-25 2:47:34 PM