Unit 3.indd 91

My BRoTHER S GREAT INVENTION

Let us do these activities before we read.

I Work in pairs and guess the invention.

1. Iam a concept invented by ancient Indian mathematicians. I add
value to numbers. Without me, calculations in the modern digital
world would be impossible. Who am I?

2. Iam an ancient Indian practice, now popular globally. I focus on
physical and mental well-being. What am I?

II Discuss in groups of four what you think the world today would have
been like without inventions and discoveries.

III Fill the grid given below with missing letters to complete the words.
These words display qualities of an inventor.

0773CHO3

06-Mar-25 2:48:47 PM

Poorvi

racket: a loud
and disturbing
noise

sopping: soaking
scowling: having
an angry or
frowning
expression
rigged up:
assembled
something
temporarily
tinkering:
experimenting
or fiddling

dynamos:
electric
generator

Let us read

I

 Who put that water bag here? roared my father from the
front doorstep. Your burglar alarm, I hissed to my brother
Anand, who was getting ready to disappear from the house.
Ma rushed in to see what the racket was all about and found
Papa standing there, sopping wet and scowling.

 IT want to know who is behind this nonsense, Papa said
grimly.

 I think it s supposed to be a burglar alarm, Ma said, in a
soothing voice.

 IT don t care what it s supposed to be, Papa said.
 Where s that boy? I m sure he rigged this up. 

Anand had vanished by this time and reappeared only after
dinner when Papa had cooled down.

Before this story, let me put you in the picture. I am Anita,
fourteen years old. My brother Anand, one year younger
than me, caused all that hoo-ha with his burglar alarm.
And this is not the first time he s got on Papa s
nerves or frightened someone half to death in
the house. The trouble with him is that he
thinks he is a scientist. He loves tinkering with
all sorts of electrical gadgets, tools, dynamos,
planks of wood, and things like that. And he
keeps creating inventions that never work

out as they are supposed to.

Recently there had been a rush of thefts in
the colony and Anand had got it into his
head that what was needed was a burglar
alarm. So, the minute Papa left for the
office and Ma for the market, he started
on his latest scheme. As usual I had to
be involved, though I d have preferred
to finish my novel. If you get a shelling,
don t bring me in, I warned Anand.

 Nothing will go wrong this time. I ve

planned it out carefully. See the blueprint. 

06-Mar-25 2:48:48 PM

Unit 3.indd 93

Anand loves words like blueprint it makes
him feel professional! Anyway, I looked at the
elaborate drawing of doors, wires, and bells
and asked, How does this thing work? 

 It s quite simple. The moment the door opens,
this alarm is tripped off and makes a clanging
sound. Then this water bag here is loosened
and falls on the thief s head. By then we call.
the police simple! 

 But how does the alarm know that a burglar is 
opening the door? 

 T ve taken care of that, Anand said loftily. Ihad
my own doubts about the alarm s guessing powers, but kept
them to myself because when Anand is in one of his inventive
moods, nothing stops him.

 You see, Anand explained smugly, A thief tries to open the
door stealthily. ve rigged it up so that the alarm works only
when the door is opened gently. 

I was sceptical. Remember, if Papa asks, I m not involved, I
warned. Now clean up this mess before anyone gets home. 

As you already know, my doubts about the alarm were
quite justified. Papa, who always opens the door softly, was
thoroughly soaked and angry as angry could be. Anyway, for
a week after this, Anand did not dare try out anything new.
Then we saw this film Back to the Future . I don t know if you
have seen it, but it s all about a time machine. Well, that was
the end of peace and quiet in
the house.

My brother decided that he
had to make a time machine
too. Papa locked up his tool
box and hid the key while Ma
kept a wary eye on her oven
and mixer. Because, as I told
you, when Anand is on one
of his inventing binges, he
takes apart all the gadgets in
the house to collect parts. You
can t imagine the noise that

DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES

elaborate:
detailed

clanging: a loud
ringing sound
like that of a
metal being hit

smugly: proudly

stealthily:
quietly or
carefully so that
one is not seen
or heard

sceptical:
doubtful

\
d-mahdg 2:48:49 PM |

Poorvi

was going on hammering and sawing and clattering. Anand s
room, next to our room, was transformed into a network of
wires, springs, levers, and bulbs. There was an enormous
panel which was to be control switchboard. As for Anand, he
went around looking like a savage. When Ma didn t notice, the
fellow didn t even comb his hair.

Anand just wouldn t let anyone into his room. Finally, after a

frantic: fortnight of frantic activity, the time machine was ready. We
Larmucetesl uve can try it out tonight, Anand announced to everyone at home
disorganised

at lunch time.

 T don t know what you ve been up to in that room, but you re
not trying out anything new, Papa said firmly.

 But it s a time machine! I ve invented it, Anand protested.
 When I say NO, I mean NO, Papa said, glaring.

crestfallen Poor boy, Ma said noticing Anand s crestfallen look.

look: sad and ,

disappointed At least let s take a look at it. 

appearance Papa sighed. All right, but if the house falls, it s your fault. 

As it turned out, we could not try out the time machine that
day at all. The next day, Papa and Ma were going to Kharagpur,
a few hours away from Calcutta (now Kolkata), for a wedding.
Ma was worried about leaving us alone, but we reassured her.
 We re old enough to look after ourselves, Ma, I said. And we
can go next door to Sharma Aunty if we need anything. 

 And it s only one night, Anand added.

 All right. But promise me you won t do anything with that

time machine till we come back, Ma said sternly, looking at
offended: felt Anand. He promised half-heartedly, offended at this lack of
HIPSOU I AEA: respect for his creation. I breathed a sigh of relief.

Let us discuss

I Complete the cause-and-effect table given below.

1. Anand set up his burglar alarm

and rigged it to work when the
door was opened softly.
&

| Unit 3.indd 94 06-Mar-25 2:48:50 PM

Unit 3.indd 95

2. Anita was able to avoid any
responsibility as Anand faced
the consequences alone.

3. We watched the movie Back to | Anand:
the Future .

4. Papa firmly said NO to trying
out the time machine.

II Do you think Anand was able to keep his promise regarding the time
machine? If yes, why? If no, why not?

I

They left by the afternoon train and were coming back the
following evening. Anand fell asleep immediately, but I stayed
up to finish a novel. At about eleven thirty I thought I heard
a scratching at the front door. Telling myself it was only my
imagination, I went back to the book. A little later there was
a rattle and a click. I was really scared, I can tell you, what
with a murder story before me and then strange noises in the
middle of the night! I shook Anand and whispered, Listen,
there s someone at the door. 

 Go and open it then, he muttered groggily.
 You silly! Someone s trying to get in, I said.
Anand sat up. Who? What? 

 T don t know, I said. What shall we do? 

 Let s holler for help, he said. Before we could do anything,
the door swung open and we found ourselves looking
at a ruffianly fellow with a green scarf around his neck.
Anand gasped.

 Hey, it s Boppa! I whispered. It was indeed the fellow who
had recently begun sweeping out the compounds in our row of
houses. So, he was the thief, and no wonder. He knew exactly
when the occupants were out, leaving the coast clear.

The fellow gave an evil grin. One squeak out of you and see
what happens, he said, brandishing his cudgel and backing
out of the room. We heard him slide the latch in.

 What do we do now? I asked in a low voice.

DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES

groggily:
sleepily

ruffianly:
rough or violent
looking

gasped: took
a short, deep
breath in
surprise

brandishing:
waving

cudgel: a short,
thick stick used
as a weapon

Poorvi

 Let s shout anyway, Anand suggested.

The door opened suddenly again in the middle of our
discussion.

 No noise from you! Now, where is your father s room? 

I was about to direct him upstairs when Anand said quickly,
 The one next to this one. 

 You silly goose! I said angrily as soon as the man had gone.
 That s your room. He ll come back as mad as mad can be. 

 At least it will give us some time to think of something, Anand
said. He ll take a while to locate the light switch. Let s shout. 
All of a sudden there was a crash followed by a loud scream.
More strange noises emerged from the next room a few
muffled:nota muffled thumps, an eerie whine, and a low, humming sound.
very clear and

1 My time machine, he s started it! Anand gasped. I wish we
oud sound

; could get out of this room and see what is happening out there. 
eerie: strange

There was another howl, much fainter this time, and a great

clattering: deal of clattering. We shouted for all we were worth. In a few
continuous loud minutes, we heard footsteps running up our drive. Thankfully
noises we recognised Mrs. Sharma s voice, along with her husband

and Dr. Mohan also a neighbour.
 Anand! Anita! Children, what s the matter? Where are you? 
&

| Unit 3.indd 96 06-Mar-25 2:48:51 PM

Ro

Unit 3.indd 97

 Here! we shouted in unison. In a minute the door was
unlocked.

 What on earth has been happening here, children? Sharma
Uncle asked. Both Anand and I fell over ourselves trying to
explain. Where is the fellow now? 

 The last we heard, he was in the time machine, I explained
hastily, seeing everyone looking rather puzzled.

We entered the room cautiously and turned on the lights. The
time machine was still humming softly but otherwise there
was no other sound from the room.

 Well, where is he? Dr. Mohan asked, peering behind the
door. Did you imagine this? 

 Oh no, I protested. How could both of us have imagined the
same thing? 
 Maybe he ran out, Anand suggested.

 I m sure we d have seen him. There s only one way out of this
house and we came the same way as soon as we heard you, 
Sharma Uncle sounded very sure.

 Look! Anand said, pointing to the floor. He was wearing
that. Near the panel of switches was the green scarf.

DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES

unison:
together

hastily: quickly

peering: looking
carefully

| Unit 3.indd 98

&

Poorvi

indulgently:
fondly

intruders:
people who
enter a place
without
permission

dismantled:
taken apart

niggling: slight
feeling (of)
 Let s search the house perhaps he s still around, Dr. Mohan
said, going upstairs.

Boppa was nowhere to be seen. Well maybe he did run out
and we missed him, Mrs. Sharma said at last, I can t imagine
what else could have happened. 

 My time machine! He s gone through that! Anand burst out,
his eyes shining.

 What an imagination this boy has! Mr. Sharma said, smiling
indulgently. Now off to bed, both of you. I ll spend the night
here so you needn t worry about any more intruders now. 

Needless to say, Boppa was never
seen again. Anand insists that his time
machine worked and he disappeared
into the past. The machine itself was
dismantled because Papa thought it
wasn t safe (maybe he also hada niggling
suspicion that it worked), so we couldn t
try it out.

As for Anand, he is convinced that he
is a genius and has launched a new
project something about a telephone
to contact creatures in outer space. Tell
you all about it next time.

Anita Rau BADAMI

Let us discuss

Arrange the following events in the correct order of occurrence.
1. The door swings open, and they see Boppa, standing there with an
evil grin.
2. Boppa is nowhere to be found, but his green scarf is lying near the
time machine.

3. Mrs. Sharma, her husband, and Dr. Mohan unlock the door and enter
the house to help the children.

4. Anita wakes Anand up, informing him that someone is trying to get
into the house.

5. Anand misleads Boppa into entering his room instead of his
father s room.

06-Mar-25 2:48:54 PM

DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES

Let us think and reflect

I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow.

1. Before beginning this story, let me put you in the picture. Iam
Anita, fourteen years old. My brother Anand, one year younger
than me, caused all that hoo-ha with his burglar alarm. The
trouble with him is that he thinks he is a scientist. He loves
tinkering with all sorts of electrical gadgets, tools, dynamos,
planks of wood, and things like that. And he keeps creating
 inventions that never work out as they are supposed to.

(i) Complete the following sentence suitably by choosing the
correct option from those given in the brackets.

When Anita says, ...let me put you in the picture , she
wants to ___ (introduce/summarise) the situation for
the benefit of the readers.

(ii) Anand loves tinkering with all sorts of electrical gadgets. This
means that he enjoys gadgets.

A. dismantling and creating B. labelling or naming
C. repairing or improving _ D. collecting and displaying
(iii) Which of the following options most suitably describes Anand s
personality?
A. methodical and cautious B. creative and experimental

C. energetic and hasty D. shy and reserved

(iv) Based on the extract, compare what Anita thinks of her brother
Anand with what he thinks of himself.

2. I was about to direct him upstairs, when Anand said quickly,
 The one next to this one. 

 You silly goose! I said angrily as soon as the man had gone.
 That s your room. He ll come back as mad as mad can be. 

 At least it will give us some time to think of something, Anand
said. He'll take a while to locate the light switch. Let s shout. 
All of a sudden there was a crash followed by a loud scream.
More strange noises emerged from the next room a few
muffled thumps, an eerie whine, and a low, humming sound.

(i) Complete the sentence given below with a suitable reason.
Anita was angry with Anand because _

(ii) Which action of Anand shows his presence of mind?

\ \
Unit 3.indd 99 d-mahdg 2:48:55 PM. |

Poorvi

(iii) What might be the cause of the strange noises emerging from
the next room?

A. The intruder moving furniture around
B. Anand s time machine getting activated
C. The intruder locating the light switch

D. Anand s invention malfunctioning

(iv) Which of the following best describes the atmosphere in this
extract?

A. relaxing B. peaceful C. tense D. sad
E. suspenseful F. joyful

(a) A,DandE (b) BandF (c) CandE (d) OnlyD

II Complete the table with the suitable traits of the characters based
on evidence from the text. Choose the traits given in the box below.
An example has been done for you.

06-Mar-25 2:48:55 PM

Unit 3.indd 101

III Answer the following questions.

ao FW DY &

time machine?

DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES

. What prompted Anand to create the burglar alarm?

. How did Anand s father become the target of the burglar alarm?
. How did Anand s parents and sister react to his ideas?

. How did Anand behave when he was on his inventing binges ?

. Why did Mr. Sharma not believe Anand when he spoke about his

6. Give an ending to this story, explaining what might have happened to

_ Boppa.

 Let us learn

I Read the highlighted word in the
following sentence.
It s quite simple. The moment the door
opens, this alarm is tripped offand makes
a clanging sound.
Such sound words are called
onomatopoeic words.

Onomatopoeia is the use
of words that imitate actual
sounds of the thing they
describe. The boom of a
firework exploding, the
 ding-dong of a bell, the
 pitter-patter of rain drops,
the tick-tock of a clock are all
examples of onomatopoeia.

1. Read the sound words used in the story in Column 1. Complete
Column 2 by matching expressions from the box given below. An

example has been done for you.

whispered angrily
constant and loud construction noises
sudden loud sound of breaking

t
I
I
I
I
I
| a continuous low and soothing sound

(i) Crash sudden loud sound of breaking

a
a

(iv) Hammering, sawing,
clattering

0i6-Mary3
vi

\R

2:48:55 PM |

g

II Read the highlighted phrase in the following sentence from the text.
Well, that was the end of peace and quiet in the house.

The highlighted phrase displays a combination of two words generally
used together in a fixed order. Such phrases are called binomials.

Binomials are expressions consisting of two words, usually linked
by a conjunction such as and or or that are commonly used
together in a fixed order. The two words convey a single meaning or
an opposite.

1. Match the words in Column 1 with the correct pairs in Column 2 to
make binomials.

(v) now

2. Complete the following sentences with suitable binomials from 1. W

(i) This project will be a moment for our team s
success.

(ii) After a long journey, we were relieved to arrive home
(iii) Every friendship works well when there is a balance of

(iv) She organised all the in the cupboard, to make
space for new clothes.

(v) Before making a decision, it is important to weigh the
carefully.

(vi) This is our final chance to perform on stage, it is

3. Complete the paragraph by using the phrasal verbs given in the
box below.

 ~ =| =| KH Ke Ke HK He MK HK HK eK Ke eK eK eK eK eK Ke Ke ee eK ee eK Ke ee ee ee eK Ke eK eK eK KH KH eK KH

06-Mar-25 2:48:56 PM

A

DREAMS AND Discov!

It had been raining and we (i) time to set up for the
function, so we quickly (ii) some decorations using
whatever materials we had. We accidentally (iii) the fire
alarm because of the smoke from the bonfire. Thankfully, the rain
(iv) just as the guests were arriving, and despite all the
chaos, the function (v) to be a huge success.

III Read the highlighted expressions in the following sentence from the text.

And this is not the first time he s got on Papa s nerves or frightened
someone half to death in the house.

The highlighted expressions are called idioms.

An idiom is a phrase or expression that has a meaning different from
the literal meaning of the individual words. It is like a special saying

that people understand in a specific way. For example, It is rai
cats and dogs means it s raining very Heel ? .

Complete the following sentences by filling in the blanks with suitable
idioms from the text given in the box below.

leaving the coast clear get our nerves fell over ourselves
| frighten me half to death getashelling =

1. Shekhar knew he would for breaking his
mother s favourite flower vase.

2. We trying to help the injured dog and get it to
the vet as quickly as possible.

3. Faizy distracted Kanchan, for us to get inside
the room to prepare the birthday surprise.

4. The constant power fluctuations during meetings can

5. When I am alone at home, any unexpected loud noise in the night
can

IV Read the highlighted words in the given sentence.

It was indeed the fellow who had recently begun sweeping out the
compounds in our row of houses.

Here we refer to two completed actions the recent past (new action)
and the later past (old action).

SSN

Unit 3.indd 103

Poorvi

1. Underline the verbs in simple past and past perfect tense for the
following sentences from the text.

(i) Ma had rushed in to see what the racket was all about and found
Papa standing there, sopping wet and scowling.

(ii) Anand had vanished by this time and reappeared only after
dinner when Papa had cooled down.

2. Fill in the blanks with the simple past or past perfect form of the
verbs given in brackets.

(i) After Rohan A. (finish) his homework, he B.
(decide) to go for a walk. He C. (leave) the house and
D. (realise) he E. (forget) his keys inside.

(ii) By the time we A. __ (reach) the station, the train
B. (already/leave). We C. (wait) for the next
one to arrive.

3. Combine the pairs of sentences using the time expressions in the
boxes given below and rewrite them using the past perfect tenses.
An example has been done for you.

Example: Rohan had packed his suitcase before he left for the airport.

Old Actions Time Expressions New Actions

(i) Rohan packed his

. He left for the airport.
suitcase.

(ii) We started work. ets STENT a tine
morning.
before, after, by the

time, when

(iii) They set up the The others brought

tents.

(iv) The students
became quiet.

(v) The villagers left
the village.

| Unit 3.indd 104

food and medicine.

They heard the
teacher coming.

The flood submerged
the entire area.

06-Mar-25 2:48:57 PM

Unit 3.indd 105

DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES

Let us listen

I You will listen to a conversation between Anita and Toby. Toby is a
Martian and is stranded on Earth. He has become Anita s friend. As you
listen, choose the true statements from 1-5 given below. (Transcript for
the teacher on pg. 136)

1.

ao F WO WD

Toby misses his school.

. Anita accepts Toby as her friend.
. Anita asks Toby about one of his facial features.
. Toby tells Anita that she had a banana for breakfast.

. Toby shares that he can see much clearer with a closed eye.

II Listen to the conversation again and fill in the blanks with the exact
words you hear.

1.
2.

Toby: I miss my and home.
Toby: Well, we don t need to eat anything. We get
our from the Sun.

. Anita: Oh! Don t you ever feel like having ice creams and

?

. Anita: Okay, tell me one thing. How are you able to see with
only eye?

. Toby: I can see beyond mountains and , woods and
even

 Let us speak

I Read the following sentences from the text.

As usual, I had to be involved, though I'd have preferred to finish my novel.

 We're old enough to look after ourselves, Ma, I said.

The word though is pronounced to rhyme with the word low .
The word enough is pronounced to rhyme with the word puff .

In

ending with -ough, which are
pronounced very differently. through cough !
Listen to the teacher say these

English there are many words

thought plough

words aloud and notice how they ~------------are pronounced.

\
d-mahdg 2:48:57 PM. |

Poorvi

Now, work in pairs. Pronounce these words out loud and put them in the
correct boxes given below.

Sounds like | Sounds like | Sounds like | Sounds like | Sounds like
 00 off O Ow aw 

Share more words that sound similar to the words in the table.

II Read the story given below aloud. Check the correct pronunciation with
the teacher.

In spite of a nagging cough, the woman continued working in her farm,
right through the rough weather. She filled up the trough with water
for her cows and ploughed the fields to plant the seeds. She then plucked
some raw mangoes from a low bough of a mango tree to make a spicy
chutney. Though the day had been tough, she smiled peacefully as she
had already prepared dough to make enough rotis for dinner.

III Now try saying this tongue twister fast as many times as you can clearly.

The boy with the tough dough on the rose bough fell in the trough and
caught a cough.

Let us write

Think about different vocations that you see around or you are currently
studying.

For example: electrician, mechanic, chef, nurse, graphic designer. You may
add more vocations to the list given here.
| Unit 3.indd 106 06-Mar-25 2:48:59 PM

DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES

Now, choose a vocation and write a paragraph. You may use the hints given
below.
 why you like this vocation
 what training is needed
 what tools and equipment are required
 who would your co-workers be
* highlight the importance of team work
 how you would deal with the customers
 how you plan to pursue it with a sense of pride

Human beings are naturally very curious and creative, and this has led to
many scientific and technological inventions. You must have heard about
many famous inventions. Some of them are mentioned below. You may look

for the names of more such Indian inventors and their inventions.

 Sushruta (sixth century B.C.), was a ~~
pioneer figure in medical science.
His innovations in surgery paved
the way for modern surgery.

Unit 3.indd 107

Unit 3.indd 108

Poorvi

 Dr. Janaki Ammal (Padma
Shri) was a brilliant woman
scientist of India who made a
significant contribution to the
field of cytogenetics.

* Under the directorship of
Dr. A.PJ. Abdul Kalam (Bharat
Ratna), Indian Space Research
Organisation (ISRO) launched the
satellite Rohini in near-earth orbit
with India s first Satellite Launch
Vehicle in 1980 (the project was
named SLV-III ). "

 Dr. Narinder Singh Kapany
(Padma Vibhushan) is known
as Father of Fibre Optics.
He played a pivotal role
in inventing fibre optics.
He was named one of the
seven Unsung Heroes of the
Twentieth Century for his ~
invention. /\

06-Mar-25 2:49:02 PM

Unit 3.indd 109

Paper Boats

Let us do these activities before we read.

I Read the questions given below. Share your answers with your classmates
and the teacher.

1. What comes to mind when you think about paper boats ?

2. What do you think someone might hope for when they send a paper
boat down a stream?

3. Read the title of the poem Paper Boats and predict what the poem
might be about.

II Read the given paragraph and match the highlighted words with their
meanings given in the box below.

I love to play beside a 1. running stream at a short distance from my
grandparent s house. I love to see it 2. skipping along to join a river. On
the river, I can see boats with 3. bulging sails moving swiftly. Some of
them take the people from one shore to the other while in some of them
people can be seen 4. lading things too. I can spend hours watching the
busy river and dreaming about them, 5. burying my head in my pillow
at night. 

Yo

06-Mar-25 2:49:02 PM

|] unit 3.indd 110

Poorvi

S

== Let us read

Day by day I float my paper boats one by one down
the running stream.

In big black letters I write my name on them and the
name of the village where I live.

I hope that someone in some strange land will find
them and know who I am.

I load my little boats with shiuli flower from our
garden, and hope that these blooms of the dawn will
be carried safely to land in the night.

Ilaunch my paper boats and look up into the sky and
see the little clouds setting the white bulging sails.

I know not what playmate of mine in the sky sends
them down the air to race with my boats!

When night comes I bury my face in my arms and
dream that my paper boats float on and on under
the midnight stars.

The fairies of sleep are sailing in them, and the
lading is their baskets full of dreams.

RABINDRANATH TAGORE

Unit 3.indd 111

DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES

Let us discuss

I Choose the correct words from the brackets to complete the summary of
the poem given below.

The poet sends paper boats down a 1. (stream/river) each day,
writing his name and the name of his 2. __ (school/ village) on
them. He hopes thatsomeoneina3.__ (strange/familiar) land will

find them and know who he is. The poet fills his boats with 4.
(rose/shiuli) flowers from his garden, hoping they will be safely carried
to another land at 5. (night/morning). As he launches his boats,
he imagines that the 6. (clouds/birds) in the sky are like friends,
racing with his boats. At night, he dreams that his paper boats continue
to 7. (swim/float) under the midnight stars, with the fairies of
sleep sailing in them, their baskets fullof8.__- (dreams/fruits).

I

-_

Choose the correct option for the following.

The theme of the poem is

1. innocence 2. imagination 3. ignorance
4. playfulness 5. travel
(i) 1, 2 and 3 Gi) 3,4 and 5 Gii) 1,4 and 5 (iv) 1,2 and 4

II

-_

Identify whether the following statement is true or false.

The setting of the poem is a natural, outdoor environment.

IV Complete the following sentence by choosing the correct word given
within the brackets.

The tone is (sad and serious/gentle and wishful) and
the mood is (thoughtful/boring).

V Identify the examples of alliteration from the poem.

V

=

Fill in the blanks with suitable words from the poem.

1. The repetition of words and emphasises the
passage of time.

2. The poet uses imagery like and to create a
clear picture in the minds of the readers.

\
do-mahdd 24909 PM |

Poorvi

VII Match the descriptions in Column 1 with what they symbolise in

Column 2.
1. the child's innocence, (i) midnight stars

dreams, hopes, and
messages sent out into
the world

2. purity, beauty, and the (ii) paper boats
start of a new day

3. the vast universe and (iii) shiuli flowers
the child's dreams
continuing through the
night

Let us think and reflect

I Read the extract given below and answer the questions that follow.

1. When night comes I bury my face in my arms and dream that my
paper boats float on and on under the midnight stars.
The fairies of sleep are sailing in them, and the lading is their baskets
full of dreams.

(i) Select the option that is most likely to be the speaker as per the
extract.

v

(ii) What can be inferred about the speaker s feelings when night
comes?

(iii) What kind of beings are the fairies of sleep imagined as? Select
the most appropriate option.

A. mischievous _ B. gentle C. fearsome D. playful
&

| Unit 3.indd 112 06-Mar-25 2:49:03 PM

y
DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES

(iv) Fill in the blank by selecting the correct option from those given
in the brackets.

The phrase lading is their baskets full of dreams suggests that the
speaker imagines the fairies of sleep carefully
(carrying his dreams /collecting his wishes) in their baskets.

II Answer the following questions.

1. Why do you think the poet writes his personal details on the paper
boats?

2. The poet talks about the imagination of a child. Support this view
with examples from the poem.

3. How does the poet bring together imagination and reality to make
the poem more interesting?

Let us learn

I The poet has used phrases like blooms of the dawn and fairies of sleep 
in the poem. In the same way we can create phrases. Now, select words
from Column 1 and Column 2 and combine them with of . Write as many
phrases as possible in Column 3. An example has been done for you.

a wings of the wind
vid
e
glimmers

go

II The poet uses words like dawn , night and midnight to show different
parts of the day. The box given below has some more words. Write the
words in the appropriate columns.

twilight dawn dusk sunrise noon daybreak
' nightfall sunset midnight sunup forenoon sundown
' noontime night-time noonday midday

 e eee ee

Afternoon

\

III Match the words from the text given in Column 1 with their opposites in
 

Column 2.
. stran C, Gi) halt
2. a) (ii) emptying

ey (iii) sink
. bulging (iv) dusk

5. float (v) ordinary

) 6. lading (vi) shrinking
Let us listen

You will listen to a conversation between a girl and her father about
the art of paper folding called origami. As you listen, select the true
statements from 1-7. (Transcript for the teacher on pg. 137)

Ro

%

| Unit 3.indd 114 06-Mar-25 2:49:03 PM

DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES

. Sai was trying to make an origami boat.
. Sai s father used to do origami as a child.
. Paper was very expensive so it was used only for special occasions.

. People have been making paper cranes for thousands of years.

ao FF wo Dd

. There is a belief that if you make a thousand paper cranes, your wish
will come true.

[op)

. The art of origami is about enjoying the process.

7. Sai s father suggests making a paper bookmark next time.

Let us speak

Create any craft item using eco-friendly materials. Make a presentation in
front of your classmates and teacher about the craft item you have made.

Your presentation should include the following
information:

 Introduction of the item
 Description of how you made it
 Reason why you like the craft

* Conclusion

Use the phrases given below to make your
presentation.

 Today, I m going to show you a... I
made.

e This... is made of... (materials)

It s... (describe colour, shape, size)
 It can be used to...
 First, I started by...

 Then, I used... (tool or material) to...
* The most difficult part was to...

 This... is special to me because...

 I hope you enjoyed seeing my craft and learning about it.
 Thank you for your attention.

\ \
Unit 3.indd 115 d-mahdg 2:49:04 PM |

\

Poorvi

Let us write

A diary entry is a personal document. It records an individual s account of
a day of her or his life expressing the thoughts, feelings and opinions in the
individual s mind.
The guidelines to compose a diary entry include:

* mentioning day, date and time of writing it

* beginning with a general sentence describing the day or feelings
towards an event or experience

* giving details
* concluding with a final remark

Now, write a diary entry expressing your joy experiencing a rainy day. You
may begin as given below:

Friday, 15 July 20XX 6:30 p.m.
Dear Diary,

It was quite humid today. On my journey back from school, I
wished that it would rain. And it did! ...

Let us explore

I Shiuli flowers often find a mention in
Rabindranath Tagore s poems. These
flowers are found in many parts of our
country.

Look at the pictures of shiuli flowers
and recall what you call them in your
language.

1. Find out names of some more trees
or plants in your locality which
have fragrant flowers. Write their
names in your language and English
language. Draw any two flowers
and colour them.

06-Mar-25 2:49:05 PM

DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES

= s
XN

II Solve the riddles given below. Share your answers with your classmates . a

 \ / \ a

and the teacher. en 

7 =
__ aaa ~ ~~- YS --77 7 
ae ~ 1 |

 = ~~ OG ~ <i i Ne
y 

4 bem
 1.1 have water that you cannot drink, ~~,
9 .

\ People come to see how in me the Sun sinks.

\

*. IT can be rough, I can _ be calm,

y I hold within myself plenty of charm. y 
\ My depths tell a never-ending tale. 
*< Who am I with dolphins and the whale? d

~
di 
,/ 2. I sit in stillness, but move with the wind, >,
j My surface mirrors the world you are in.
\ The trees around me live happily, .
. In me, you can take a dip daily.
, Home to ducks, frogs, fish, and all, - ra

-, Can you guess what I am, after all? 1 a-,

 =\_---"

/ 3. I gently travel through valleys deep, wes 
> My soft murmur can make you sleep. ;

| Little paper boats float on me in rain
The merry laughter of the kids I gain.

You may sit beside me without any fear,
. Who am I who skips along, crystal clear?

 4, Ihaveabed, butIdonotsleep. --~~.

, [ I have a bank, but no money I keep. 
Uj \ 1
/ ,-* I carry stories, old and _ new, A
bee y High mountains to the oceans blue. g
rN \ { . N
My \ I journey far to meet the sea, 

~.__ Can you guess, who I can be? |

Unit 3.indd 117

NortH, Sout, East, WEST

Let us do these activities before we read.

I Work in pairs. Discuss the place that you have enjoyed travelling to.
Talk about who you went with, how you travelled, and what you learnt
from the experience.

II Which State or Union Territory of India do you live in? Write the following
details about it.

1. Part of the country North, East, Northeast, West, South or Centre
2. Its capital 3. Language 4. River(s)

5. Tourist attraction 6. Food

III Work in pairs. Recall the names of the states of our country which have
 Pradesh in their names. Mention if it is in the North, East, Northeast,
West, South or Centre of our country. Recall any special feature about
each Pradesh . Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher.

Secon 1 art of Special Feature
the Name <q

Ro

Te

| Unit 3.indd 118 06-Mar-25 2:49:07 PM

DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES

Ww

Cn
g V9 mom

s= > Let us read

Shaana, who lives in Rameswaram island, is travelling the length
and breadth of the country with her parents, exploring the many
landscapes, people and cultures of India. She shares her travel
experiences through postcards that she writes to her friends
back at school. Let us read these postcards.

- m way up north, at the Thajiwas glacier in Kashmir. The
glaciers are white and blue and we have to wear four layers of *

 
snowballs at each other. But they say there was much more
 snow last year.

wearing gloves, so I don t think I can write any more.
* send my love to PT Miss and Library Ma am.

 \

| Unit 3.indd 119 06-Mar 

ip 2:49:09 PM |

Poorvi

y 10 May 20XX
Dear class, 8:

We took another train yesterday and reached Himachal 2.
Pradesh. It is very quiet, and we can see so many 9
e

chirping: short, |

sharp sound , mountains from our cabin. Colourful birds wake me *
made by birds with their chirping when the Sun rises in the east.
snoring: I also think I hear bears 2

making a loud
noise as one
breathes while
sleeping

growling in the west when it
gets dark. But Amma says that s
just Appa snoring. I would love
to meet a bear and give it a hug.

With love from your best friend,
Shaana

co

IDDPOODPD BBDBOGSD DD

17 May 20XX
Hi everyone, >

_ Did you know that Arunachal Pradesh is far away st)
from Himachal Pradesh? Himachal is in the north

but Arunachal is all the way in the east. I thought

all the Pradesh states sat next to each other.

: ge We took two trains and drove a long time to get here. St
This morning, we walked through a forest to reach our &
treehouse. The forest here is so thick that if you blink or

so stop to tie your shoelaces, you will get lost. S&S
I love Arunachal the best so far and am beginning to enjoy
myself. I hope we get to see red pandas. sh)

es With love, st)
Shaana

OSSD SSSSESSES BS

| Unit 3.indd 120 06-Mar-25 2:49:14 PM

DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES

e e & @ oe @ e e e e

( 24 May 20XX
&
Dear classmates, (

SRE
e
Y ee
e

It did not take any time at all to travel south west and get e
to the Sundarbans in West Bengal. Today, Amma and Appa

took me out onto the river in a small boat. Amma tells +(
me that places like the Sundarbans are called wetlands. i
I never knew such a place existed, and that it was possible (/

for trees called mangroves to grow in seawater! But Amma : ):
is sad about how much this place floods today. V

mene e

We also saw crocodiles and a lonely snake while boating. *(

e 
e'-=

) I hope they don t follow us home. )( How is everyone? Are you missing me yet?

 Love, (
(: Shaana . . ; oe )

e e e@ e
emo oI , "=~" no " o "e _ .- ".- 

30 May 20XX /

Hi everyone,

 
%
i We travelled across the country, all the way from
east to west, from West Bengal to Gujarat, and it
yh took us two-and-a-half days!
ik
 ,

I don t know why my Amma and Appa brought me to 

everywhere. It s like a beach without the sea! ButI do really P
love the clothes here. They re so pretty and colourful.

Iam sure you're all busy with your holiday
homework. Amma gave me a surprise test
today, and I passed with 88 per cent. .

. Love,
 Shaana aia f

ee

Unit 3.indd 121 d-mahdg 2:49:16 PM |

Poorvi

e e@ e e e e e e e e e .) e e@ e
 7 June 20XX VA
\ Dear class, 
 Today was the best day ever! We drove east from the x
> desert to the Narmada river, which flows allthe way to 

the centre of India, and it only took us six hours. In the

eee afternoon, Amma, Appa, and I went rafting in the river

the sport of ; . . travelling down 2nd you won t believe how wild and scary it was. always ,
ariver in an thought rivers were calm, but up close they re really fast. . 
air-filedrubber Appa says that there used to be a lot more water, and e
boat rafting was much scarier then. e
 I was fully wet by the time I was done, and Appa was *
 so scared that he decided never to go rafting ever again.
* I love the water so much and can t wait to go back. A
 
 Your best friend, 7.
. Shaana P
co e e e Py e @ e r e e e @ e e o
ee oW%eVeoVeWe oe Ve We oe We We We 

 O 12 June 20xx
e Dear classmates, 8.

Amma and Appa are fast asleep, and I should be sleeping .\.
too, but I just love looking out of the window. I think we re
in the southwest part of the country, in Goa, and you won t 2.
believe how nice the plateaus look. There are so many hills
here, and beaches too. Q.

0.
Q.
Q.
There are also a lot of tunnels that the
Q train goes through. I used to be afraid of
tunnels, but I m not any more. Someday,
R. I wish we could all go on a tour of the
plateaus. Maybe when we're in Class 11.
Q.

e
e
e
e
 Love,
e

Shaana 1
RY

&

| Unit 3.indd 122 06-Mar-25 2:49:18 PM

DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES

e? 17 June 20XX ?
Dear friends,

* Tcan t believe we re in the same state again! We travelled ; ;
south, and I will be home soon. ELSIE. GGL
that involves

We reached Chennai yesterday, and on the way to standingona
Puducherry, we decided to learn how to surf. I think 'm_!0ng lightweight
* sood at it now because I only fell down twice. Amma and 0ard and
} Appa splashed water on each other and behaved like "484 wave to
t )

; ; the seash
children. It s a good thing I was there to control them. <

surf: (here)

(s The beaches here are not like the ones wehave _
on our island. The waves are a lot rougher and ,

the water is browner, but I still like it here. @
i Your best friend,
e Shaana

\) 22 June 20XX Q,
 y Hi everyone, (
(* I just crossed the Pamban bridge. (
r , | could see the ocean on both sides. How amazing )( that a train can travel across the sea like this! od (

(

ad

e I m almost home, and I can t wait to give you my
final letter in person. . (

Lovd 

Shaana

a, ee ea
e o_

e e e & e e e e e =)

\
Unit 3.indd 123 d-mahdg 2:49:19 PM |

| Unit 3.indd 124

&

Poorvi

dive: (here)
swim
underwater
with special
breathing
equipment;
(past tense:
dove)

pebbles: small,
smooth stones

mR

24 June 20XX
Dear classmates,

I thought Amma and Appa would be tired from all our
travelling, but we made one last stop at the Olaikaadu
beach before we reached home. And I m so happy we
did.

Amma wanted to teach me how to dive, but they did not
have diving suits my size, so I spent the day floating and
looking at the fish while my parents dove below me.

We found all sorts of pebbles on the beach, and I can t
wait to give them to you in person tomorrow.

Your best friend,
Shaana

06-Mar-25 2:49:20 PM

DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES

f
(
tol

25 June 20XX
Dear Amma and Appa,

Gro GNo

I can t believe we travelled across the whole country!
I know we're going to miss visiting the forests, glaciers,
deserts, wetlands, plateaus, and mountains. And we are
going to miss hearing all those new languages and meeting
all those different people. But we re finally home now, and
we can join our friends again.

Tp? SN0 Gyo GN Gyo

NTIS TOS

I hope we get to travel like this again, and maybe next time
we can take our friends with us.
With love,

= ofaana
Lac octse OI CL OD noo eco Lo NOLO

eee
@
oO GO

ts

C.G. SALAMANDER
(Excerpts from North, South, East, West)

Let us discuss

Complete the table given below based on Shaana s postcards. An example has been
done for you. Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher.

Interes ting Descriptions and Activities

1. Thajiwas glacier, Kashmir | white and blue glaciers; throwing snowballs

walking through a thick forest to reach the tree
house

floating and looking at the fish; Appa and Amma
went for a dive

Unit 3.indd 125

Let us think and reflect

I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow.

1. Amma tells me that places like the Sundarbans are called wetlands.
Inever knew such a place existed, and that it was possible for trees
called mangroves to grow in seawater! But Amma is sad about
how much this place floods today.

We also saw crocodiles and a lonely snake while boating. I hope
they don t follow us home.

How is everyone? Are you missing me yet?

(i) What feeling does Shaana most likely experience when she
says, I never knew such a place existed... ?

A. pride B. hope C. relief D. wonder

(ii) Complete the following sentence with a suitable reason.

Amma is sad about the frequent flooding in Sundarbans
because ___

(iii) Select the evidence from the text that reflects a feeling of the
speaker s slight nervousness.

(iv) Select the option that applies to both the Assertion and the
Reason.

Assertion: The speaker is missing her friends.

Reason : The speaker wishes to know the well-being of her
friends.

A. Both the assertion and the reason are true, and the reason
correctly explains the assertion.

B. Both the assertion and the reason are true, but the reason
does not correctly explain the assertion.

C. The assertion is true, but the reason is false.
D. Both the assertion and the reason are false.

2. Amma and Appa are fast asleep, and I
should be sleeping too, but I just love
looking out of the window. I think
we re in the southwest part of the
country, in Goa, and you won t believe
how nice the plateaus look. There are
so many hills here, and beaches too.

Unit 3.indd 126 06-Mar-25 2:49:21 PM

Unit 3.indd 127

DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES

There are also a lot of tunnels that the train goes through. I used to be
afraid of tunnels, but m not any more. Someday, I wish we could all go
ona tour of the plateaus.

(i) Complete the sentence with a suitable reason.

The speaker chooses to stay awake because

(ii) What does the speaker mean by saying, You won t believe how
nice the plateaus look ?

(iii) What has been the change in the speaker s attitude towards

tunnels?
A. from fear to comfort B. from courage to confidence
C. from doubt to clarity D. from fascination to delight

(iv) Fill in the blanks with the correct option from those given in the
brackets.

The speaker s wish to share the experience of touring the
plateaus with others indicates her (ability to
communicate/sense of connection) as well as the value she
placeson__ (shared experiences/updating information)
with her peers.

II Answer the following questions.

1.

Shaana mentions that she used to be afraid of tunnels. What could
have been the most likely reason for her to be scared of tunnels?

. Do you think Shaana s Appa and Amma enjoyed themselves, just like

children do? Support your answer with evidence from the text.

. Shaana mentions less snow in the glaciers and more flooding in the

Sundarbans. Explain what these observations indicate.

. Shaana s visits to different parts of the country highlight the diversity

of India s geography. Support this statement with evidence from
the text.

. How does Shaana use language to convey her excitement, curiosity,

and sometimes her fears about the places she visits?

. What might Shaana have learnt from her travels across India? How

would it impact her understanding of the country?

. What could be the author s purpose of presenting the text in the form

of postcards?

\
d-mahdg 2:49:21 PM |

eS
Let us learn

I Read the words from the text given in Column 1 and match them with
suitable pictures in Column 2.

Column 1 Column 2

1. glaciers (i)
2. treehouse (ii)
p
3. wetlands (iii)
4. plateaus (iv)
5. pebbles (v)
6. rafting (vi)

Za

06-Mar-25 2:49:23 PM

DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES

II Read the situations given in Column 1. Choose the associated words from
the text given in the box below and write them in Column 2. An example
has been done for you.

1. Inthe middle of the night, the little boy heard a loud scary
noise. He felt so afraid that he couldn t sleep.

2. There used to be a bookstore near my house. But it is
now shifted to the town.

3. The flashes of light from the car made her suddenly
close and open her eyes several times.

4. The children jumped into the pool and threw water at
each other with loud noises.
My grandmother s place is so beautiful with all green

paddy fields and palm trees. It was a great experience.

6. When I looked up at the sky, the clouds were not
staying at one place. They were moving across the sky.

II The following word grid has six words related to travel used in the
lesson. Circle the words in the grid. You can search horizontally and
vertically. The last letter of each word has been highlighted.

Unit 3.indd 129 | my 25 2:49:24 PM

(J

IV Read the following sentences from the text and underline the subject
and the verb.

1. Amma and Appa are fast asleep. \
(When the subject of a sentence has two or more nouns or pronouns
that are connected by and , we use a plural verb).

2. It s hot, dry, and there is sand everywhere.

(In case the subject is it , the verb that follows is either is or was 
depending on the tense of the sentence).

3. There are so many hills here, and beaches too.

(When we begin a sentence with there , the subject comes after the
verb).

ww
The subject of a sentence is closely linked to the i 6 verb
form changes depending on whether the subject i gular or
plural and if it is in the led person. Choosi e correct verb

based on the subject is c ubject-ve ment.
! y oN : ere

Let us understand subject-verb agreement better.

 Asubject and its verb must agree, even if other words or phrases come
between them.

The formation of paragraphs is important in writing.
 When the subjects are considered individually, we use a singular verb.
Every man and woman has the right to vote.

* Collective nouns such as class , committee , audience , team can be
singular or plural, based on the context of the sentence. If the sentence
implies the group is acting as one unit, the noun is singular and takes
a singular verb.

The committee decides on the new policy tomorrow.

* The indefinite pronouns each , either , every , much , and neither 
always require singular verbs.

Each of the children was given a gift.

 Subjects that look plural because they end in s but refer to one thing
are singular.

Mathematics is an interesting subject.

IN Some nouns (like glasses, scissors, pants, and tongs) are plural but take
a singular verb when the phrase pair of is placed before it. Here,
 pair is the subject.

This pair of scissors is sharp.

os,
06-Mar-25 2:49:24 PM

Unit 3.indd 131

~A DREAMS AND Discov:

 When subjects are joined by or or nor , the verb should match the
subject that is closer to it.

Y Neither the students nor the teacher wants to cancel the trip.

fg Y Either the manager or the employees are responsible for the
mistake.

V Choose the correct option from the words given in the brackets.

1. A pair of sunglasses (is/are) essential when travelling to
sunny destinations.

2. Either the tour guide or the tourists (has/have) to arrive
first at the meeting point.

3. The information on travel expenses (is/are) useful for firsttime travellers.

4. Neither the flight crew nor the pilot (was/were) aware of
the delay.

5. The news about the heavy rains (makes/make) many people
reconsider their vacation plans.

6. A pair of binoculars (is/are) useful for spotting wildlife on a
safari.

7. The hill stations in India (remains/remain) a popular traye!

destination during winter.

8. Keeping accounts (is/are) important for spending money
wisely during travel.

9. Either the ticket or the bus passes (need/needs) to be used
for travelling in the tourist bus.

10. Neither the passengers nor the taxi driver (was/were) aware
of the best route to the hotel.

Let us listen

You will listen to a girl speak about the story of how Agartala got its name
and the importance of agar. As you listen, choose the correct option for the
questions given below. (Transcript for the teacher on pg. 138)

1. What does the word Agartala mean?
(i) under the agar tree (ii) beside the agar tree

(iii) around the agar tree

. Which of these is another name for agarwood trees?
(i) gharuwood (ii) sandalwood (iii) rosewood
3. What kind of smell does agarwood have?
(i) woody and citrusy (ii) woody and flowery
(iii) fresh and citrusy
4. How is agarwood formed?
(i) when the tree dries (ii) when the tree dies
(iii) when the tree gets infected
5. What is agarwood used to make?
(i) incense and edible oil

(ii) perfumes and wood carvings

(iii) gum and candies r,
oo Ph
Let us speak eS SS ir
Read the questions listed below. ; ws .
Which of the two given options do you prefer? ~

1. How do you like to travel?

Bus C) train C )

2. What kind of a trip do you like?

Family trip C) school trip =F

3. Where would you like to go?
Beaches L4 mountains C)
4. What do you like to do on a trip?
Adventure activities C) sightseeing (Ge
5. When do you like to travel?
Winter C) summer ee)
6. What kind of places would you like to visit?
Historic monuments C_) wildlife sanctuaries C)

7. How long a trip would you like?

Short C) long C_)

132 Rt

Unit 3.indd 132 06-Mar-25 2:49:25 PM

Unit 3.indd 133

DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES

Now, work in pairs and tell each other about your preferences with respect
to the questions. You may use the phrases given below to speak about your
choices.

 I prefer... to... because...

 I would rather... than... because...

 I like... better than... as...

 ...is or are better than... because...

* ... appeal or appeals to me more than... as...

 Iam alright with both, but I prefer... because...

 Given a choice, I would go for... over... as...

Let us write

Imagine that you have to travel to your hometown to attend a family event.
Write an application to the Principal of your school, requesting leave of
absence. Remember to include the duration of the leave, the reason for the
leave and mention how you will complete your school work. Use the format
of the application and the verbal cues given below.

(House no. and street)
(City)
(State or Union territory)
(Date)
The Principal
(Name of your school)
(City)
(State or Union territory)
Subject: Request for leave for... days

Dear (Madam or Sir),

I am writing to request __ days leave with effect from
to __ in order to attend

I would like to assure you that I would
I would be grateful if you could grant me the leave.

Yours sincerely,

(Name)
(Class, Section, Roll Number)

do-aahsd 2:49:25 PM |

Poorvi

I Solve the crossword
puzzle by identifying
the States and Union
Territories of India

using the clues given.
7 8

10 11

12 13
15

Across Down
2. Pangong Lake 1. Dampa Tiger Reserve
7. Thar Desert 3. Cellular Jail
9. Serenity Beach 4. Double Decker Living
11. Hampi Root Bridge
5. Dudhsagar Falls

12. Nagarjuna Sagar Dam
6. Gangotri Glacier

8. Chilika Lake

14. Thangka Paintings
15. Rann of Kutch

16. Nalanda University 10, Chota Nagpur Plateau

. Kurukshetra

Unit 3.indd 134 06-Mar-25 2:49:26 PM |

Unit 3.indd 135

DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES

II There are many ancient places to
visit in India. For example, Kailasa,
the majestic cave temples of Ellora.
They are officially listed on the World
Heritage list by UNESCO. These
caves were carved out of the vertical
basalt cliffs of the Sahyadri hills.
You may visit this site to know
more about these caveshttps://indianculture.gov.in/stories/
kailasa-majestic-temple-ellora

The Kailasa Temple
1. Rani-ki-Vav (the Queen s Stepwell) Source: UNESCO

is located at Patan, Gujarat and is
also on the World Heritage list by
UNESCO. Stepwells are a distinctive
form of water resource and storage
systems on the Indian subcontinent,
and were constructed during ancient
times. They evolved over time from
what was basically a pit in sandy
soil towards elaborate multi-storey

. Rani-ki-V
works of art and architecture. Source. UNESCO

Now, find out about the unique places in your village, region or state and
share the details with your classmates and the teacher.

Il The Hornbill festival is a unique
festival that is held annually in
the Kisama village near Kohima,
the capital of Nagaland.

In groups of four, find out about
this festival when it is held,
who participates in it, what its
purpose is, what events are held,
etc. Share your findings with your
classmates and the teacher.

TRANSCRIPTS

Let us listen (refer to page 105)

I You will listen to a conversation between Anita and Toby. Toby is a
Martian and is stranded on Earth. He has become Anita s friend. As you
listen, choose the true statements from 1-5.

Anita : Hi, Toby! Do you miss your planet?
Topsy : Very much, Anita! I miss my people and home.

Anita : Oh! I wish I could do something about it! But Iam happy
to have you as my friend.

Tosy : Thank you, Anita!

Anita : Er... could you tell me something more about yourself?
Tosy : Why not! What do you want to know about me, Anita?
Anita : What do you eat for breakfast?

Tosy : Well, we Martians don t need to eat anything. We get our
energy from the Sun.

Anita: Oh! Don t you ever feel like having ice creams and
chocolates? I can t think of life without them!

Tosy : No, Anita! We are made of different stuff.

Anita : Okay, tell me one thing. How are you able to see with only
one eye? I see only one big eye in the centre of your face.

Tosy : My friend, we Martians need only one eye to see clearly.
In fact, I can see even with my eye closed. I can see
beyond mountains and clouds, wood and even metals. I
can see that you are carrying a toy in your pocket. It s a
blue aeroplane. Isn t it? And yes! That apple you just had
for breakfast is going round-and-round in your stomach
right now!

Anita : (gasps in disbelief) Oh my goodness!

II Listen to the conversation again and fill in the blanks with the exact
words you hear.

06-Mar-25 2:49:26 PM

DREAMS AND Discov

Let us listen (refer to page 114)

You will listen to a conversation between a girl and her father about
the art of paper folding called origami. As you listen, select the true
statements from 1-7.

Fatuer : Sai dear! What are you working on there with all that paper?

Sar: Baba, I am trying to make an origami crane, but it s a bit
tricky. I keep messing up the folds.

Fatuer : Ah, origami! I remember doing that when I was your age.
You know, Sai, origami has a really interesting history.

Sar: Really? I thought it was just something fun to do with
paper.

Fatuer : It is fun, but it s also an age-old art form. Origami started
in Japan over a thousand years ago. Back then, paper
was really expensive, so it was only used for special
occasions, like religious ceremonies.

Sar: Wow, I didn t know that. So, it wasn t just for doing crafts?

Fatuer : It wasn t until the seventeenth century that people began
making animals, flowers and other designs just for fun.

Sal :So, people have been making paper cranes for hundreds
of years?

Fatuer : Yes, and the crane is especially important in Japanese
culture. It s a symbol of peace and long life. There s even
a belief that if you fold a thousand paper cranes, you can
make a wish, and it will come true.

Sar :Athousand cranes? That s a lot! But it sounds like a really
nice tradition.

Fatuer : It is. Origami isn t just about the final shape it s about
the process, the patience and the creativity involved.
And over the years, it s spread all over the world, with
people adding their own styles and techniques.

Sal :I had no idea origami had such a long history. It makes
folding this crane feel even more special.

Fatuer: I m glad you think so, Sai. Perhaps we can start with
something simpler next time. How about we make an

Unit 3.indd 137

origami paper boat next? It s easier, and we can float it
in the stream outside.

Sat :A boat sounds awesome! Let s do it! But first, I want to
finish this crane. Can you help me with the last few steps?

Fatuer: Of course! Let s finish this crane together. After that,
we'll sail our paper boat.

Let us listen (refer to page 131)

You will listen to a girl speak about the story of how Agartala got its name
and the importance of agar. As you listen, choose the correct option for
the questions given below.

Hi everyone,

We all know that Agartala is the capital of Tripura. But did you
know how Agartala got its name? It s made up of two words:
 agar , which is a type of tree, and tala , meaning underneath.
So, Agartala means under the agar tree . These trees are also
called aloeswood, eaglewood, or gharuwood. It is also referred
to as wood of the gods .

Agarwood, the wood from these trees, is really special. It smells
amazing like a mix of woody and flowery scents. It is one of
the rarest and the most expensive woods in the world. People
have used it for thousands of years in medicines, perfumes and
rituals. It has been described as early as 1400 BCE in the Vedas.
The Egyptians are believed to have used agarwood incense as
part of their rituals more than 3,000 years ago.

Here s something even more remarkable agarwood only forms
when the tree is hurt or infected with a bug or virus. Instead of
dying, the tree creates this dark, sticky, sweet-smelling substance
called agar oil which protects it from further infection.

Agarwood is very important to people in Agartala. It s used to
make perfumes, incense, and the hand carvings which Tripura
is famous for.

And here s the best part: the tree was once almost extinct, but
now, thanks to people taking care of it, you can find it in almost
every house in northern Tripura. How great is that!

06-Mar-25 2:49:27 PM