.

vis
j *

i

ANIMALS, BirDs, AND Dr. DOLITTLE

Let us do these activities before we read.

0773CHO2

I Do you have a pet or a domestic animal? If yes, why? If not, why not?
How do people usually spend time with a pet or domestic animal? Share
your thoughts with your classmates and the teacher.

I

-_

You must have read stories where animals and birds talk. If you hada
chance to communicate with an animal or a bird, who would you like
to speak to and why? Share your thoughts with your classmates and the
teacher.

II

-_

If we closely observe the body language of animals and birds, we can
understand what they want to tell us. Work in pairs and study the
pictures given below. Find out what emotions these animals and birds
are trying to convey. Share your observations with your classmates and
the teacher.

Unit 2.indd 43

06-Mar-25 2:50:35 PM

Poorvi

Doctor Dolittle was sitting in his kitchen talking with the Cat sfood-Man who had come to see him with a stomach-ache.

 Why don t you give up being a people s doctor, and be an
animal doctor? asked the Cat s-food-Man.

The parrot, Polynesia, was sitting in the window looking out
at the rain and singing a sailor song to herself. She stopped
singing and started to listen.

 You see, Doctor, the Cat s-food-Man went on, you know all
about animals much more than what these vets here do.
That book you wrote about cats, why, it s wonderful! I can t
read or write myself my wife, Theodosia, is a scholar, and
she read your book to me. You might have been a cat yourself.
You know the way they think. 

When the Cat s-food-Man had gone the parrot flew off the
window on to the Doctor s table and said, That man s got
sense. That s what you ought to do. Be an animal doctor. Give
the silly people up if they haven t brains enough to see you re
the best doctor in the world. Take care of animals instead 
they ll soon find it out. Be an animal doctor. 

 Oh, there are plenty of animal doctors, said John Dolittle,
putting the flowerpots outside on the windowsill to get the
rain.

 Yes, there are plenty, said Polynesia. But none of them are

| Unit 2.indd 44 06-Mar-25 2:50:36 PM

Wirt anp Humour

any good at all. Now listen, Doctor, and I ll tell you something.
Did you know that animals can talk? 

 I knew that parrots can talk, said the Doctor.
 Oh, we parrots can talk in two languages people s language racker: a thin,

and bird language, said Polynesia proudly. If I say, Polly "Y Piscutt

; . : usually eaten
wants a cracker , you understand me. But hear this: Ka-ka oi- with cheese
ee, fee-fee? 
 Good Gracious! cried the Doctor. What does that mean? 
 That means, Is the porridge hot yet? in bird language. 
 My! You don t say so! said the Doctor. You never talked that
way to me before. 
 What would have been the good? said Polynesia, dusting
some cracker crumbs off her left wing. You wouldn t have
understood me if I had. 
 Tell me some more, said the Doctor, all excited; and he
rushed over to the drawer and came back with a book and Birds ABC:
a pencil. Now don t go too fast and Ill write it down. there) the
This is interesting very interesting something quite new. language that
Give me the Birds A.B.C. first slowly now. birds speak

So that was the way the Doctor came to know that animals
had a language of their own and could talk to one

another. And all that afternoon, while it was _

raining, Polynesia sat on the kitchen table, |

giving him bird words to put down in the
book.

At teatime, when the dog, Jip, came in,
the parrot said to the Doctor, See, he s
talking to you. 

 Looks to me as though he were
scratching his ear, said the Doctor.

 But animals don t always speak
with their mouths, said the parrot
in a high voice, raising her eyebrows. 
 They talk with their ears, with their _
feet, with their tails with everything. ~

Sometimes they don t want to make ts ames | ong =a

&

Unit 2.indd 45 dmahdg 2:50:37 PM |

a ah

Poorvi

noise. Do you see now the way he s twitching up one side of his
nose? 

 What s that mean? asked the Doctor.

 That means, Can t you see that it has stopped raining? 
Polynesia answered. He is asking you a question. Dogs nearly
always use their noses for asking questions. 

After a while, with the parrot s help, the Doctor got to learn the
language of the animals so well that he could talk to them himself
and understand everything they said. Then he gave up being a
people s doctor altogether.

Let us discuss
I Complete the following sentence by selecting a suitable reason.

The Cat s-food-Man suggests to Doctor Dolittle that he should
become an animal doctor because he _ believes that Dolittle

1. earns less fee by treating human patients

2. enjoys the company of animals as they speak less
3. dislikes spending time with human patients
4.

knows more about animals than the local veterinarians
II Fill in the blanks by choosing the suitable option given in the brackets.

Doctor Dolittle reacts to Polynesia s information about animal languages
with both excitement and (certainty/curiosity). He rushes
to (write/memorise) the bird words she provides and is
interested in learning more.

III Do you think Doctor Dolittle would be famous as an animal doctor?
If yes, why? If not, why not?

I

As soon as the Cat s-food-Man had told everyone that John Dolittle
was going to become an animal doctor, old ladies began to bring
him their pet pugs and poodles who had eaten too much cake;
and farmers came many miles to show him sick cows and sheep.
| Unit 2.indd 46 06-Mar-25 2:50:38 PM

Unit 2.indd 47

One day a plough horse was brought to him; and the poor thing
was terribly glad to find a man who could talk in horse language.

 You know, Doctor, said the horse, that vet over the hill knows
nothing at all. He has been treating me six weeks now for
something or the other. What I need is spectacles. I am going
blind in one eye. There s no reason why horses shouldn t wear
glasses, the same as people. But that stupid man over the hill
never even looked at my eyes. He kept on giving me big pills.
I tried to tell him, but he couldn t understand a word of horse
language. What I need is spectacles. 

 Of course of course, said the Doctor. I ll get you some at once. 

 I would like a pair like yours, said the horse only green.
They ll keep the Sun out of my eyes while I m ploughing the field. 

 Certainly, said the Doctor. Green ones you shall have. 

 You know, the trouble is, Sir, said the plough horse as the
Doctor opened the front door to let him out the trouble is that
anybody thinks he can doctor animals just because the animals
don t complain. As a matter of fact, it takes a much cleverer man
to be areally good animal doctor than it does to bea good people s
doctor. 

 Well, well! said the Doctor.
 When will my glasses be ready? 

Wirt anp Humour

yi 2:50:39 PM |

Poorvi

 Tl have them for you next week, said the Doctor.
 Come in again Tuesday Good morning! 

Then John Dolittle got a fine, big pair of green spectacles; and
the plough horse stopped going blind in one eye and could see
as well as ever.

And soon it became a common sight to see farm animals
countryside: wearing glasses in the countryside, round Puddleby; and a
rural area blind horse was a thing unknown.

And so it was with all the other animals that were brought to
him. As soon as they found that he could talk their language,
they told him where the pain was and how they felt, and of
course it was easy for him to cure them.

Now all these animals went back and told their brothers and
friends that there was a doctor in the little house with the big
garden who really was a doctor. And whenever any creatures
got sick not only horses and cows and dogs but all the little
things of the fields, like harvest mice, badgers, and bats, all
came at once to his house on the edge of the town, so that his
big garden was nearly always crowded with animals trying to
get in to see him.

There were so many that came that he had to have special
doors made for the different kinds. He wrote HORSES over

N
&

| Unit 2.indd 48 06-Mar-25 2:50:40 PM

Unit 2.indd 49

the front door, COWS over the side door, and SHEEP on the
kitchen door. Each kind of animal had a separate door even
the mice had a tiny tunnel made for them into the cellar, where
they waited patiently in rows for the Doctor to come round
to them.

And so, in a few years time, every living thing for miles and
miles got to know about John Dolittle, M.D. And the birds who
flew to other countries in the winter told the animals in foreign
lands about Dolittle who could understand their talk and help
them in their troubles. In this way he became famous among
the animals all over the world. He was happy and liked his
life very much.

Hucu LoftinGc

Let us discuss
I What became a common sight in Puddleby after Doctor Dolittle started
treating animals?
1. Humans talking to farm animals
2. Farm animals wearing glasses
3. Farm animals learning bird language
4. Birds riding atop farm animals
II What challenges do you think Doctor Dolittle might face if more and
more animals come to him for help?

1. How might he overcome these challenges to ensure that he
provides good treatment?

Wirt anp Humour

O

below ground
level often used
for storage

Poorvi

III Arrange the following events in correct order according to the story. Two
have been done for you. Share your answers with your classmates and
the teacher.

2. Animals from near and far come to Doctor Dolittle for
help, crowding his garden.

4. Polynesia teaches Doctor Dolittle animal languages,
and he starts understanding and communicating with
animals.

.
6. The parrot, snimal docto ges ees 1 Dol le to
become an anima I doct evealingfetn at animals can talk.

0 CoN \unicate with animals
helps him diagnose sean heir illnesses effectively.

10. Word spreads, and people start bringing their sick pets
and farm animals to Doctor Dolittle for treatment.

o>

fp Let us think and reflect

I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow.

1. IfI say, Polly wants a cracker , you understand me. But hear this: Kaka oi-ee, fee-fee? 

 Good Gracious! cried the Doctor. What does that mean? 
 That means, Is the porridge hot yet? in bird language. 

 My! You don t say so! said the Doctor. You never talked that way to
me before. 
| Unit 2.indd 50 06-Mar-25 2:50:41 PM

a

Wirt anp Humour

 What would have been the good? said Polynesia, dusting some cracker
crumbs off her left wing. You wouldn t have understood me if I had. 

(i) Complete the sentence by choosing the correct option.

In the line, Good Gracious! cried the Doctor, the expression
 Good Gracious can be replaced by !

A. bravo B. gosh C. alas D. hurray

(ii) Why had Polynesia never used bird language with the Doctor
earlier?

(iii) Identify whether the following statement is true or false.

Polynesia had been munching on a food item while talking to
Doctor Dolittle.

(iv) How did Doctor Dolittle feel according to the extract?
A. anxious B. surprised C. angry D. relaxed

2. I would like a pair like yours, said the horse only green. They ll
keep the Sun out of my eyes while I m ploughing the field. 

 Certainly, said the Doctor. Green ones you shall have. 

 You know, the trouble is, Sir, said the plough horse as the Doctor
opened the front door to let him out the trouble is that anybody thinks
he can doctor animals just because the animals don t complain. As a
matter of fact, it takes a much cleverer man to be a really good animal
doctor than it does to be a good people s doctor. 

(i) Choose a word from the extract to complete the analogy.

digging: flower bed:: __: field
(ii) Choose the correct word to complete the sentence.
Doctor Dolittle s attitude in the extract is
A. respectful B. sentimental C. understanding D. careful
(iii) Complete the sentence with an appropriate reason.

Based on the extract, we can conclude that doctors take animals
for granted because

(iv) Do you agree with the concluding sentence of the extract?
Why/why not?

II Answer the following questions.

1. How can we say that Polynesia was a good trainer of animal la

?

2. Explain how Doctor Dolittle gave equal and individual atte tion
each animal who came to him for treatment. yi iy

;
06-Mar\2 5 2:50:42 PM

Unit 2.indd 51 143

Poorvi

3. How does Doctor Dolittle s readiness to follow the parrot s advice
highlight the importance of listening to different viewpoints?

4. Which qualities of Doctor Dolittle made him famous among the
animals? Explain with evidence from the text.

5. What changes do you think would happen in the world if people
suddenly gained the ability like Doctor Dolittle, to understand and
communicate with animals?

'
whe
Dye ~ 
oe
p Ld

Let us learn

I

Read the following words from the text.
Cat s-food-Man, bird language, flowerpots

Are all the words that are combined to form another word written the
same way?

Compound words are formed by combining two words of different
parts of speech to create a new word that has an entirely new meaning.
They are of three types hyphenated (Cat s-food-Man), open compound
words (bird language) and closed compound words (flowerpots).

Complete the following table correctly by choosing words from the box
given below. An example has been done for you.
sailor song teatime check-in plough horse

{
I
harvest mice windowsill well-bred

Open Closed
Compound Words Compound Words

Hyphenated Words

check-in

 

| Unit 2.indd 52 06-Mar-25 2:50:43 PM
g

II Create compound words from the table given below.

1. fun (i) head
2. high (ii) birds
3. never (iii) flying
4. early (iv) loving
5. song (v) risers
6. over (vi) tops
7. tree (vii) ending

Now, complete the paragraph with suitable compound words from the
table. An example has been done for you.

After being treated by Doctor Dolittle, the A. fun-loving dolphins

danced playfully in his sanctuary. The B. chatter of
monkeys echoed through the C. , their ailments cured.
Dz. eagles soared gracefully E. their health
restored. F. among the G. chirped joyfully

from the branches. All creatures were happy with Doctor Dolittle s care.

III Underline the names of animals that are hidden in the sentences given
below. Clues are given within the brackets. An example has been done
for you.

1. Dr. Dolittle was eating oatmeal for his breakfast. (a farm animal)

2. Old ladies began to bring him their pets. (an insect)

3. The author sees the connection between humans and animals. (a
farm animal)

gp 4. The three baby dinosaurs are from ice age. (field animal)
5. The patients who came late didn t know where to go. (ship of the desert)

IV Read the following sentence from the text. Study the highlighted words.

But that stupid man over the hill never even looked at my eyes.

The highlighted words spell and read the same backwards too.

A word, phrase, or sequence that reads the same backwards as
forwards is a palindrome.

Unit 2.indd 53

S

Some of the common palindromes include Was it a car or a cat
I saw? , Madam, I m Adam and A man, a plan, a canal Panama .

Read the sentences below and identify the palindrome words and
sentences.

1. Step on no pets.

. Naman saw a race car at the show.

. Nitin speaks in Malayalam.

. The engineer used a rotator to check the surface level.

. The pilot relied on the radar to navigate safely.

anna F&F WwW WD

. Eva can I see bees in a cave? =

Now, create your own palindrome and share it
with your classmates and the teacher.

_

ne verbs in 1. and

are in present
1. He is asking you a question. continuous form.
The verbs in
2. and 4. are in
3. Iam going blind in one eye. simple present.

V Underline the verbs and identify the tense
form in the following sentences from the text.

2. Oh, there are plenty of animal doctors.

4. ... the trouble is that anybody thinks he can
doctor animals.

VI Read the following sentences
from the text.
 That man s (man has) got We use present perfect tense to
sense. indicate:
e arecently completed action
* an action that started in the
past and is relevant even at the
In the first sentence the verbs, moment of speaking

 has got denote an action that is | * 4% action in the past where the
focus is on the action and not

on the time of occurrence (but
In the second sentence, the verbs relevant at the time of speaking)
 has stopped denote an action | structure of Present Perfect Tense:
that is recently completed. has/ have + V3 (past participle)

* Can t you see that it has
stopped raining?

relevant at the time of speaking.

A

06-Mar-25 2:50:44 PM

Wirt anp Humour

Fill in the blanks using the correct form of verbs (present
perfect) given within brackets.

Since becoming an animal doctor, Doctor Dolittle 1.

(learn) to communicate with all animals and birds. He
2. (treat) countless farm animals and pets with care.
The parrot, Polynesia, 3. (teach) him bird-language,
and he 4. (write) books about his adventures. Many
people 5. __ (bring) their sick animals to his door. Over
the years, Dolittle 6. _ (become) renowned worldwide
for his unique abilities.

Let us listen

I

You will listen to an announcement. As you listen, state whether the
following statement is true or false. (Transcript for the teacher on pg. 88)

Dr. Dolittle s new clinic presents an offer of free medicines.

II You will listen to the announcement again. As you listen, complete the
details given below with one or two exact words you hear.

1. The new clinic is located in the town of

. The address is 12, Lane.

. The clinic is open Monday to Friday from a.m. to 5 p.m.
. Special timings for are on Saturdays from 11 a.m. to 2 p.m.

. Dr. Dolittle will ensure that animals get the

rn oO FP W WH

. All animals horses, cows, , wild animals, and others
are welcome.

Let us speak

Conversation between a doctor and a patient

e Read the information about the problems 1-4.
e Use the cue cards provided to guide your conversation.
e Take turns to play parts of doctor and patient.

Problem 1:Cough and cold
 Solution: Ginger and honey mix
e Additional Advice: Drink warm fluids and rest.
Unit 2.indd 55 im

ip 2:50:45 PM |

Poorvi
&

| Unit 2.indd 56

N oy

Problem 2: Dry lips
 Solution: Apply ghee

 Additional Advice: Stay hydrated and
avoid wetting your lips.

Problem 3:Sore throat
 Solution: Gargle with warm salt water.

e Additional Advice: Drink herbal teas and
avoid cold drinks. > \

Problem 4: Fatigue

 Solution: Ensure adequate sleep anda
balanced diet.

e Additional Advice: Take short walks to
increase energy levels.

Cue Cards

Doctor _ |

Patient |

Greet the patient Respond to the greeting

Enquire about the problem Tell your problem

Ask about symptoms Describe the symptoms

Make a diagnosis Ask for clarification
and give solution
Acknowledge the
information and ask about
the next appointment

Provide additional advice

Share details of next
appointment Express agreement and

thank the doctor

06-Mar-25 2:50:47 PM

Wirt anp Humour

MD. Let us write
A notice is a means of formal communication for a particular group of
persons. It informs them about some important event, such as an invitation
to a meeting, an announcement, to give instructions, make appeals, etc.

Write a notice in about 50 words about the Annual Health Check-up for
students of Grades 6-8. Remind students to collect their health check-up
cards from the class teacher. Include all other necessary details about date,
time, and venue.

Complete the draft of the notice by using the words and phrases given in the

box below.
inform queries health card health check-up
assembly hall Grades 6-8 please contact
Thursday and Friday

Name of the School

NOTICE

12 July 20XX
Mention Heading

This is to all the students of
Grades 6-8 about the Annual Health
Check-up.

Date: ,27 and 28 July 20XX
Time: 9:00 a.m. to 12:15 p.m.

Venue:

All students are requested to bring their
for the check-up.

For __ or further details
the undersigned.

Asma

Asma

In-charge

Unit 2.indd 57

Poorvi

 

| Unit 2.indd 58

I

II

I The word goshala translates to cowshed in English. It is a Sanskrit
word that is made up of the words go , which means cow , and Sala,

I

_

which means shed or hall .

Plan a visit with the teacher to a goshala and find out how the cows are

looked after.

Ayurveda is the oldest existing medical system in India. Animals
received good medicinal care in ancient India. Indian medical treatises
like Charaka Samhita, Sushruta Samhita, and Harita Samhita contain
references of care of animals. Find out names of different organisations

that work for the welfare of animals with the help of the teacher.

What is the best way to take care of stray and abandoned animals?
1. Provide food and water for the animal
2. Take them to an animal shelter
3. Adopt them by taking them home ( &) ANIMAL

Give reasons for your responses.

ADOPTION
& CARE

06-Mar-25 2:50:51 PM

Wirt anp Humour

A Funny MAN

Let us do these activities before we read.

Look around you for things or people that make you laugh. Write them in
the bubbles given below. Share the reasons for your answers with your
classmates and the teacher.

Unit 2.indd 59 06-Mar-25 2:50:52 PM

Poorvi

Let us read

One day a funny kind of man
Came walking down this street
He wore a shoe upon his head
And hats upon his feet.

He raised the shoe and smiled at me,
His manners were polite;

But never had I seen before

Such a funny sounding sight.

He said, Allow me to present
Your Highness with a rose. 
And taking out a currant bun
He held it to my nose.

I staggered back against the wall
And then I answered, Well!

I never saw a rose with such

A funny looking smell. 

He then began to sing a song,
And sat down on the ground;
You never heard in all your life
Such a funny feeling sound.

 My friend, why do you wear two hats
Upon your feet? I said.

He turned the other way about,

And hopped home on his head.

NATALIE JOAN

| Unit 2.indd 60 06-Mar-25 2:50:55 PM

Unit 2.indd 61

Wirt anp Humour

Let us discuss
I Work in pairs. Identify the true statements. Check your answers with
the teacher.
1. The poet says that she had never heard such an amusing song.
. The funny man was quite ill-mannered.
. The funny man wore two hats on his feet.
. The funny man hopped on his head to reach home.

. The funny man gave a rose to the poet.

rn a FPF WwW ND

. The funny man smiled at the poet.

II Identify the words from the poem based on the meanings given.
Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher.

1. asmallseedlessraisin - C RT

2. moved unsteadily - S GG D

III Complete the following sentences with a reason.
1. The tone of the poem is __ because

2. Therhymescheme ofthe poemis___ ;andit givesa
quality to the poem.

3. The poet has frequently repeated the word funny in order to

IV Choose the correct answer from the options given in the brackets.

1. The poem uses vivid imagery to create a
(humorous and nonsensical/ confusing but thought-provoking) scene.

2. The structure of the poem is in (monologue/ dialogue) form.
3. The phrases sounding sight and hopped home are examples of
. (alliteration/simile)
V_ Rewrite the following line from the poem in the correct order.
1. But never had I seen before

Such a funny sounding sight.

Sometimes, the poets change the word order (inversion) in a line
in order to maintain a rhythm.

\

2:50:55 PM |

Poorvi
2. Why has the poet used phrases like funny sounding sight and funny
feeling sound with reference to the funny man?

VI Can you think of any real-world situations where people do similar things
for fun, entertainment, or performance? Share with your classmates and
the teacher.

Let us think and reflect

I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow.

1. He said, Allow me _ to_ present
Your Highness with a_ rose. 
And taking out a currant bun
He held it to my nose.

I staggered back against the wall
And then I answered, Well! 

(i) Why does the funny man address
the poet as Your Highness ?

(ii) Choose a phrase from the extract
which indicates a polite request.

(iii) Choose the option which shows a currant bun .

Cw O@ 

A. Image 1 B. Image 2 C. Image 3 D. Image 4

(iv) Complete the sentence with an appropriate reason.

When the poet says, Well! , it expresses surprise. This was so
because

2. You never heard in all your life
Such a funny feeling sound.
 My friend, why do you wear two hats
Upon your feet? I said.

He turned the other way about,

And hopped home on his head.
| Unit 2.indd 62 06-Mar-25 2:50:57 PM

RY

Unit 2.indd 63

Wirt anp Humour

(i) Choose the line from the extract which tells us that
the sound was unique.

(ii) Complete the sentence with an appropriate reason.

The poet calls the funny man my friend because

(iii) What does the reaction of the funny man to the
poet s question tell us about him?

lca

(iv) Choose the correct option to complete the sentence.

The last line of the extract makes the readers feel

A. dreamy B. impatient C. worried D. cheerful

II Answer the following questions.

1. Which character trait of the funny man was most
appealing to you? Why?

2. The funny man does unusual things in the poem. How
does it affect the overall mood of the poem?

3. What alternative title would you suggest for the poem?
Give reason(s) for your choice.

4, Why do you think the poet has included dialogues in
the poem?

5. What does the poet wish to convey by highlighting the
unusual behaviour of the funny man?

Let us learn
Read the following phrases from the poem.

 walking down taking out e sat down

These are phrasal verbs.

Phrasal verbs are combinations of a verb with a preposition or
adverb that together function as a single unit. They often have
meanings that are different from the individual words used alone.
The same verb followed by different prepositions or adverbs conveys
different meanings.

g

I Match the phrasal verbs in Column 1 with their correct meaning in
Column 2.

(i) to understand or comprehend

1. take u .
 something
ii) to assume control or
2. take after (a) vy age .
responsibility for something
iii) to begin to study, practice, or
3. take in (iu) 6 . oP
do something
iv) to become successful
4. take over (iv)

popular quickly
5. take off (v) to resembl similar to
 A (usually a fami member)

Now, fill in the blanks with suitable phrasal verbs from the table given
in I. You may change the tense of the verb, if required.

1. The new technology is set to traditional methods of
communication.

2. I tried hard to what the writer wanted to say but
was unsuccessful.

3. Arjun decided to painting as a hobby. ,

4. The smartphone quickly the sales in the market.

5. Sheela her father; they have the same smile.

II Match the verbs in Column 1 with any suitable adverbs or prepositions
in Column 2. Write their meanings in Column 3. An example has been
done for you.

look after: take care of,

after, away, up,

for, in, on, into,
down, off, out

06-Mar-25 2:51:01 PM

A

Wirt ano Hu

Now, frame sentences of your own using any five phrasal verbs.

III Read the following words from the poem.
walking, staggered, hopped

The given words denote the different ways of walking.
Arrange the words given in the box in increasing order of pace.

Let us listen 2

I You will listen to a girl narrate a personal incident. As you listen, select
the picture related to the narration. (Transcript for the teacher on pg. 88)

Unit 2.indd 65

Poorvi

II You will once again listen to the girl narrate a personal incident. As you
listen, arrange the events in order of occurrence.

1. Ate lunch 2. Took off shoes
3. Put shoes in the room 4. Laughed at the mistake
5. Placed the plate in the room 6. Prepared for the presentation

7. Put the plate in the kitchen

Let us speak

Read the joke given below.

A man is talking to God.

The man says, God, how long is a million years? 
God replies, For me, it s about a minute. 
The man asks, How much is a million rupees? 
God smiles and replies, It s less than a rupee for me. 
The man quickly requests, God, may I have a rupee? 
God promptly says, Wait a minute. 
Work in pairs and take turns to tell the joke.
Remember:
e Narrator s voice your own voice (speak in a matter-of-fact manner)
e Man s voice - change to louder voice (speak with respect)
 God s voice deep voice (speak in a pleasant tone)

Now, work in pairs to create a joke and tell it in front of the class.

Let us write

I

A limerick is a nonsensical and funny verse consisting of five lines.
Study the limerick given below and identify the rhyme scheme.

1. There was an Old Man with a beard,
Who said, It is just as I feared!
Two Owls and a Hen,
Four Larks and a Wren,
Have all built their nests in my beard! 
Edward Lear

WAAAY

Ba La
AS NS
A
RR

Unit 2.indd 66 06-Mar-25 2:51:08 PM

Wirt anp Humour

Now, read another limerick
2. There were two friends in Bengaluru s lanes,
One loved books, the other flew planes.
They d laugh and they d play,
In their own unique way,
Creating stories and flying in dreams trains.

Remember all limericks have the same rhyme scheme AABBA.

II Follow the structure given below and write a limerick on your own.

Line 1 : Introduction There was a child from
of a person or place

Who

Lines 2-4: A silly story

She/He

Line 5 : An unexpected ending

Let us explore ,

I In ancient Indian literature and mythology, there are several humorous or funny characters who play important roles in the stories. These
characters often represent wit, humour and mischief while conveying
deeper moral lessons. Here are a few well-known funny characters:

Take any story to read and share it with your classmates and the teacher.

II We can identify the acts of the funny man with certain modern
day activities that have playfulness, or unconventional behaviour. ,*~
For example: |

,
v7 -7
/ . .
' STREET PERFORMERS OR CLowns: Like the funny man in the poem, modern! .
bos. day street performers or clowns often dress in unusual ways and do
iN
rs} unexpected acts to entertain people.
\ ~
\
XN
 NN
ee
XN
- -. ~
f \ ~

Unit 2.indd 67

Poorvi

PERFORMANCE ArT oR ApsstrAct THEATRE: The funny man s actions, such
as singing a song and hopping on his head, resemble performance art
or abstract theatre, where artists break conventional rules to create
thought-provoking, often humorous experiences.

CHILDREN s ENTERTAINMENT AND Comepy Suows: The funny man s behaviour
is reflected in children s shows to evoke laughter.

In these examples, the common theme is humour, imagination, and
defying logic or expectation, which is exactly what the funny man in the
poem represents.

II Sukumar Ray, an Indian poet and illustrator, wrote poems in a similar
style in his book Abol Tabol.

You may also share a similar poem from your native language with your
classmates and the teacher.

Unit 2.indd 68 06-Mar-25 2:51:12 PM

IV Read and enjoy the poem.

My Lost PENcIL

Oh pencil, dear pencil, where have you gone?
I just had you here a minute at dawn!

You were sharp and perfect, ready to write,
Now you're missing gone from sight!

Did you roll off my desk? Did you fall to the floor?
Did someone swipe you for sure?

It s always the same, I ve lost fifty this year,

By the end of the month, they just disappear!

Next time, I'll tie you with tape or a string,
Because losing my pencils is a real thing.

=

Unit 2.indd 69

Poorvi

Say THE RIGHT THING

Let us do these activities before we read.

I Work in pairs and discuss.

1.
Te

What does Athithi Devo Bhava mean?
Why is it important to be polite to guests?

II Choose the statements that display polite behaviour when you have
guests at home.

1.

a F&F wo NWN

Offer the guests a glass of water.

. Enquire about the well-being of the guests.
. Ask the guests when they would leave.
. Comment critically about the habits of guests.

. Accompany the guests to the door when they leave.

III Sometimes you find that a few friends in class are rude while disagreeing
with each other on certain issues. Work in groups. How would you deal
with such a situation? Share at least three ways in which you can do this.
&

| Unit 2.indd 70

06-Mar-25 2:51:21 PM

Wirt anp Humour

S fs Let us read

This is a humorous play in which a mother advises her
daughter to say the right thing at the right time. However,
when guests arrive, the daughter hilariously forgets her
mother s guidance.

hilariously: in
a very funny
way
blunders:

Read the play to find out how she commits blunders and _ @reless
embarrasses the guests as well as her mother. USE Soe

embarrasses:
Characters angles (date
guest
Mary SHAW : a young girl uncomfortable
Mrs. SHAW : Mary s mother
Mrs. Harpinc : the wife of Mr. Harding, a wealthy man &

Mrs. LEE : Mr. Harding s married sister

Scene I ,

Mrs. SHaw: The room looks cleaner now. Put that coat away in
your bedroom. This room isn t the place for coats.
Md
& , VA

Unit 2.indd 71 isi 2:51:23 PM

Poorvi

%

| Unit 2.indd 72

Mary

Mrs. SHAW:

Mary

Mrs. SHAW:

Mary

Mrs. SHAW:

Mary

Mrs. SHAW:

Mary

Mrs. SHAW:

Mary

Mrs. SHAW:

Mary

Mrs. SHAW:

Mary

Mrs. SHAW:

Mary

Mrs. Harding and Mrs. Lee will soon be here, and
they don t want to see that.

: You re always telling me to put things away.

Yes, Iam. You leave your clothes all over the house.

: Tm nota child!

No, you re not. So please keep your clothes in your
own room.

: Why are those two women coming here? Who s Mrs.

Harding?

She s the wife of a wealthy man, Mr. Harding. He
has just bought a big house in Lanfield. They lived in
London before. She s coming to have a talk. I met her
in a shop and asked her to come.

: Oh, I ve seen her children. They often come along the

road. Who s Mrs. Lee?

She s Mr. Harding s sister. She has been staying with
them for a while.

: What are you going to talk about?

I don t know. All kinds of things. One day you'll have
to go to some of these houses yourself and talk to the
people there.

: Ican talk now. I ve been able to talk for a long time.

Yes, that s true. You always talk too much. But does
anyone want to hear the things that you say?

: Ican talk very well when I like. Pll stay with you

today and talk to them when they come.

Oh, I don t think so. You can go out for a walk. It will
be better if you do that.

: Why?

If you stay with me, you may not say the right thing.

: I know the right things to say: Good afternoon ,

 How are you? and things like that. Let me stay
today. I can do it very well. ll show you. Anyone
can talk.

06-Mar-25 2:51:23 PM

Unit 2.indd 73

Mrs. SHAW:

Mary

Mrs. SHAW:

Mary

Mrs. SHAW:

Mary

Mrs. SHAW:

Mary

Mrs. SHAW:

Mary

: Tell me what to say.

You may stay if you like. But take
care. I want to know Mrs. Harding
well. I want her to ask me to go to
their house. There isn t much to
do here in Lanfield, and I want to
know some more people. I want
some more friends here. So take
care when you say anything.

I can t tell you everything, but
you'll always be right if you re
kind to people. Say things that
will please them. Then they'll like
you. Laugh a lot, and try to make
them laugh too. And if everyone stops talking, say
something to make them talk again. They don t want
to sit here and look at the floor without speaking.
Think of something to say.

: Ican do that. There s always something to say. Must I

do anything else?

When they are ready to leave, don t jump out of your
chair and look gladly at the door. You must look sorry
when they want to leave.

: What shall Ido when they want to go?

Ask them to stay a little while longer. Just say, Must
you go? Can t you stay? or something like that. You
like them and you want them to stay, and you must
let them understand that.

: That s not very hard, is it? Pll remember that. Must

you go? Can t you stay? Must you go? Can t you stay? 

That s right. Now take your coat to your room
and change into a clean dress. You must look nice
when they come. And if everyone stops talking, say
something kind to make them talk again. And don t
say anything that will make them angry.

: Iwill remember. I ve often done harder things than this.

Wirt anp Humour

Poorvi

Let us discuss

I Complete the table given below based on Scene I of the play. An example
has been done for you. Share your answers with your classmates and the
teacher.

Words of the Speaker

Mrs. Shaw __| The room looks cleaner To instruct Mary to keep
now. Put that coat away in | the room tidy
your bedroom.

Mary Youw re always telling me to
put things away.

I m not a child!

Mrs. Shaw To highlight the
importance of being kind
as a way to ensure Mary
says the appropriate things
when guests arrive

II Do you think Mary will be able to follow her mother s advice successfully
when Mrs. Harding and Mrs. Lee visit? Why or why not?

Scene II
Te

| Unit 2.indd 74 06-Mar-25 2:51:30 PM

Unit 2.indd 75

Mrs. SHAW

Mrs. HarpDING:

Mary

Mrs. HarpDING:

Mary

Mrs. HARDING:
: Oh!
: (quietly) They must be someone else s children.

Mary

Mrs. SHAW

Mary

Mrs. LEE

Mary

Mrs. SHAW

Mary

: So you like Lanfield, Mrs. Harding! I m very glad.

Yes, we like it very much. It s not the same as
London, but there are some very nice people
here, and we ve found a good house. (No one says
anything more, and Mrs. Shaw looks at Mary.)

: What beautiful children you have, Mrs. Harding!

I ve often seen them walking along the road.
Oh, I haven t any children.

: Oh, yes, you have! I ve seen them: a little boy and

a little girl.
(not very pleased) I have no children; believe me.

Have you met Mr. Best? He s a nice man. He lives
near you.

: Oh, Mr. Best! He lives here and he works in

London. He goes all the way to London by train
every morning, and then he comes all the way
back by train every night. He lives in trains! (she
laughs) What kind of life is that? Why do people
do things like that? They do not know how to live.
And he reads two newspapers in the train every
day. He never reads a book. But he s only a banker,
and bankers can t think.

: My brother s a banker. He goes to London by train

every morning and comes hack every night. He
reads two newspapers in the train in the morning,
and another every night.

: Oh, I m sorry. I didn t know.
: Bankers always have to read a lot of newspapers.

Do you know Mrs. Best? She s a nice woman. I like
her.

: But have you seen her clothes? She goes out in a

blue dress with a red coat over it. (she laughs)

Wirt anp Humour

Poorvi

Mrs. Harpinc: I have a blue dress, and I often put on my red coat
at the same time.

Mrs. SHaw__: (quickly) I like blue dresses and red coats. (No one
says anything.)
Mary : Isaw Mrs. Cotter this afternoon. I met her in the

street. No one sees her in the morning because she
always stays in bed then. And she s always asking
the doctor to go to see her. I can t understand
women who stay in bed in the morning. And why
must she always ask for the doctor? I ve never
been to a doctor in my life.

Mrs. Harpinc: I stay in bed in the morning myself.

Mrs. LEE : Ioften go to the doctor.
Mary : Oh, I m sorry. (No one speaks.)

. py 6OCMrs. Suaw : Do you know Mrs. Grantley? She s
one of my best friends.

Mary : But she s so_ talkative!
Talkative women aren t
very interesting, are they?

Mrs. LeE: My mother s a_ very
talkative woman.

Mary : Oh, I m sorry. I didn t know.
(No one says anything.)

Mary: (looking out of the window):
Oh, there s that dog again! It
always looks very dirty. I don t
like dogs, do you? Who wants
a dog? That dog s always near
our house. Why do people
keep dogs? Who wants a dog?
Why doesn t its owner keep it
clean? Have you seen it?

Mrs. Harpinc : (looking out of
the window) Yes, I ve seen it.
That s Towzer. It s our dog.

%

| Unit 2.indd 76 06-Mar-25 2:51:32 PM

Wirt anp Humour

Mary : (withared face) Oh, I didn t know! (No one speaks.)

Mary : (still looking out of the window) There s Mr.
Pomeroy on his horse. He s always talking about
horses. He rides a horse every day, and practises
shooting. Why must he do that? What have they
done to Mr. Pomeroy? Why do some men like
horses more than they like people? It s hard to
understand men.

Mrs. LEE : My brother practises shooting when he has the
time, and he rides his horse when he can. He sold
his house in London and bought a house here
because he wanted to ride and practise shooting.

Mrs. Harpinc: (looking at Mrs. Lee) It s getting a little late. We
must go now, Mrs. Shaw. It has been very nice to
have a little talk. (She looks at Mary.)

Mrs. LEE : Very nice. (She looks at Mary.)

Mrs. SHAaw__: It was very good of you to come to see us. Please
stay a little longer.

Mary : (unable to say the right thing even now) Oh, must
you stay? Can t you go?
G.C. THORNLEY
Let us discuss

I Rectify the false statements given below from Scene II of the play.
An example has been done for you. Share your answers with your
classmates and the teacher.

1. Mrs. Harding states that they do not like London as it is not the same
as Lanfield.

Rectification: Mrs. Harding states that they like Lanfield very much
even though it is not the same as London.

2. Mrs. Harding was pleased to know that Mary was familiar with her
children.

3. Mrs. Shaw shared that she liked Mrs. Best as she read a lot of
newspapers.

4. Mrs. Harding and Mrs. Shaw agree that wearing a blue dress with a
red coat is unfashionable.

5. Mary shares that she finds the dog outside the window cute.

\
Unit 2.indd 77 d-mahdg 2:51:32 PM |

Poorvi

Let us think and reflect

I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow.
1. Mary : What are you going to talk about?

Mrs. SHaw: I don t know. All kinds of things. One day you'll have to
go to some of these houses yourself and talk to the people
there.

Mary : Ican talk now. I ve been able to talk for a long time.

Mrs. SHaw: Yes, that s true. You always talk too much. But does anyone
want to hear the things that you say?

Mary : Ican talk very well when I like. I'll stay with you today and
talk to them when they come.

Mrs. SHaw: Oh, I don t think so. You can go out for a walk. It will be
better if you do that.

(i) What does Mrs. Shaw imply when she says, One day you'll have
to go to some of these houses yourself and talk to the people
there ?

A. She believes Mary should start learning about hosting
guests then.

B. She thinks Mary is ready to visit these houses independently.
C. She wants Mary to develop social skills for the future.

D. She hopes Mary will avoid these social interactions entirely.

(ii) Complete the following sentence with the correct option from
the brackets.

Mrs. Shaw and Mary are discussing how to
(have a polite conversation/ get to know people better)

(iii) Why did Mary insist on staying with her mother when the guests
arrived?

(iv) Match the following character traits to the characters in the
extract:

A. eager B. inexperienced C. cautious

Mary Mrs. Shaw
&

| Unit 2.indd 78 06-Mar-25 2:51:33 PM
2. Mary : Isaw Mrs. Cotter this afternoon. I met her in the street.

No one sees her in the morning because she always
stays in bed then. And she s always asking the doctor
to go to see her. I can t understand women who stay in
bed in the morning. And why must she always ask for
the doctor? I ve never been to a doctor in my life.

Mrs. Harpine : I stay in bed in the morning myself:

(i) Complete the following sentence suitably.
Mary could spot Mrs. Cotter in the street because

(ii) What does Mary s comment about Mrs. Cotter staying in bed and
calling the doctor suggest about her understanding?

A. She is worried about why Mrs. Cotter stays in bed all morning.
B. She is unable to understand why people need medical help.
C. She thinks Mrs. Cotter is scared and lonely for staying in bed.
D. She believes Mrs. Cotter is right to rest and take care of herself.
(iii) How can we say that Mary enjoyed good health?
(iv) Identify whether the following statement is true or false.

Mary might have unintentionally offended Mrs. Harding.

II Answer the following questions.

1.

Unit 2.indd 79

What does Mary s comment about Mr. Best s routine and profession
reveal about her viewpoint on bankers and their way of life?

. What can we infer about Mary s understanding of polite conversation

based on her interactions with the guests?

. What do you think the repeated stage direction no one speaks 

indicates about the atmosphere in the room when Mary speaks?

. How does Mary s attitude towards the guests change throughout

the play?

. What do Mrs. Harding s and Mrs. Lee s responses to Mary s blunders

during their visit reveal about their characters?

. In what way does the play show the importance of knowing how to

engage in polite conversation?

Wirt anp Humour

\
d-mahdg 2:51:33 PM |

<I

Let us learn

I Study the following words taken from the text.
humorous, hilariously, coming, beautiful

The given words are made by adding word endings like -ous, -ly, -ing,
and -ful to the root words humour, hilarious, come, and beauty. Such
word endings are called suffixes.

e humour + -ous qu. . . . 1
* hilarious + -ly | the spelling variant when the !
| 9 9 !
* come + -ing ; word ends in e as in come 
I
(

A

and y as in beauty .

ee - =
* beauty + -ful

Now, divide the following words from the text as root words and suffixes.
Check your answer with the teacher.

1. Study the words in Column 1. Match the suffixes in Column 2 with
their meanings or purpose in Column 3. Write a few examples for
each in Column 4. Share your answers with the teacher.

Biology (i) -logy, A. change to adverb Sociology

\

stopped (iii) -ed C. a study of

backward (iv) -ward__|D. change to

superlative
quietly (vi) -ly F. change to anoun oe
toughest G. ina certain direction oe

06-Mar-25 2:51:34 PM

Wirt anp Humour

2. Fillin the blanks using words given in the brackets by adding suitable

suffixes.

To communicate (i) (effective), choose your words and
topics (ii) (wise). Avoid (iii) (discuss) things
you don t know much about or that could upset someone. Remember
to be (iv) (respect) towards others, including yourself,
and express your (v) (appreciate). Finally, always be
(vi) (response) by replying promptly to communicate.

II Read the highlighted words in the following sentences from the text.
 But does anyone want to hear the things that you say?

 Ican t tell you everything.

Select the correct answer.
Is there a difference in the meanings of say and tell ? (Yes/ No)
* Say focuses on the message and does not always require a listener.
 Tell focuses on who receives the message and always needs a
listener.

1. Fill in the blanks with suitable words from the sets of words given in
the box below. Make changes in the verb forms (tense), if necessary.

* fetch : go somewhere to get something and bring it back
bring : take something with you to the place you are going

*see : something that we view, whether or not we pay
attention

look : focus your eyes ina certain direction by paying attention
* live : permanent place of residence

stay : temporary presence in a location as a guest or visitor
 study : spend time learning something as part of formal

education
learn : gain knowledge or skill through study or experience

* speak: express thoughts or ideas aloud, often in formal
situations

talk : engage in informal conversation with someone
e hear : perceive sounds unintentionally through the ears
listen : pay attention to sounds or speech intentionally

Unit 2.indd 81 do-mtahse 2:51:34 PM |

 

@) I at the photo, but I didn t anyone familiar.
(ii) 'd better go and my mother from the station, and then
her home.
(iii) I need to for my mathematics exam this weekend, so I
hope to new concepts along the way.
(iv) Ican the music from my neighbour s house, but I need
to to it carefully to understand the lyrics.
(v) Could I to Mrs. Kalpana, who is going to to us
about gardening, said Ritu.
(vi) I in asmall town, but I often with my relatives
in the city.

III Read the following sentences from the text and underline the verbs.
 They lived in London before.
 ITmet her ina shop and asked her to come.

SSN

As you know, the verbs you have underlined are in simple past tense.
(actions that happened in the past or distant past)

Read the following sentence from the text and underline the verb.
She has been staying with them for a while.

The verb you have underlined is in present perfect continuous tense.

Cy continuous (has/have + been + verb + -ing)

to indicate:
The auration Mag) action that started in the past and continues up

to the ey, moment.
 . has been preparing the room since the morning for
Mrs. Harding and Mrs. Lee s visit.
tion that was ongoing in the recent past, with its results
evident now. The focus is on the ongoing activity rather than its
ompletion.
* Mrs. Shaw has been cleaning the room since the morning.
(The room looks spotless now.)
* The students have been practising a play about the story.
(They are rehearsed and ready.)

06-Mar-25 2:51:35 PM

Unit 2.indd 83

Wirt anp Humour

1. Fill in the blanks using the verbs given in brackets in present

continuous or present perfect continuous tense.

The students (i)

stage. They (ii)

perfect. The performers (iii)
their excitement (iv)

Everyone (vi)

below.

Kinds of
Sentences

Declarative
sentences

Interrogative
sentences

Exclamatory
sentences

Imperative
sentences

Function

to state
or convey
information

to ask
questions

to express
strong feelings
or emotions

to give order,
command or
request

(organise) a play and setting up the
(prepare) for weeks to make everything
(rehearse) every day, and
(grow). The sound in-charge (v)
(test) the microphones to check the sound quality.
__ (work) hard, and now the place (vii)

Punctuation

end with a full
stop (.)

end witha
question mark
(?)

end with an
exclamatory
mark (!)

end with a full
stop (.)

(buzz) with energy and excitement.

IV Read the explanation about the kinds of sentences given in the table

Examples from
the text
There s always
something to say.

What shall I do
when they want to
 0?

What beautiful

children you have,
Mrs. Harding!

Put that coat away
in your bedroom.

1. Identify the kinds of sentences and punctuate them appropriately.

(i) the meeting starts at 10.00 a.m. in the conference room

(ii) what an exciting adventure it was

(iii) how did you solve the problem so quickly

(iv) what is the weather forecast today

(v) how beautiful is the rainbow

(vi) clean up your room before dinner

(vii) the children are planning a surprise party for their mom

(viii) turn off the music

do-mtahse 2:51:35 PM |

Poorvi
Let us listen

I Mrs. Shaw wanted Mary to learn to say the right thing. You will listen to
a conversation between a mother and her son about basic manners. As
you listen, fill in the blanks given below by selecting the correct option.
(Transcript for the teacher on pg. 89 )

1. How did the son behave in the grocery queue?
(i) strangely (ii) impatiently (iii) politely

2. The mother finally refers to her son asa

(i) polite youngman (ii) responsibleson (iii) grateful person
II You will once again listen to the conversation. As you listen, select four
true statements from 1-7 given below.

1. The mother uses the grocery store incident as an opportunity to teach
her son about patience and fairness.

2. The son recognises the value of apologising and understands that
it shows he notices others.

3. The son is gradually learning the importance of polite words and
actions from his mother s guidance.

4. The mother discourages her son from speaking softly in public,
suggesting that people should adjust to his voice level.

5. The son feels that covering his mouth when coughing is only
important when he s at home.

6. The son receives all advice readily while understanding its
importance.

7. The mother uses praise to support the polite behaviours she wants
her son to continue practising.

Let us speak

As you know

 Intonation is the rise and fall of the pitch of tone while speaking.

Let us learn about sentence stress.
 Sentence stress is laying emphasis on certain word(s) in a sentence.

 The emphasis on particular words helps to convey the meaning
and importance of the sentence.

St be

Unit 2.indd 84 06-Mar-25 2:51:35 PM

Wirt anp Humour

 Content words like book, run, beautiful, quickly, etc., are mostly
stressed instead of function words like she, in, is, etc., in a sentence.

I Speak the given declarative sentence aloud.

I saw Mrs. Cotter this afternoon.

 Use falling intonation towards end of the sentence as declarative
sentences usually have falling intonation.

e Stress the words Mrs. Cotter .

Remember, stress does not mean to say the word louder than others. It
means to say a word with more emphasis than others.

II Speak the following declarative sentences with falling intonation and
stress the highlighted words.

1. The room looks cleaner now. 2. You always talk too much.
3. You leave your clothes all over the house.
III Work in pairs and speak the following sentences 1-5 aloud, as Mary.

Apply stress and falling intonation. Match each of the sentences to the
meaning they convey in (i)-(v).

Sentences
1. I didn t hurt anyone today. 2. I didn t hurt anyone today.
3. Ididn t hurt anyone today. 4. I didn t hurt anyone today.

5. Ididn t hurt anyone today.

Meaning conveyed

(i) I might have done other things but did not hurt anyone.
(ii) I might cause hurt usually, but not anyone on this day.

(iii) The action of hurting anyone did not occur.

(iv) I, specifically, did not hurt anyone, possibly implying someone
else might have.

(v) I may have spoken a lot many things but not a single person
was hurt.

\

Unit 2.indd 85 d-mahdg 2:51:36 PM |

Poorvi
IV Now, speak the given declarative sentence with rising intonation towards
the end of sentence and stress the highlighted words.

I saw Mrs. Cotter this afternoon.

The rising intonation makes it sound like a question. It asks whether I
was the person who actually saw Mrs. Cotter: Did I see Mrs. Cotter this
afternoon?

Remember

The way we use stress and intonation in a sentence can change the
meaning of what we wish to say if we are not careful.

Let us write

Rewrite the play Say the Right Thing as a short story, focusing on Mary s
interactions with her mother and the guests.

 Ensure the story captures the main events, character emotions, and
humorous moments effectively.

 Use paragraphs to organise your story and include descriptive language
to bring the characters and events to life.
You may refer to the following hints:

 Begin with an introduction: describe Mary and Mrs. Shaw, their
relationship and the setting of the story.

 Explain Mrs. Shaw s instructions to Mary before the guests arrive and
Mary s confidence in handling the situation.

Narrate the events when Mrs. Harding and Mrs. Lee visit, highlighting
Mary s remarks and the guests reactions.

Include key moments of humour and awkwardness to maintain the tone
of the play.

Conclude by commenting on how the visit ended and Mary s impact on
the situation.

Let us explore

I Work in groups. Enact your favourite part of the play.

Points to remember:

 Allot a specific role to each member in the group.
For example: director, narrator, and characters

Unit 2.indd 86 06-Mar-25 2:51:36 PM

Unit 2.indd 87

II

Il

Include the actions and expressions as indicated
in brackets in the play.

Find out how people greet guests who visit their TAR 2023 INDIA

homes in different languages. Share it with your
classmates and the teacher.

 Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam (aaa @erren) is a
Sanskrit phrase which means the world is one family. Vasudha (aeen)
means Earth; eva (wa) translates to is thus and Kutumbakam (@errenn)
means family . The phrase originates from ancient Indian texts like
the Maha Upanishad and the Hitopadesha.

This saying highlights the interconnectedness of all people,
suggesting that humanity is part of a single global family. It
encourages unity, cooperation, and treating others with kindness
and empathy, regardless of differences in nationality, race, or
religion. The message is often used to promote global peace and
mutual understanding among diverse cultures and nations.
 Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam was chosen as the theme for the G20
Summit which captured the essence of global unity, common bonds,
and shared aspirations for a better future.

~- Lk
_
 --.
_~.

ONE EARTH ONE FAMILY * ONE FUTURE

TRANSCRIPTS

Let us listen (refer to page 55)

I You will listen to an announcement. As you listen, state whether the
following statement is true or false.

Greetings and attention everyone!

We are excited to announce the opening of Dr. John Dolittle s
new clinic in the town of Woodstock. The clinic is located at
12, Rose Lane. It will be open Monday to Friday from 9 a.m. to
5 p.m. Special timings for birds are on Saturdays from 11 a.m. to
2 p.m. Dr. Dolittle is renowned for his ability to communicate
with animals and shall ensure that they receive the best care
possible. All animals are welcome, from horses and cows to pets
and wild animals. For the best veterinary care, visit Dr. John
Dolittle s new clinic in Woodstock.

Thank you.

II You will listen to the announcement again. As you listen, complete the
details given below with one or two exact words you hear.

Let us listen (refer to page 65)

I You will listen to a girl narrate a personal incident. As you listen, select
the picture related to the narration.

Hello. This is quite a funny incident. One day, I was so preoccupied
with preparing for my presentation. After a long day of studying
at a friend s place, I finally came home. Exhausted, I removed
my shoes at the door and headed straight to the kitchen for some

06-Mar-25 2:51:37 PM

Wirt ano Hu

lunch. I served myself dal-chawal and ate it, still thinking about
all the topics I needed to cover.

Once I finished my lunch, I got up to put my shoes away in my
room and placed my plate in the kitchen. However, being so
preoccupied, I ended up doing the opposite! I walked to my room
with my plate in hand and left it on my desk. Then, I took my
shoes and placed them in the kitchen!

As I stood there, confused, I realised what I had done. I couldn t
help but laugh at myself. I shook my head, recovered my shoes
from the kitchen and kept the plate in the kitchen.

II You will once again listen to the girl narrate a personal incident. As you
listen, arrange the events in order of occurrence.

Let us listen (refer to page 84)

1 @

I Mrs. Shaw wanted Mary to learn to say the right thing. You will listen to
a conversation between a mother and ason about basic manners. As you
listen, fill in the blanks given below by selecting the correct option.
Mortuer : Why were you getting impatient in the grocery store?
Son : Was I really? I just didn t like waiting so long.

Mortuer :I know waiting can be boring, but remember, we
always stand in queues and wait for our turn. It s fair
for everyone, right?

Son : Hmm, I guess. Even if it takes a lot of time?

Motuer : Well, that s when we practise patience. And when it s
our turn, what do we say to the shopkeeper?

Son : Wesay, Thank you . And Please ifwe ask for something,
right?

Motuer : Yes! Those are polite words. Why do you think they re
important?

Unit 2.indd 89

Son : Maybe because they make people feel respected?

Motuer : Exactly! It shows gratitude and kindness. And what
about yesterday when you bumped into that lady with
the blue sari?

Son : Oh, I said sorry right away. You always tell me it s
important to apologise.

Motuer : That s true. Why do you think it s important to
apologise?

Son : Um... so people know I didn t mean to do it and that I
care?

Motuer : Yes, it shows you re responsible. And how about when
we're in places like the library? What kind of voice
should we use?

Son : Oh, I know this! We speak softly so we don t bother
others.

Motuer : Right again! It s called using an inside voice .

Son : I know. I also know that we should cover our mouth
when we yawn, sneeze or cough in a gathering or a
public place.

Motuer : Absolutely! You re getting really good at remembering
these things. And when we talk at home or school, what
should we do when someone else is speaking?

Son : We wait for our turn. It s not well-mannered to
interrupt.

Motuer : You ve got it, Rohan. You re becoming a really polite
young man.

Son : Thanks, Ma. So, do you think I ll be ready to handle the
grocery queue next time?

Motuer : Certainly! And maybe we can get some ice cream as a
reward if you do it well.

Son : Deal! And... thank you!

II You will once again listen to the conversation. As you listen, select four
true statements from 1-7 given below.

06-Mar-25 2:51:38 PM