PoorRVI

Textbook of English for Grade 7

Oe ra)

i

o773

fagen s qaneqTa

vada anzct
NCSERT

za Ver sym sie ura aRaq
NATIONAL COUNCIL OF EDUCATIONAL RESEARCH AND TRAINING

Prelims.indd 1 06-Mar-25 4:41:39 PM

0773 - PoorvIi
Textbook of English for Grade 7

ISBN 9'78-93-5729-759-2

ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

QO) No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a
retrieval system or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise
without the prior permission of the publisher.

QO This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by
way of trade, be lent, re-sold, hired out or otherwise disposed
of without the publisher s consent, in any form of binding or
cover other than that in which it is published.

QO) The correct price of this publication is the price printed on
this page, Any revised price indicated by a rubber stamp or

by a sticker or by any other means is incorrect and should

be unacceptable.

First Edition
March 2025 Phalguna 1946

PD 1500T GS

 National Council of Educational

Research and Training, 2025
OFFICES OF THE PUBLICATION

DIVISION, NCERT

NCERT Campus
Sri Aurobindo Marg
New Delhi 110 016 : 011-26562708

108, 100 Feet Road

Hosdakere Halli Extension

Banashankari Ill Stage

Bengaluru 560 085 : 080-26725740

Navjivan Trust Building i
P.O. Navjivan
Ahmedabad 380 014 : 079-27541446

CWC Campus

Opp. Dhankal Bus Stop

Panihati a
Kolkata 700 114 : 033-25530454

CWC Complex Maligaon
Guwahati 781 021 : 0361-2674869

Publication Team

Head, Publication : M.V. Srinivasan
Division

Chief Editor : Bijnan Sutar

Chief Production Officer : Jahan Lal

(In charge)

Chief Business Manager : Amitabh Kumar

Printed on 80 GSM paper with NCERT
watermark

Assistant Editor : Garima Syal

Production Officer : Sunil Sharma

Published at the Publication Division
by the Secretary, National Council of
Educational Research and Training,
Sri Aurobindo Marg, New Delhi 110016
and printed at Laxmi Offset Printers,
G- 115, Heerawala Industrial Area,
Kanota, Agra Road, Jaipur

Cover, Illustrations and Layout
Blue Fish Designs Put. Ltd.

Prelims.indd 2 10-Mar-25 3:56:55 PM

FOREWORD

The National Education Policy 2020 envisages a system of education in the
country that is rooted in Indian ethos and its civilisational accomplishments
in all domains of human endeavour and knowledge while at the same time
preparing the students to constructively engage with the prospects and
challenges of the 21st century. The basis for this aspirational vision has been
well laid out by the National Curriculum Framework for School Education
(NCF-SE) 2023 across curricular areas at all stages. Having nurtured the
students inherent abilities touching upon all the five planes of human
existence, the pafichakoshas in the Foundational and the Preparatory Stages
have paved the way for the progression of their learning further at the Middle
Stage. Thus, the Middle Stage acts as a bridge between the Preparatory and
the Secondary Stages, spanning three years from Grade 6 to Grade 8.

The NCF-SE 2023, at the Middle Stage, aims to equip students with the
skills that are needed to grow, as they advance in their lives. It endeavours
to enhance their analytical, descriptive, and narrative capabilities, and
to prepare them for the challenges and opportunities that await them. A
diverse curriculum, covering nine subjects in three languages including at
least two languages native to India Science, Mathematics, Social Sciences,
Art Education, Physical Education and Well-being, and Vocational Education
promotes their holistic development.

Such a transformative learning culture requires certain essential
conditions. One of them is to have appropriate textbooks in different
curricular areas as these textbooks will play a central role in mediating
between content and pedagogy a role that will strike a judicious
balance between direct instruction and opportunities for exploration and
inquiry. Among the other conditions, classroom arrangement and teacher
preparation are crucial to establish conceptual connections both within and
across curricular areas.

The National Council of Educational Research and Training, on its part, is
committed to providing students with such high-quality textbooks. Various
Curricular Area Groups, which have been constituted for this purpose,
comprising notable subject-experts, pedagogues, and practising teachers as
their members, have made all possible efforts to develop such textbooks.
Poorvi, the English language textbook for Grade 7 is one of these. Its content
comprises stories, poems, and narratives that ensure a reflection of their
social, cultural, and geographical landscapes wherein students are sure to
find traces of their lived experiences. Poorvi also weaves into its contents

vin |
f/f |

| / J | b6-Mar.25\4:41:41 P

i

Mi

snippets from the vast treasure-trove of Indian Knowledge Systems, India s
artistic and cultural heritage, and embeds values alongside ecological
sensitivity, gender equality, digital skills, etc. For all practical purposes, it
has, to my mind, succeeded in its Curricular Goals: first, to foster natural
curiosity among students through a proper selection of content, and second,
develop among them the core competencies in listening, speaking, reading,
and writing by intelligently designing various activities around them,
thereby seamlessly integrating vocabulary and grammar within meaningful
contexts.

However, in addition to this textbook, students at this stage should also
be encouraged to explore various other learning resources. School libraries
play a crucial role in making such resources available. Besides, the role of
parents and teachers will also be invaluable in guiding and encouraging
students to do so.

With this, I express my gratitude to all those who have been involved in
the development of this textbook, and hope that it will meet the expectations
of all stakeholders. At the same time, I also invite suggestions and feedback
from all its users for further improvement in the coming years.

DINESH PRASAD SAKLANI

Director,
New Delhi National Council of Educational
February 2025 Research and Training

| \
| \' \06-Mar-25) 4:41311 PM \

ABOUT THE BOOK

Poorvi, a textbook of English for Grade 7, is developed in alignment with
the vision of the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 and the National
Curriculum Framework for School Education (NCF-SE) 2023. Language
education is essential for effective communication, aesthetic expression and
appreciation. Reasoning and critical thinking are very closely linked with
language use, and these are valuable capacities to be developed. Language
development plays an important role in the development of perceptual and
practical concepts, and also enables us to check our experiences with others
to ensure that we have a shared meaning emerging from these experiences.
The textual material developed for the Middle Stage will take children well
beyond the Preparatory Stage.

Curricular Goals, competencies, and learning outcomes have been the
guiding principles while developing the textbook. The Curricular Goals (CG)
cover a range of competencies. The NCF-SE 2023 has stated the following
Curricular Goals:

CG-1: Develops independent reading, comprehension, and summarising
skills of a variety of texts (stories, poems, extracts of plays, essays,
articles, and news reports).

CG-2: Attains the ability to write about thoughts, feelings, and experiences
of social events.

CG-3: Develops the capacity for effective communication using language
skills for questioning, describing, analysing, and responding.

CG-4: Explores different literary devices and forms of literature.

CG-5: Develops the ability to recognise basic linguistic aspects (word and
sentence structure) and use them in oral and written expression.

CG-6: Develops an appreciation of the distinctive features of the language,
including its alphabet and script, sounds, rhymes, puns, and other
wordplays and games unique to the language (pp. 245-246).

The Curricular Goals have been covered through a variety of themes
and an array of activities. There are five thematic units that comprise
stories, poems, conversation, narrative and descriptive pieces. Themes
such as learning together, wit and humour, dreams and discoveries,
travel and adventure and homage to bravehearts have been included.
Cross-cutting themes, such as Indian Knowledge Systems, values, heritage,
gender sensitivity, and inclusion have been integrated in all the units. Each
unit has three literary pieces story, poem, conversation or non-fiction.

/|
f/f |

06-Mar-25 \4:41:42 P

Mi

\

There are in-text questions, Let us discuss to assess comprehension of the
text. The end-of-the-text questions given in Let us think and reflect are
designed to encourage critical thinking, reasoning, responding, analysing, etc.

Unit 1 Learning Together encourages students to explore the
interconnectedness of nature and human life. The story, The Day the River
Spoke , emphasises the importance of respecting and listening to nature.
The river encourages Jahnavi to overcome her fears and societal barriers
by boldly pursuing her desire for education, assuring that her courage can
make a difference. The poem, Try Again inspires resilience and the power
of perseverance, encouraging students to view challenges as stepping stones
to success. The poem leaves a powerful impact on the readers, inspiring
them to achieve their best goal in life. Three Days to See presents a touching
narrative of a girl who cannot see and that invites learners to appreciate
their senses and value the beauty of the world around them.

Unit 2 Wit and Humour engages students with a light-hearted story,
poem, and play. These delightful works showcase the charm of intelligence,
humour and laughter. The amusing tale of Animals, Birds, and Dr. Dolittle 
will help students explore the idea of a doctor who learns animal language.
He not only communicates with animals but also treats their ailments with
empathy. The story is a fable that entertains and also educates about animal
care. The poem, A Funny Man celebrates humour which can be unfamiliar
that can spark curiosity and amusement. Say the Right Thing highlights the
comic consequences of miscommunication. The play focuses on the fact that
itis important to say the right thing at the right time. We must listen carefully
to what others are saying and we must think before we speak.

Unit 3 Dreams and Discoveries captures the essence of wonder and
imagination of children. It also sparks curiosity and creativity, encouraging
students to explore how dreams and discoveries shape the world. My
Brother s Great Invention is a humorous story about a boy who likes to
discover new things around him. This leads to an unexpected encounter
with a thief. The story highlights determination, creativity, and sibling bonds,
teaching students the value of trial and error in discovery. The poem Paper
Boats uses the imagery of paper boats to symbolise dreams and aspirations.
Students will reflect on the joy of simple pleasures and the universal desire
to connect with the unknown. North, South, East, West will help students
appreciate the diversity that exists in our country. The narrative presents
postcards from a girl exploring India s diverse landscapes with her parents.
The vibrant observations will foster an appreciation for the country s rich
cultural and natural heritage.

J\/ | |

}
\\ Ml Ly 3 PM \ |

Unit 4 Travel and Adventure ignites the spirit of exploration and
aims to cultivate curiosity, resilience, and a sense of wonder. The story, The
Tunnel will take students on an adventurous episode ina tunnel, highlighting
the excitement of discovery and the courage to face the unknown. It also
conveys the concept of maturing through self-exploration. The poem, Travel 
revolves around the theme of exploring the unknown and a strong desire to
travel. Train is used as a symbol to embark on to new adventures with new
people. The sun s journey is used as a metaphor for constant movement and
the human urge for exploration. Conquering the Summit is a non-fiction
piece on Arunima Sinha, the first female amputee to scale Mount Everest
to accomplish her dream. This will inspire students with her extraordinary
determination and perseverance.

Unit 5 Bravehearts instills a sense of patriotism and gratitude in
students, celebrating the courage and sacrifices of the valiant who have
selflessly laid down their lives for the nation. A Homage to Our Brave Soldiers 
is a tribute to the real heroes of our nation our soldiers, the embodiment
of patriotism. The poem My Dear Soldiers is a heartfelt acknowledgement
of the courage, dedication, and sacrifice of the soldiers who tirelessly defend
the nation, often in harsh and unforgiving conditions. The graphic story of
 Rani Abbakka is a tale of a fearless queen, who defied Portuguese colonial
powers with resilience and military acumen. She exhibited indomitable
courage, valour, and determination.

These literary pieces serve not only as sources of entertainment but
also as repositories of valuable life lessons, fostering personal growth and
equipping children with skills to navigate social situations with confidence.
By resonating with children s daily experiences, the selected pieces promote
positive values such as resilience, empathy, and emotional intelligence,
thereby exerting a profound impact on their overall development.

The primary focus lies in cultivating competencies in listening, speaking,
reading, and writing while concurrently developing vocabulary and
grammar in context. Language learning truly comes to life when connected
to the immediate environment of learners, allowing them to express their
thoughts, feelings, and experiences through experiential learning. All the
activities are conveniently colour coded under headings such as Let
us discuss , Let us think and reflect , Let us speak , Let us listen , Let us
learn , Let us write and Let us explore . Let us Explore extends learning
beyond the text, staying within the unit s theme. It aims to connect students
with the Indian Knowledge System, fostering an appreciation for our rich
heritage and culture, encouraging students to delve deeper, engage in

vin |
f/f |

| / J | 06-Mar.25\4:41:43 P

i

Mi

meaningful discussions, and broaden their understanding. In-text activities
and exercises at the end of each chapter are thoughtfully designed to be
engaging, fostering joyful learning experiences while serving as tools for
assessment as and for learning. Illustrations have been carefully crafted to
depict context and enhance comprehension.

We sincerely hope that students will enjoy doing these activities, and
develop language competencies.

Kirti Kapur

Professor of English,

Academic Coordinator,

Department of Education in Languages,
NCERT, New Delhi

Vili

+n f \/ | ) /|

e

 

NATIONAL SYLLABUS AND TEACHING

LEARNING MATERIAL COMMITTEE
(NSTC)

. M.C. Pant, Chancellor, National Institute of Educational Planning and
Administration (NIEPA), (Chairperson)

. Manjul Bhargava, Professor, Princeton University, (Co-Chairperson)

3. Sudha Murty, Acclaimed Writer and Educationist

. Bibek Debroy, Chairperson, Economic Advisory Council to the Prime
Minister (EAC PM)

. Shekhar Mande, Former Director General, CSIR; Distinguished Professor,
Savitribai Phule Pune University, Pune

. Sujatha Ramdorai, Professor, University of British Columbia, Canada

7. Shankar Mahadevan, Music Maestro, Mumbai

10.
11.

12.

13.
14.
15.
16.

17.

18.

19.

. U. Vimal Kumar, Director, Prakash Padukone Badminton Academy,
Bengaluru

. Michel Danino, Visiting Professor, IT - Gandhinagar
Surina Rajan, JAS (Retd.), Haryana, Former Director General, HIPA

Chamu Krishna Shastri, Chairperson, Bharatiya Bhasha Samiti, Ministry
of Education

Sanjeev Sanyal, Member, Economic Advisory Council to the Prime
Minister (EAC PM)

M.D. Srinivas, Chairperson, Centre for Policy Studies, Chennai
Gajanan Londhe, Head, Programme Office
Rabin Chhetri, Director, SCERT, Sikkim

Pratyusha Kumar Mandal, Professor, Department of Education in Social
Sciences, NCERT, New Delhi

Dinesh Kumar, Professor, Department of Education in Science and
Mathematics, NCERT, New Delhi

Kirti Kapur, Professor, Department of Education in Languages, NCERT,
New Delhi

Ranjana Arora, Professor and Head, Department of Curriculum Studies
and Development, NCERT (Member-Secretary)

I} \

| \ / / \ \
| \ / V, \
\\ \ \ y / 06-Mar25 \4:41:-43 PMI | |

TEXTBOOK DEVELOPMENT TEAM

CONTRIBUTORS

N. Nagaraju, Professor and Vice Chancellor, Gangadhar Meher University,
Sambalpur, (Team Leader)

Anju Gandhi, Academic Consultant, Sri Sri Ravi Shankar Vidya Mandir Trust,
Bengaluru

Girish Nair, Senior Member, Samvit Research Foundation, Bengaluru

Nidhi Tiwari, Professor, Department of Education in Languages, NCERT,
New Delhi

Rachana Chattopadhyay, PGT English, Cambridge School Srinivaspuri,
New Delhi

Ruchi Sengar, CBSE Subject Expert; ELT Consultant, New Delhi

Saket Bahuguna, Assistant Professor, Central Institute of Hindi-Delhi Centre,
New Delhi

Sasi Raj, PGT English, PM Shri Kendriya Vidyalaya, DIAT, Pune

Suganya J., HoD, English, Bala Vidya Mandir Senior Secondary School, Adyar,
Chennai

Sushmita Roy Choudhury, Dean Academics, G.D. Goenka Public School, Jammu

Kirti Kapur, Professor, Department of Education in Languages, NCERT,
New Delhi, (Member-Coordinator)

oN
ff

& 1} | \ } ;
| i} \ |

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The National Council of Educational Research and Training (NCERT)
acknowledges the guidance and support of the esteemed Chairperson and
members of the National Curriculum Framework Oversight Committee
for their invaluable contributions in overseeing the translation of NCF-SE
2023 perspectives into the textbook. NCERT is also deeply grateful to the
Chairperson, Co-Chairperson, and members of the National Syllabus and
Teaching-Learning Material Development Committee for their continuous
guidance and thorough review of the textbook. Furthermore, NCERT extends
its heartfelt thanks to the Chairpersons and members of the Sub-Group:
English of the Curricular Area Group (CAG): Languages, as well as other
relevant CAGs, for their support and guidelines on the cross-cutting themes.

The Council is grateful for granting permission to reproduce copyright
material in this book and would like to thank the National Book Trust for
an extract from the story The Day the River Spoke by Kamala Nair; Anita
Rau Badami for My Brother s Great Invention from Battling Boats, Katha;
C.G. Salamander for North, South, East, West ; Ruskin Bond for The Tunnel 
from Great Stories for Children; Ministry of Culture (GOI) for Rani Abbakka 
from Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav.

We also acknowledge the following: Eliza Cook for Try Again from
The Poetical Works of Eliza Cook; Helen Keller for Three Days to See 
from The Atlantic Monthly January 1933); Hugh Lofting for Animals,
Birds, and Dr. Dolittle from Frederick A. Stokes Company ; Natalie
Joan for A Funny Man from Poems Children Will Sit Still For: A Selection
for the Primary Grades; G.C. Thornley for Say the Right Thing ; Edna
St. Vincent Millay for Travel from her collection Poems by Edna St. Vincent;
Rabindranath Tagore for Paper Boats ; A.P.J. Abdul Kalam for My Dear
Soldiers from https://abdulkalam.nic.in/dr-apj-abdul-kalam/poetry/my-dearsoldiers.

The Council acknowledges the support of Amarendra Behera, Professor
and Joint Director, CIET; Pratyusha Kumar Mandal, Professor and Head,
DESS; Sunita Farkya, Professor and Head, DESM; Indrani Bhaduri, Professor
and Head, ESD; Vinay Singh, Professor and Head, DEGSN; Milli Roy, Professor
and Head, DGS; and Jyotsna Tiwari, Professor and Head, DEAA, along with
their teams, for their meticulous efforts in ensuring the seamless integration
of cross-curricular aspects throughout the textbook and linkages with other
curricular areas.

We are also grateful to Md. Farug Ansari, Professor and Head, Department
of Education in Languages, for providing academic and administrative
support. The Council acknowledges Geetanjali Kumar, PGT English, PM Shri
Kendriya Vidyalaya No.1, Kozhikode, Kerala for her valuable inputs.

vin |
{i} | \*\
/ J | b6-Mar.25\4:41:44

[

Mi

\

A)

| |

The Council acknowledges and appreciates the contributions made
by Monika Dohare, Senior Research Assistant; Asma Rafiq, Junior Project
Fellow; Deepa Dubey, Junior Project Fellow; Faizy Abdul Kalam, Junior Project
Fellow; and Abhishek Kumar, Junior Project Fellow from the Department of
Education in Languages, NCERT for providing support in the development
of the textbook.

Special thanks are also due to the Publication Division, NCERT for
their support. NCERT gratefully acknowledges the contributions made
by Pawan Kumar Barriar, Incharge, DTP Cell; Kanchan Mishra, Ambuj
Mishra, and Keshav Saroyan, Proofreaders (Contractual); Mohammad Wasi,
Vivek Rajpoot, DTP Operators (Contractual); Himani, Graphic Designer
(Contractual); and Shadab Khan, Computer Typist (Contractual).

Copyright has been applied for all the texts and the publisher extends
apologies for any omissions and would be glad to hear from any such
unacknowledged copyright holders.

Poorvi

The textbook of English for Grade 7 is titled Poorvi after the
Indian raga Poorvi . This raga is said to promote harmony
and serenity. It is associated with dusk, specifically sunset
time (Sandhi Prakash). Each raga in Indian music carries its
own emotional significance and is symbolically connected to
certain seasons, times of day, and moods. Ragas are believed
to evoke specific emotions in listeners.

Poorvi is an ancient and traditional Hindustani classical
raga that originated in eastern India. It is typically performed
during the fourth prahar of the day, between 3:00 p.m. and
6:00 p.m. It evokes a sense of calmness and contemplation in
the journey of learners, symbolising a harmonious blend of
traditional and modern learning.

CONTENTS

Foreword
About the Book

Unit 1: Learning Together
The Day the River Spoke
Try Again
Three Days to See

Wit and Humour

Animals, Birds, and Dr. Dolittle
A Funny Man

Say the Right Thing

Dreams and Discoveries

_ My Brother s Great Invention
Paper Boats
North, South, East, West

Travel Adventure

The Tunnel \
4 @

Travel

a the Summit { ~ 166

: a
5: Bravehearts

nage to Our Brave Soldiers fe:
liers eer)

ae

yl /
9 re ae ALD [tt age Se er eT ll aA \ F : '

THE CONSTITUTION OF
INDIA

PREAMBLE

WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having
solemnly resolved to constitute India into a
 [SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST SECULAR
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC] and to secure
to allits citizens:

JUSTICE, social, economic and
political;

LIBERTY of thought, expression, belief,

faith and worship;

EQUALITY of status and of opportunity;
and to promote among them all

FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of
the individual and the *[unity and
integrity of the Nation];

IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY
this twenty-sixth day of November, 1949 do
HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO
OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION.

Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, Sec.2,
for "Sovereign Democratic Republic" (w.e.f. 3.1.1977)

Subs. by the Constitution (Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, Sec.2,
for "Unity of the Nation" (w.e.f. 3.1.1977)

ie j | | \ VA \06-Mar-25) 1:41 f}6 PM \ |

\ | Prelims.inddl {