i )

Ww hy

ie

i

) j 1
Vee Nik UAE ios.

THE TUNNEL :

Let us do these activities before we read. srvacnos

I What kind of an adventure activity would you like to be a part of ;
Now, choose the option(s) that best applies to you.
1. How would you like to spend your weekends?
(i) Trying new activities (ii) Reading a book |
(iii) Spending time with friends (iv) Learning something new.
2. Which of these places would you prefer to explore?
(i) Dense forests and clear streams
(ii) Magical lands with fairies
(iii) Busy cities with interesting people
(iv) Quiet places to think and create
3. Which one of these activities would you prefer to do?
(i) Climbing a mountain or exploring a jungle

(ii) Finding a hidden treasure or discovering a
secret world

(iii) Solving puzzles or guessing riddles with friends

(iv) Making something creative or building a model

| Unit 4.indd 139 07-Mar-25 1:52:07 PM

Poorvi

Based on your choices, which of the following do you think applies
the best to you? Discuss with your classmates.

* Bold Explorer Imaginative Dreamer
 Energetic Planner Thoughtful Creator

You may add to the list as per your choices.

Let us read

shimmered:

shined with

a light that I

appears to

move It was almost noon, and the jungle was very still, very silent.
railway Heat waves shimmered along the railway embankment where
embankment: it cut a path through the tall evergreen trees. The railway lines
a stone wall were two straight black serpents disappearing into the tunnel
made to carry in the hillside.

the railway over . . wie . .
Suraj stood near the cutting, waiting for the midday train. It

low ground ; ; ; _

: was?ta station, and he wasn t catching a train. He was waiting
cutting: a so that he could watch the steam engine come roaring out of
narrow valley

the tunnel.
cut through a
hill to make < He had cycled out of the town and taken the jungle path until

space for a he had come to a small village. He had left the cycle there, and
railway line walked over a low scrub-covered hill and down to the tunnel
scrub-covered: .

; exit.
covered with
short trees and Now he looked up. He had heard, in the distance, the shrill
bushes whistle of the engine. He couldn t see anything, because

the train was approaching from the other side of the hill;
| Unit 4.indd 140 07-Mar-25 1:52:08 PM

al

but presently a sound like distant thunder issued from the
tunnel, and he knew the train was coming through.

y 4

ae

A second or two later, the steam engine shot out of the tunnel,
snorting and puffing like some green, black, and gold dragon,
some beautiful monster out of Suraj s dreams. Showering
sparks left and right, it roared a challenge to the jungle.

Instinctively, Suraj stepped back a few paces. Waves of hot
steam struck him in the face. Even the trees seemed to flinch
from the noise and heat. And then the train had gone, leaving
only a plume of smoke to drift lazily over the tall shisham
trees.

The jungle was still again. No one moved.

Suraj turned from his contemplation of the drifting smoke and
began walking along the embankment towards the tunnel.

The tunnel grew darker as he walked further into it. When
he had gone about twenty yards, it became pitch dark. Suraj
had to turn and look back at the opening to reassure himself
that there was still daylight outside. Ahead of him, the tunnel s
other opening was just a small round circle of light.

The tunnel was still full of smoke from the train, but it would
be several hours before another train came through. Till then,
the cutting belonged to the jungle again.

TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE

instinctively:
without thought
or plan

flinch: make a
quick movement
plume of
smoke: long,
thin cloud of
smoke
shisham: a

tree found in
northern parts
of India
contemplation:
deep thought
reassure:
comfort, calm

141 <

Hg
# ts
Ni 1:52:10 PM

Poorvi

scuttled: ran Suraj didn t stop, because there was nothing to do in the tunnel
hurriedly and nothing to see. He had simply wanted to walk through, so
that he would know what the inside of a tunnel was really

need like. The walls were damp and sticky. A bat flew past. A lizard
bright Tak scuttled between the lines.
swishing: Coming straight from the darkness into the light, Suraj was

moving with a dazzled by the sudden glare and put a hand up to shade his
brushing sound eyes. He looked up at the tree-covered hillside and thought he
saw something moving between the trees.

It was just a flash of orange and gold,
and a long swishing tail. It was there
between the trees for a second or
two, and then it was gone.

About fifteen metres from the
entrance to the tunnel stood the
watchman s hut. Marigolds grew in
front of the hut, and at the back there
was a small vegetable patch. It was
the watchman s duty to inspect the
tunnel and keep it clear of obstacles.

Every day, before the train came
through, he would walk the length of
the tunnel. If all was well, he would

return to his hut and take a nap. If something was wrong,
ohstacles: he would walk back up the line and wave a red flag, and the

block the way engine driver would slow down. At night, the watchman lit

an oil lamp and made a similar inspection of the tunnel. Of
porcupine: a course, he would not stop the train if there was a porcupine
small animal on the line. But if there was any danger to the train, he d go
Ween aes back up the line and wave his lamp to the approaching engine.
on its hack P If all was well, he d hang his lamp at the door of his hut and

go to sleep.

< He was just settling down on his cot for an afternoon nap
when he saw the boy emerge from the tunnel. He waited until
Suraj was only a metre or so away and then said, Welcome,
welcome. I don t often have visitors. Sit down for a while, and
tell me why you were inspecting my tunnel. 

 Ts it your tunnel? asked Suraj.

 

| Unit 4.indd 142 07-Mar-25 1:52:11 PM

TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE

 a

4 > 7 |
 

 It is, said the watchman. It is truly my tunnel, since no one
else will have anything to do with it. I have only lent it to the Ne
Government. 

v

Suraj sat down on the edge of the cot.

 I wanted to see the train come through, he said. And then,
when it had gone, I thought I d walk through the tunnel. 

 And what did you find in it? 

 Nothing. It was very dark. But when I came out, I thought I
saw an animal up on the hill but I m not sure, it moved off
very quickly. 

 It was a leopard you saw, said the watchman. My leopard. 
 Do you own a leopard too? 

 T do. 

 And do you lend it to the Government? 

 T do not. 

 Is it dangerous? 

 No, it s a leopard that minds its own business. It comes to this
range for a few days every month. range: area

 Have you been here a long time? asked Suraj.

 Many years. My name is Sunder Singh. 

 My name s Suraj. 

 There is one train during the day. And there is one train

Unit 4.indd 143

Poorvi

night mail: a during the night. Have you seen the night mail come through
train that runs the tunnel?

at night No. At what time does it come? 

 About nine o clock, if it isn t late. You could come and sit here
with me, if you like. And after it has gone, instead of going to
sleep I will take you home. 

 T ll ask my parents, said Suraj. Will it be safe? 

 Of course. It is safer in the jungle than in the town. Nothing
happens to me out here. But last month, when I went into
town, I was almost run over by a bus. 

Sunder Singh yawned and stretched himself out on the cot.
 And now I am going to take a nap, my friend. It is too hot to
be up and about in the afternoon. 

 Everyone goes to sleep in the afternoon, complained Suraj.
 My father lies down as soon as he s had his lunch. 

 Well, the animals also rest in the heat of the day. It is only the
tribe of boys who cannot, or will not, rest. 

Sunder Singh placed a large banana leaf over his face to
keep away the flies, and was soon snoring gently. Suraj stood
up, looking up and down the railway tracks. Then he began
walking back to the village.

Let us discuss

1. Suraj compares the train to a magical creature. Pick the phrases that
convey the meaning.

2. Suraj knew that the train was close by because

3. What did Suraj see inside the tunnel?
4. Select the correct option.
What does Sunder Singh convey about the tunnel?

He says that (it is damp and sticky inside/he has
lent it to the Government).

5. The watchman has created a system through which he informs the
locomotive driver about any danger in the tunnel. The following flow
chart shows this system. Refer to the text and complete the flow chart.

 

| Unit 4.indd 144 07-Mar-25 1:52:13 PM

TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE

Goes to take
anap

Walks the length
of the tunnel

found
Waves his

lamp to
warn the

locomotive
driver

I

The following evening, towards dusk, as the flying foxes 
swooped silently out of the trees, Suraj made his way to the swooped:

watchman s hut. moved quickly
. through the air
It had been a long hot day, but now the earth was cooling,and gqownwards

a light breeze was moving through the trees. It carried with it
the scent of mango blossoms, the promise of rain.

Sunder Singh was waiting for Suraj. He had watered his small
garden, and the flowers looked cool and fresh. A kettle was

boiling on a small oil stove. seven sisters:

birds, also
 Iam making tea, he said. There is nothing like a glass of hot called jungle
tea while waiting for a train. babblers and

found in groups
of six to eight

They drank their tea, listening to the sharp notes of the
tailorbird and the noisy chatter of the seven sisters.

Unit 4.indd 145 f

Poorvi

As the brief twilight faded, most of the birds fell silent. Sunder
Singh lit his oil lamp and said it was time for him to inspect the
tunnel. He moved off towards the tunnel, while Suraj sat on
the cot, sipping his tea. In the dark, the trees seemed to move
closer to him. And the nightlife of the forest was conveyed on
the breeze the sharp call of a barking deer, the cry of a fox,
quaint: unusual the quaint tonk-tonk of a nightjar. There were some sounds
ithe a that Suraj didn t recognise sounds that came from the trees,
nocturnal bird creakings and whisperings, as though the trees were coming to
withashortbill life, stretching their limbs in the dark, shifting a little, flexing

flexing: bending their fingers.

trimming: Sunder Singh stood inside the tunnel, trimming his lamp.

(here) adjusting The night sounds were familiar to him and he did not give

the wick of the them much thought; but something else a padded footfall, a

lamp rustle of dry leaves made him stand still for a few seconds,
peering into the darkness. Then, humming softly to himself, he
returned to where Suraj was waiting. Ten minutes remained
for the night mail to arrive.

As Sunder Singh sat down on the cot beside Suraj, anew sound
reached both of them quite distinctly a rhythmic sawing
sound, as if someone cutting through the branch of a tree.

 What s that? whispered Suraj.
 Tt s the leopard, said Sunder Singh. I think it s in the tunnel. 
 The train will soon be here, said Suraj.

 Yes, my friend. And if we don t drive the leopard out of the
tunnel, it will be run over and killed. I can t let that happen. 

 But won t it attack us if we try to drive it out? asked Suraj,
beginning to share the watchman s concern.

 Not this leopard. It knows me well. We have seen each other
many times. It has a weakness for goats and stray dogs, but it
will not harm us. Even so, I ll take my axe with me. You stay
here, Suraj. 

 No, m coming with you. It will be better than sitting here
alone in the dark! 

 All right, but stay close behind me. And remember, there is
nothing to fear. 
| Unit 4.indd 146 07-Mar-25 1:52:14 PM

Unit 4.indd 147

Raising his lamp, Sunder Singh advanced into the tunnel,
shouting at the top of his voice to try and scare away the
animal. Suraj followed close behind, but he found he was
unable to do any shouting. His throat was quite dry.

They had gone about twenty paces into the tunnel when the
light from the lamp fell upon the leopard. It was crouching
between the tracks, only five metres away from them. It was
not a very big leopard, but it looked lithe and sinewy. Baring
its teeth and snarling, it went down on its belly, tail twitching.

Suraj and Sunder Singh both shouted together. Their voices
rang through the tunnel. And the leopard, uncertain as to how
many terrifying humans were there in the tunnel with him,
turned swiftly and disappeared into the darkness.

To make sure that it had gone, Sunder Singh and Suraj walked
the length of the tunnel. When they returned to the entrance,
the rails were beginning to hum. They knew the train was
coming.

Suraj put his hand to one of the rails and felt its tremor. He
heard the distant rumble of the train. And then the engine
came round the bend, hissing at them, scattering sparks into
the darkness, defying the jungle as it roared through the steep

TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE

lithe: thin,
graceful

sinewy: lean
and muscular

snarling:
growling

twitching: a
short, sudden
movement

defying:
opposing

\
\ VN
07-Mar\ 25 1:52:17 PM

Poorvi

sides of the cutting. It charged straight at the tunnel, and into it,
thundering past Suraj like the beautiful dragon of his dreams.

she gevnid when it had gone, the silence returned and the forest

mA seemed to breathe, to live again. Only the
rails still trembled with the passing of
the train.

They trembled again to the passing of the
same train, almost a week later, when
Suraj and his father were both travelling
in it.

Suraj s father was scribbling in a
notebook, doing his accounts. Suraj sat
at an open window staring out at the
darkness. His father was going to Delhi
on a business trip and had decided
to take the boy along. ( I don t know
where he gets to, most of the time, he d
complained. I think it s time he learnt
something about my business. )

The night mail rushed through the forest with its hundreds of
passengers. The carriage wheels beat out a steady rhythm on
the rails. Tiny flickering lights came and went, as they passed

flickering: : : ;

burning small villages on the fringe of the jungle.

unsteadily Suraj heard the rumble as the train passed over a small bridge.

fringe: edge It was too dark to see the hut near the cutting, but he knew
they must be approaching the tunnel. He strained his eyes
looking out into the night; and then, just as the engine let out

shrill: sharp a shrill whistle, Suraj saw the lamp.

sound He couldn t see Sunder Singh, but he saw the lamp, and he

knew that his friend was out there.

The train went into the tunnel and out again; it left the jungle
< behind and thundered across the endless plains.

Suraj stared out at the darkness, thinking of the lonely cutting
in the forest and the watchman with the lamp, who would
always remain a firefly for those travelling thousands as he lit
up the darkness for steam engines and leopards.

RuskIN BonpD

N
a

 

| Unit 4.indd 148 07-Mar-25 1:52:18 PM

TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE

Let us discuss
1. Sunder Singh knew that the leopard was in the tunnel because

2. Why do you think Suraj was unable to do any shouting in the tunnel in the
beginning?

(i) He was afraid of the leopard.
(ii) He didn t want to disturb the leopard.
(iii) He was trying to listen for the leopard.
(iv) He didn t really believe Sunder Singh.
3. What made the leopard disappear into the darkness?
4. How did Suraj know Sunder Singh was at the tunnel?

5. Why did Suraj s father take him along to Delhi?

Let us think and reflect

I Read the following lines and answer the questions that follow.

1. Suraj had to turn and look back at the opening to reassure himself
that there was still daylight outside. Ahead of him, the tunnel s other
opening was just a small round circle of light.

The tunnel was still full of smoke from the train, but it would be several
hours before another train came through. Till then, the cutting belonged
to the jungle again.

Suraj didn t stop, because there was nothing to do in the tunnel and
nothing to see. He had simply wanted to walk through, so that he
would know what the inside of a tunnel was really like.

(i) Write whether the following statement is true or false.

Suraj looked back at the opening of the tunnel
to check if the train was coming.

(ii) Choose the correct option to complete the
sentence given below.

Suraj did not stop anywhere in the tunnel
because _

A. there was nothing to see in the tunnel
B. the tunnel was damp and sticky
C. he was in a hurry to get out of the tunnel

D. it was time for another train to come

Unit 4.indd 149

Poorvi

(iii) What does the sentence Till then, the cutting belonged to the
jungle again mean?

(iv) Suraj wanted to know the inside of the tunnel. What character
trait of Suraj is highlighted here?
2. The train will soon be here, said Suraj.

 Yes, my friend. And if we don t drive the leopard out of the tunnel, it
will be run over and killed. I can t let that happen. 

 But won't it attack us if we try to drive it out? asked Suraj, beginning
to share the watchman s concern.

 Not this leopard. It knows me well. We have seen each other many
times. It has a weakness for goats and stray dogs, but it will not harm
us. Even so, I'll take my axe with me. You stay here, Suraj. 

(i) What was the watchman s concern?
(ii) Complete the sentence with a suitable reason.

Sunder Singh was sure that the leopard in the tunnel would not
attack him and Suraj because

(iii) Select the sentences that are true from those given below.
A. Suraj wants to see the leopards in the jungle.
B. Suraj is concerned about Sunder Singh s safety.
C. The leopard in the tunnel attacks goats and stray dogs.

D. Sunder Singh wants to protect Suraj.
E. Sunder Singh knows all about the animals in the jungle.
(iv) Choose the correct option to complete the sentence.

Sunder Singh decides to take his axe with him. This tells us that
he was

A. violent B. cautious C. bold D. afraid

II Answer the following questions.

1. What does Sunder Singh convey by saying that he has lent his tunnel
to the Government?

2. According to Sunder Singh, It is safer in the forest than in the town .
What example does Sunder Singh give to support his opinion? What
does this tell us about him?

3. Sunder Singh has become part of the jungle life. Support the view
with a suitable reason.

a

 

| Unit 4.indd 150 07-Mar-25 1:52:21 PM

Unit 4.indd 151

TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE

4. Sunder Singh and Suraj form an_ unlikely friendship.
What draws them together?

5. Why is Sunder Singh referred to as a firefly ?

6. Do you think Suraj is an adventure-loving boy? Give reasons.

> Let us learn

I Complete the following sentences using the suitable phrases from the
text given in the box below.

 = j= He He HK- Ke HK HK MK Ke eK eK eK Me eK Ke Ke eK eK eK eK eK eK Ke eK eK eK eK eK eK eK eK eK ee eK eK eK eK eK eK eK eK He

1. We could hear the of the train long before it
came into view at the station.

2. The street was completely dark but the little boy walked to his house
guided by the from the houses.

3. The from the carpenter s workshop grew
louder every hour.

4. From the balcony, she watched the from her
neighbour s chimney float across the backyard.

II The text has many sound words . Some of these words are given in
Column 1 and their meanings are given in Column 2. Match the words
with their meanings. You can use a Os

YPIZ
Columns) _fetumn2_)

1. creaking (i) making a noise like a long s sound (
2. chatter (ii) making a long low sound when a \
xO door or wooden object moves or

xX is moved

3. hissing (iii) repeated series of short high
sounds made by birds or monkeys

4. rust (iv) blowing with short, quick blasts,
as the wind
5. puffing (v) asoft low, dry sound made by

the movement of things such as ~ eS
leaves, paper, etc.

WN V4

fy

Now, complete the sentences given below by filling in the blanks with
the correct form of the sound words given in Column 1.

1. The steam engine reached the station black smoke
into the sky.

2. Suddenly the snake raised its hood and made a

noise.

3. When the wind blew, I heard the of the wooden
roof.

4. He heard a of leaves behind him when he was

walking in the woods.

5. Iget disturbed by the continuous of the monkeys in
the neighbourhood.

II Read what the watchman Sunder Singh did regularly at the tunnel as
part of his duty. Notice the use of would .

Every day, before the train came through, he would walk the length of

the tunnel. If all was well, he would return to his hut and take a nap. If
something was wrong, he would walk back up the line and wave a red flag LF
and the engine driver would slow down. At night, the watchman lit an oil

lamp and made a similar inspection of the tunnel.

1. Why is the word would used here?
(i) to make a polite request
(ii) to express a desire

(iii) to talk about a habit in the past

In these sentences, the word would is used to speak about a past habit.

Would isused in these sentences to describe repeated activities for
rio time in the past. We call them habitual or routine actions

ape
inthe past .
=_.

Would and used to both describe something that happened regularly in
the past. However, used to indicates a past action that doesn t happen
any longer.

 I used to paint when I was in Grade 4.
 Riya used to eat a lot of junk food, but she stopped last year.

2. Complete the sentences using the verb in brackets with the correct
form of used to or would . An example has been done for you.

A

07-Mar-25 1:52:22 PM

TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE

When I was a child we used to live in a village near a forest. Back then,

we (i) (grow) vegetables in our back garden. Every day
we (ii) (get up) early and go for a walk. The weather in
summer (iii) (be) really nice. There was a lake near the
house and we (iv) (go) there every Sunday for a picnic.
Winters (v) (be) rather cold. In the evenings, my father
(vi) __ (tell) us incredible stories and we (vii)

(listen) with admiration.

IV We use punctuation marks to make our writing clear. You already know
how to use full stops and commas. Let us look at three more punctuation
marks brackets, semicolon, and colon.

Colon (:) is used to introduce a list or an explanation.

 You need the following ingredients to make Ela Ada: ghee, coconut,
jaggery, and rice flour.

 He has one goal: to win the championship.

Semicolon (;) is used to connect two clauses which are closely related
without a conjunction.

 She loves reading; he prefers watching movies.

 Suraj followed close behind; but he found he was unable to do any
shouting.

Now, use semicolons and colons to punctuate the following paragraph.

We explored the busy by-lanes of Charminar, the heart of Hyderabad
it was an exciting day. We wanted to do a few things buy bangles,
taste biryani, and purchase pearl earrings, which are special to this
area. As we walked through the lanes, we saw stalls selling spices,
clothes, and jewellery the market was full of colours. We visited
some famous spots Charminar, Golconda Fort, Salar Jung Museum,
and Chowmahalla Palace each place was beautiful.

Or

I an Let us listen

A famous museum in your town is organising a treasure hunt in the museum
premises. You and your friends decide to participate in it. Upon arrival, you
find that there are many other teams. Each team is given an audio guide
(recorded information) anda map to the museum. (Transcript for the teacher
on pg. 176)

\
Unit 4.indd 153 dr-mahsg 1:52:22 PM |

Poorvi

Listen to the audio recording and as you listen, mark your map with the
route to take to find the treasure. To help you, the names of a few rooms in
the museum are given below. Now listen to the audio and mark the various
rooms.

library auditorium weapon room art gallery
musical instruments hall

You are here

=> Closed for

Renovation

Let us speak

Anju is going on a trekking trip with her family during the summer vacation.
They have reached the railway station. Anju calls the tour manager for
directions to the trekking site.

Work in pairs and have this conversation. Student A will play the role of
Anju and mark the route on the map given below. Student B will play the
role of the tour manager. Looking at the map, give directions to reach the
trekking site from the railway station. You may use phrases like the ones in

the box to help you.

; turn left turn right keep going straight till...
! take the next left take the next right take the roundabout :
take the second left start from... on the opposite side |
right around the corner in front of next to

al

 

| Unit 4.indd 154 07-Mar-25 1:52:22 PM

TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE

Lassi
Corner

Let us write

Write a descriptive paragraph about your experience of a train journey.
Describe the sights, sounds, and feelings you experienced during the
journey. Include details about the people around you, the scenery
outside, and the atmosphere inside the train to make your paragraph
vivid and engaging.

You may use the following guidelines to help you create the paragraph.

 Start with how the journey began: boarding the train, finding your
seat, and the initial impressions.

 Describe the sounds: the whistle of the train, the chatter of
passengers, and the rhythmic clatter of wheels on the tracks.

 Mention the sights: the changing scenery outside the window, the
hustle and bustle inside the train, and any interesting moments.

 Reflect on your feelings: Were you excited, relaxed, or curious? How
did the journey make you feel overall?

Unit 4.indd 155

Poorvi

Let us explore J ove \

_

The Nation s pride Atal Tunnel is 9.02 kilometres long. It runs under the
Rohtang Pass. It was constructed on the Manali-Leh Highway under the
challenging conditions of freezing temperatures in extremely difficult
terrain. The Atal Tunnel has officially been certified by World Book of
Records as the World s Longest Highway Tunnel above 10,000 Feet !

II The history of Indian Railways spans over 165 years. On 16 April 1853,
the first passenger train ran between Bori Bunder (Mumbai) and Thane,
covering 34 kilometres. It was operated by three locomotives named
Sahib, Sultan, and Sindh and had thirteen carriages. In 1864, the North
received its first station, Delhi Junction, near Chandni Chowk.

You may refer to the given link to know more about Indian Railways.

https://artsandculture.google.com/story/a-history-of-indian-railwaysnational-rail-museum/cAVh7RwikiTtKg?hl=en

%

| Unit 4.indd 156 07-Mar-25 1:52:23 PM

 
ig 7
Des 7
, \ /
7 1 ,
I 1.7
Suef
7
a
:
9 qi
i $
z Ne
Ne
Ee
A
s
Hi
sul
Ea ||| |
O
mh %
*
i |
\
is
| *
|
ih :
| c
\ j
Ss lin Ree
s
N tyrcyy } pe
= 1 ' i >
oS went ] t a
TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE

TRAVEL

Let us do these activities before we read.

I Complete the following word web on travel.

bus, work,
Feelings po 1 | Adventure Activities |
i joy, | Travel| *' exploring,
: : / a \ =e ,
Destinations Challenges +
| riverside, | bad weather,
\ i] Lt J

II You are going on a trip to an adventure camp
with your classmates and teacher.

1. How will you travel to the adventure camp?
2. What things will you take along?

3. Why would you like to go there?
. What are the activities you would like to do
with your friends?

5. How much time will it take to complete
your adventure trip?

Let us read
The railroad track is miles away,

And the day is loud with voices speaking,

Yet there isn t a train goes by all day
But I hear its whistle shrieking.

All night there isn t a train goes by,
Though the night is still for sleep and dreaming,
But I see its cinders red on the sky,
And hear its engine steaming.

 My heart is warm with the friends I make,
And better friends I ll not be knowing;

Yet there isn t a train I wouldn t take,

No matter where it s going.

Epna St. VINCENT MILLAY

Unit 4indd 158)

Unit 4.indd 159

TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE

Let us discuss
I The main ideas of each stanza of the poem are given below. Write the
number of the stanza against the matching main idea.

1. At night, the speaker imagines the train and hears its engine in
the quiet.

2. The speaker feels a strong desire to take any train, no matter where
it goes.

3. The speaker hears the train whistle during the day, even though the
train is far away.

II Read the poem and underline the rhyming words in each stanza.
Write the rhyming words from each stanza. An example has been done
for you.

1. Stanza (i): away-day;
2. Stanza (ii):
3. Stanza (iii):
III Identify the rhyme scheme of the poem from the options given below.
1. AABB 2. ABCA 3. ABAB 4, ABBC

IV Identify the word in the poem that personifies the whistle of the train.

V Tone refers to the attitude the poet has about the poem. Which of these
words can be used to describe the poet s tone in this poem?

' serious excited curious worried thoughtful
' content enthusiastic critical joyful

VI Select the words that tell us what the train symbolises for
the poet.

1. education 2. adventure 3. comfort
4. opportunities

VII Complete the following by choosing the correct option
from those given in brackets.

The poet repeats the line, ...there isn t a train goes by, in all
three stanzas to . (highlight the speaker s fascination
with the train/suggest that the area has many trains passing
through)

07-Mar;25 1:52:24 PM

Poorvi

VIII The poem contrasts the busy day with the stillness of the night.
What is the common factor in these?

IX Imagery is a literary device that uses descriptive language to create
mental pictures and appeal to the reader s senses (sight, sound,
smell, taste and touch). It makes the descriptions more relatable.

Select the phrases from the poem that are examples of imagery. One
example is given: day is loud.

Let us think and reflect

I Read the extract given below and answer the questions that follow.

1. My heart is warm with the friends I make,
And better friends I'll not be knowing...

(i) Choose the suitable option to complete the following.
The line My heart is warm refers toa heart thatis__.
A. filled with worries
B. full of love
C. feeling upset
D. experiencing anger

(ii) What does the speaker say about her current friends?

(iii) What does the line better friends Pll not be knowing suggest
about the speaker s feelings toward their current friends?

(iv) Complete the following suitably.

The tone of the speaker in these lines is _ . (grateful/content)

II Answer the following questions.

1. What does the phrase cinders red on the sky tell us about the train
at night?

2. What is the significance of the repeated references to the train s
whistle?

3. What does the line no matter where it s going reveal about the
speaker s attitude towards travel?

4. Do you think the poet actually sees and hears the train? Why or
why not?
| Unit 4.indd 160

N
a

07-Mar-25 1:52:25 PM

TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE

Let us learn

I Read the expressions from the poem given in Column 1 and match them
with what they indicate in Column 2.

. miles away (i) The speaker s affection for their
friends

. cinders red (ii) The fast and powerful movement of
the train

. heart is warm (iii) The busy and noisy atmosphere
during the day

. day is loud (iv) The glow of the train s sparks lighting
up the night sky

. engine steaming (v) The distance of the train from t
speaker

Now, use the expressions in Column 1 to fill in the following blanks
correctly.

1. After meeting her old friend, her with the joy of rekindled
memories.

2. As I arrived at the railway station I could hear the

3. The marketplace is bustling, and the with the chatter of
shoppers and vendors.

4. The bonfire glowed brightly, throwing into the dark night sky.

5. The sound of a train could still be heard as the evening grew
quiet.

II The poet uses the word shrieking to tell us about the sound of the train s
whistle. There are other words that tell us about different types of related
sounds.

Read the meanings of such words in Column 1 and match them with the
words in Column 2. You may use a dictionary. Share your answers with
your classmates and the teacher.

1. shouting loudly, ofteninanger (i) wailing
or excitement

2. crying out in fear or excitement (ii) hollering

Unit 4.indd 161

Poorvi

3. crying loudly with grief or (iii) screeching
sorrow

4. making a high-pitched, piercing (iv) yelling
sound

5. calling out loudly, often in a (v) whimpering
casual or informal way

6. crying softly in a low, broken (vi) bawling
voice

7. crying loudly and (vil) screaming
uncontrollably

Now, complete the following paragraph by using suitable words from
Column 2.

The street was filled with a variety of sounds. Ashopkeeper was1._
to attract customers, while a child nearby was 2. at his friend to
wait for him. From the other side of the road, a toddler was 3.
uncontrollably after dropping his ice cream, and his mother tried to
calm him as he began 4. softly. In the background, someone s
loud 5. voice added to the bustling noise of the busy evening.

Ryo
| | Let.us listen

I Listen to this announcement made in the morning assembly
about a school trip to the National Science Centre. As you listen,
circle the information that is not correct. (Transcript for the
teacher on pg. 177)

1. The trip to the National Science Centre is organised on 15
September.

2. Students will start from school at 8.00 in the morning and
return by 5.00 in the evening.

3. Refreshment will not be provided during the trip.

4. Students are permitted to carry a phone, a notebook, and
a pen.

5. The permission slip is to be signed by the class teacher.

6. The permission slip is to be submitted to your class teacher
by 10 September.

7. Mr. Mukherjee is the Adventure Club in-charge.

N
a

&

| Unit 4.indd 162 07-Mar-25 1:52:26 PM

TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE

II Now, listen to the announcement again and rectify the sentences.

Pa Zz
x

Let us speak

When speaking in English, small differences in pronunciation can change the
overall meaning of the words. One such difference is in the pronunciation of
the consonant c .

For example: cat (uses /k/ sound for c ) and city (uses the /s/ sound for c )

The poem uses the word cinders , which is pronounced with a /s/ sound.

The letter c has two sounds. It can be pronounced as a /k/ or /s/ sound.
But which is right depends on the next letters of the words.

* Letter c produces /s/ sound if it is followed by the letters e , i , A
or y . For example, city ( c is followed by i ). This /s/ sound is

known as the soft c sound.

* Letter c produces /k/ sound if it is followed by the letters a , o ,
or uw or aconsonant at the end of the word. For example, cat ( c 
is followed by a ). This /k/ sound is known as the hard c sound.

That is why cinders is pronounced with a /s/ sound. The letter c is followed
by 7!

Now, work in pairs. Pronounce the given words aloud. Keep the rules of the
soft and hard c pronunciation in mind.

cell cable race cake decide receive
| concert circle bicycle echo uncle

Let us write

Poorvi

Day
Bright, sunny
Dancing, playing, running

= _ Out comes the sun, down goes the sun
Resting, listening, dreaming
Quiet, peaceful
Night

In this example we see how two different ideas day and night are
connected through the poem.

Let usnow write a diamante poem that connects reading and adventure .

are

er rs

OY
linking your topics

three -ing words about
adventure

Share your poem with your classmates and the teacher.

II We come across many interesting characters while travelling. They
become interesting because of their actions, their behaviour, and
manner of speaking. Describe one such character that you met. Follow
these steps.

1. Choose the character.
2. Create a first draft of your description including the following details.
(i) What is the name of the character?
(ii) What does the character look like?
(iii) What does the character do?

164 gr

Unit 4.indd 164 07-Mar-25 1:52:26 PM

TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE

(iv) What kind of person is she or he?

(v) Include any line or incident from the text that you like the most.
3. Check your description for any spelling mistakes or errors.
4. Show your classmates your work and ask for suggestions.

5. Rewrite your description including all the changes and suggestions
for improvement.

Let us explore

I The Mountain Railways of India are outstanding examples of hill
railways and they are designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site
under the name Mountain Railways of India. These three railways are
the Darjeeling Himalayan Railway, the Nilgiri Mountain Railway, and the
Kalka-Shimla Railway.

The Matheran Hill Railway and Kangra Valley Railway are on the
tentative list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites. rs

They are still fully operational as living examples of the ingenious engineering enterprise of the late nineteenth and early twentieth \
centuries. The owner of the three properties is the Railway Ministry of ~
the Indian Government.

N

V7
on

In groups of four, find out more about these heritage trains and make a
presentation in the class.

II As an excellent example of the Make in India success story, the Indian
Railways launched India s first indigenous semi-high-speed train,
Vande Bharat Express. It has become a symbol of India s aspirations for
modern, efficient, and comfortable rail travel. The first Vande Bharat
Express train was flagged off on 15 February 2019, on the New DelhiKanpur-Allahabad-Varanasi route, running at a speed of 160 kilometres
per hour.

Courtesy PIB. Posted on: 02 September 2024 3:41p.m.
In groups of four, find out more about these heritage trains and make a
presentation in the class. 7 et
III Some of the underwater rail tunnels are the Thames Tunnel in London,
) the Seikan Tunnel in Japan and the Channel Tunnel between England
' and France.

mes India s first underwater metro route in Kolkata started in March 2024.
vss A part of this special metro line runs beneath the Hooghly River.

s. IV Which of these trains do you think would be adventurous to travel in ?
ae Discuss among yourselves.

Unit 4.indd 165

CONQUERING THE SUMMIT

Let us do these activities before we read.

I Identify the activities represented by the icons given below. Share your
answers with your classmates and the teacher.

II Work in pairs and discuss the following questions.
1. Why do you think people undertake the activities identified above?
2. How would they prepare for these activities?
3. Which one of them do you find the most exciting? Why?

Share your answers with the teacher.

III Work in pairs to complete the word web given below. Share the answers
with the teacher.

 

| Unit 4.indd 166 07-Mar-25 1:52:28 PM

Unit 4.indd 167

>=. Let us read

This is a story that narrates the triumph of will,
courage, determination, and dedication. Arunima
Sinha s journey from a devastating accident to
scaling the highest peak in the world stands as a
beacon of hope and resilience. In 2011, at the age
of 24, Arunima Sinha, a national-level volleyball
player, faced a life-altering event. It challenged
her in ways she could never have imagined. As
she lay in the hospital bed with one leg amputated,
Arunima made a vow that many would deem
impossible: not only to walk again with a
prosthetic leg but to scale Mount Everest. In 2013,
she did just that, becoming the first Indian female
amputee to achieve this feat. Hence, in 2015, she
was awarded the Padma Shri, the fourth highest
civilian award in India. She was also awarded the
Tenzing Norgay National Adventure Award and
National Award for Best Female Mountaineer.

Arunima hails from Ambedkar Nagar, a small district in Uttar
Pradesh. Her father was an army engineer, and her mother
worked as a health supervisor. Sports were a significant part
of Arunima s life, with her family having a natural inclination
towards athletics. After completing her law degree following
her post-graduation, Arunima decided to pursue a job in the
paramilitary forces, which would allow her to continue her
passion for sports while having a regular income.

On the fateful night of 11 April 2011, she met with a train
accident. The hours that followed were harrowing. She never
imagined she would survive that night, but survive she did,
miraculously, displaying an extraordinary will to live. Arunima
received a prosthetic leg and underwent physiotherapy. It was
during this period that she made a profound decision. Inspired
by an article about Mount Everest, she resolved to conquer
the highest peak in the world.

To pursue her ambition, Arunima Sinha completed a
basic mountaineering course at the Nehru Institute of
Mountaineering in Uttarkashi, followed by eighteen months
of rigorous training. Arunima approached Bachendri Pal, the

TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE

Courtesy: Hindustan Times

beacon:

source of
inspiration
resilience:
ability to
recover quickly
from a difficulty

amputated: cut
off a part of the
body (here the
leg)

prosthetic leg:
an artificial

leg that helps
people to move
around easily

feat:
achievement
harrowing:
extremely
disturbing and
painful

rigorous:
severe

Unit 4.indd 168

Poorvi

a (1A | 2

NEHRU INSTITUTE oF = =

(MOUNTAINEERING 3 _< x

endeavour: an
attempt to do
something

surge: a sudden
and great
increase

endurance:
(here) ability to
continue doing
something
difficult for a
long time

first Indian woman to summit Everest, to guide her in the
endeavour. Bachendri Pal instilled confidence in Arunima
and said, My child, you decided to climb Mount Everest in
these situations with a prosthetic leg you have conquered
the Everest within you; the world will realise it later. 

On 21 May 2013, after 52 exhausting days, Arunima Sinha
reached the summit of Mount Everest. Standing at the top
of the world, she felt a surge of emotions pride, relief, and
an overwhelming sense of achievement. She displayed the
Indian flag at the summit and left behind a photograph of her
idol, Swami Vivekananda, whose teachings had inspired her
throughout her journey.

Arunima s feat did not end with Everest. By July 2016, she
had summited seven peaks in Europe, Africa, Australia,
South America, North America, and
of course, Mount Everest in Asia.
In January 2019, she climbed the
seventh peak on Antarctica and
became world s first female amputee
to climb Mount Vinson. Her goal to
complete the Seven Summits was
achieved.

Throughout her journey, Arunima
has faced numerous challenges and
setbacks. Yet, her story is not just about
physical endurance but

a also about mental

= . p

07-Mar-25 1:52:29 PM

Asia T Ap
. RAVEL AND ADVENTURE
South America

North America Everest

; Aconcagua Africa
. Europe Denali
Antarctica Kilimanjaro
Elbrus Australia

Vinson

Kosciuszko

fortitude and the power of a positive mind set. Her message is itude:_
simple yet profound: Never give up and work hard. Always rage over a
remember your goal and work on it. long period

Arunima s autobiography, Born Again on the Mountain: A Story oat
of Losing Everything and Finding It Backrecordsher incredible * difficult

journey to the top of the world. It is a story of triumph over vcctaments
adversity, a testament to the human spirit s capacity to rise aon ,
above the most challenging circumstances. conferred:

She was conferred with the honorary doctorate by the _ givenan official
University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK. In her words, Failure _ title or honour
is not when we fall short of achieving our goals. It is when
we don t have goals worthy enough. Never forget your goal, BORN AG AIN
respect it, work hard, and youwillbethe winner. Dr.Arunima 9
Sinha has not only conquered mountains but has also won [ie MOUNTAIN
people s hearts the world over, inspiring them to reach their i 

own summits.

Let us discuss

I Read the statements given below and explain each statement in your
words.

1. Arunima Sinha is considered a beacon of hope and resilience.
2. Arunima decided to climb Mount Everest despite losing her leg.

3. Bachendri Pal s guidance was crucial in Arunima s journey to the
summit of Mount Everest.

4. Arunima s achievements go beyond just physical endurance.

5. Arunima s autobiography inspires readers around the world.
j
# ts
Unit 4.indd 169 (si 1:52:30 PM

VW

Poorvi

&

| Unit 4.indd 170

a

 Let us think and reflect

I Read the extract given below and answer the questions that follow.

Bachendri Pal instilled confidence in Arunima and said, My child, you
decided to climb Mount Everest in these situations with a prosthetic leg 
you have conquered the Everest within you; the world will realise it later. 

On 21 May 2013, after 52 exhausting days, Arunima Sinha reached the
summit of Mount Everest. Standing at the top of the world, she felt a surge
of emotions pride, relief} and an overwhelming sense of achievement.

1. Complete the sentence with a suitable reason.

Bachendri Pal said that Arunima had conquered the Everest within
her because

2. How might Arunima have felt after what Bachendri Pal told her?

3. Choose a phrase from the extract which shows that reaching the
summit of Mount Everest was tiring.

4. Select the correct option to complete the sentence.

After her success when Arunima felt an overwhelming sense of
achievement , she would have most likely said, 

(i) Iam confident of my abilities
(ii) I will accomplish this soon
(iii) Iam excited to begin this climb

(iv) I finally realised my dream

II Answer the following questions.

1. What did Arunima do in order to fulfill her ambition
of conquering Mount Everest?

2. Arunima is a beacon of hope and resilience. Support
this statement with evidence from the text.

3. Arunima s autobiography is titled Born Again on the
Mountain: A Story of Losing Everything and Finding It
Back. Why do you think this title is appropriate?

4 4. Arunima says, Failure is when we don t have goals
= worthy enough. What would be the most likely
impact of this statement on readers?

07-Mar-25 1:52:32 PM

Unit 4.indd 171

TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE

I Read the underlined phrases in sentences (i)-(v) and match them with
their appropriate meanings given in the box below.

1. genuine, sincere efforts 2. strength of mind

3. periods of time filled with tiring and demanding activities

4, an incident or experience that significantly changes a person s life
5.

a source of inspiration or encouragement

(i) Nisha was relieved when the final match was over after several
exhausting days of practice.

(ii) Despite several failures, her heartfelt attempts to learn the guitar
showed her determination and passion for music.

(iii) Moving to a new city was a life-altering event for Jagan, as it gave
him the chance to make new friends and try different activities.

(iv) Competing in the marathon requires not just physical strength
but also mental fortitude to stay focused and finish the race.

(v) The lighthouse served as a beacon of hope for the sailors lost
at sea.

II Complete the following table by filling in the gaps with correct parts of
speech mentioned. An example has been done for you.

Nouns Adjectives _- Verbs (present) Adverbs
determination | determined determine determinedly
a
relief relievedly
inspiring inspire
resistance resistantly
success successful

AFL!

07-Mary3 ? 1:52:32 PM

TN

Ill Study the highlighted words in the following sentences from the text.
e Arunima made a vow that many would deem impossible.
 Her father was an army engineer.

* Standing at the top of the world, she felt a surge of emotions pride,
relief, and an overwhelming sense of achievement.

 She planted the Indian flag at the summit and left behind a
photograph of her idol, Swami Vivekananda.

 Arunima Sinha s journey from a devastating accident to scaling the
highest peak in the world stands as a beacon of hope and resilience.

The highlighted words are articles.

 A and an are indefinite articles; the is the definite article. The choice
between a and an depends on the sound that follows the article,
specifically the initial sound of the word that follows. N

1. Fill in the blanks with a , an , the . Put an x where no article is
required.

We planned (i) adventurous trip to (ii) remote island.
(iii) island was known for its beautiful landscapes and (iv)
diverse wildlife. On (v) first day, we set out to explore

(vi) island s dense jungle. (vii) guide led us through
(viii) thick foliage and showed us (ix) hidden waterfall.
In (x) evening, we gathered around (xi) campfire to

share stories and enjoy (xii) meal we cooked. (xiii)
experience was truly unforgettable, and we felt (xiv)
connection with (xv) nature.

2. There is an error in each sentence that has been underlined. Correct
the error in the following sentences.

(i) We waited for a hour before the bus finally arrived.

(ii) The guide insisted on an uniform jacket for the group s safety
during the trek.

(iii) Mount K2 is a second highest peak in the world.

(iv) A Ganga is a sacred river in India, known for its cultural
importance.

(v) Challenges are faced with courage and determination by a brave.
(vi) A North Star has guided travellers for centuries.

SN
J

07-Mar-25 1:52:33 PM

TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE

Let us listen &

You will listen to five speakers share their opinion about adventure
sports. As you listen match the statements 1-8 with the speakers
(i)-(v). There are three extra statements that you do not need.
(Transcript for the teacher on pg. 177)

Let us speak

In groups of four, select a role from 1-4 given below and speak about the
views allotted to each. Use the prompts and vocabulary given. Take turns to
express your opinions, agreement, and disagreement.

Role-Specific Prompts

1. School Student: Talk about why you think Physical Education should be
included in school activities.

2. Parent: Discuss your concerns or support for your child participating in
Physical Education activities.

3. Physical Education Teacher: Share your experiences about Physical
Education activities and why you think they are valuable.

Unit 4.indd 173

Poorvi

4. Sports Camp Organiser: Explain how you ensure safety and why you
believe sports are beneficial for participants.

Prompts
 In my opinion... * I believe that...
 From my point of view... I disagree with...
 One reason for this is... I agree with the idea that...

 I disagree with the notion that...
 I support this perspective because...
* I find it hard to agree because...

Vocabulary you may use
precautions unique experiences fun safe enjoyable thrilling
builds confidence concern explore overcomefear participate

Let us write

Read the various components of a formal letter from the box given below.

complimentary close receiver s address subject date
introduction statement of request expression of interest
salutation signature line sender s address

1. Now, read the letter given below and write the matching components.

Sender s Address
Date
Receiver s Address
School
Subject: Request to join Adventure Club
Madam/Sir,
I am Sreelakshmi, a student of Grade 7-C. I am interested

in adventure activities like trekking, hiking, rope climbing,
and exploring sites of natural beauty.

I would love to be a part of the Adventure Club of the school
and participate in the adventure activities organised.

I request you to grant me permission to join the club.

Yours sincerely,

Sreelakshmi

174 ge

Unit 4.indd 174 07-Mar-25 1:52:34 PM

TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE

2. Write a letter to the Principal of your school requesting her to organise an
excursion to a nearby hill station for Grade 7 students of your school.

Let us explore

I Find out more information about the following adventure sports in our
country and complete the table given below. _

Name Preferred Time| Equipment 14 na .
of the Year Required -l_Le--4t,
 oy
. snow- covered oo. snow skiing . skis, ski suit,
hills
Spring, Autumn,
trekkin
a Winter
iw | ep
scuba divin SCTILDE. GUE
& mask, fins,

II Prepare an information booklet with fact sheets of five Indian
mountaineers. Include the following information in the fact sheet. pas

1. name (and photograph, if available) mu
2. place of birth 5. training received
3. profession 6. sport known for (if any)

4. accomplishments awards or honours

Unit 4.indd 175

TRANSCRIPTS

, Towne

Let us listen (refer to page 153)

A famous museum in your town is organising a treasure hunt in the
museum premises. You and your friends decide to participate in it. Upon
arrival, you find that there are many other teams. Each team is given an
audio guide (recorded information) and a map to the museum.

1. Look at the map given below. Try and predict what each of the rooms
might be.

2. Listen to the audio recording and as you listen, mark your map with the
route to take to find the treasure. To help you, the names of a few rooms
in the museum are given below. Now listen to the audio and mark the
various rooms.

Welcome to the City Museum. We start our tour at the entrance
hall. Here you will find the information booth and a display
devoted to the history of this museum. To the right of the
Entrance Hall you will find the (i) library. On the left is the
museum shop. Go straight from the Entrance Hall till you reach
the (ii) Art Gallery. The gallery is famous for its collection of rare
paintings from various parts of India. There are three doors that
lead out of the Art Gallery. The first door on the left leads to the
Decorative Art Gallery, where you will find items like jewellery,
carvings, and textiles from Medieval India. The next door is
temporarily closed due to renovation work. The third door on
the right leads to the (iii) Weapons Room, where you will find an
extensive collection of Indian weapons including bows, swords,
shields, and helmets. From the weapons room take a left turn.
You will find the world-famous (iv) Musical Instruments Section,
where you can find musical instruments from every country in
the world. The second room to the left in this gallery will take
you to the (v) Auditorium. Hidden here is your treasure! All the
best to all. May the best team win!

07-Mar-25 1:52:35 PM

TRAVEL AND ADVE

. Trav,

 
Let us listen (refer to page 162)

1. Listen to this announcement made in the morning assembly about a
school trip to the National Science Centre. As you listen, circle the words
that are not correct.

Good morning students!

I have some very exciting news to share with you all. The muchawaited educational trip to the National Science Centre will be
held on 16 September, that is in two weeks! As you know this
would be a fantastic opportunity to explore and learn more
about the world around us.

We will be starting from school at 8.00 in the morning and return
by 5.30 in the evening. All of you must bein proper school uniform.
Don t forget to carry your identity cards. Light refreshments will
be provided at the museum. But do carry a water bottle and a
packed lunch. You are not permitted to wear any jewellery or
carry mobile phones. You may carry a notebook and a pen to
make notes. Interested students must bring a permission slip
signed by your parent and submit them to their class teachers
by 10 September. It is going to be a fun trip so don t miss out. If
you have any more questions, please contact Mr. Mukherjee, the
excursion in-charge.

2. Now, listen to the announcement again and rectify the sentences.

Let us listen (refer to page 173)

2 @

You will listen to five speakers share their opinion about adventure
sports. As you listen match the statements 1-8 with the speakers (i)-(v).
There are three extra statements that you do not need.

SPEAKER (i): As a parent, I fear the risks involved, especially
with activities like rock climbing or paragliding.

Unit 4.indd 177

I m quite worried about the safety risks ofadventure
sports. It s important to consider these risks before
letting children participate.

SPEAKER (ii): Adventure sports are thrilling! All my friends
agree; it is amazing. It s not just about fun; it s about
pushing your limits and experiencing something
new. I think it s worth trying, of course, with a
trainer.

SPEAKER (ili): As organisers of adventure camps, we take safety
very seriously. Our team ensures all equipment is
regularly checked and maintained. Participants are
given thorough training and are always supervised
by professionals. We focus on minimising risks
while still providing an exciting experience.

SPEAKER (iv): At our school, we organise adventure camps with
activities like trekking and zip-lining. However, we
stick to basic sports that are safe and manageable
for students. We always prioritise safety, ensuring
that all necessary precautions and measures are in
place. Being careful is what we promote.

SPEAKER (v): In my opinion, sports should be about fitness and
enjoyment, like track and field or swimming. Why
risk your life for a fleeting moment of thrill just for
a feeling of adventure? Traditional sports are safer
and just as fulfilling!

07-Mar-25 1:52:36 PM