hospitals in Pakistan and the UK and the UAE government who have helped me to get better and recover my strength. WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] 30-05-2018 11:55:47 | ... There are hundreds of human rights activists and social _ __ -_ - -__4N6T ES) workers who are not only speaking for their rights, but who are struggling to achieve their goal of peace, education and equality. Thousands of people have been killed by the terrorists and millions have been injured. I am just one of them. So here I stand, one girl among many. I speak not for myself, but so those without a voice can be heard. Those who have fought for their rights ...Their right to live in peace. Their right to be treated with dignity. Their right to equality of opportunity. Their right to be educated. ... the compassion I have learned from Mohamed, the Prophet of Mercy, Jesus Christ and Lord Buddha. This the legacy of change I have inherited from Martin Luther King, Nelson Mandela and Mohammed Ali Jinnah. This ts the philosophy of non-violence that I have learned from Gandhi, Bacha Khan and Mother Teresa. And this is the forgiveness that I have learned from my father and from my mother. This is what my soul is telling me: be peaceful and love everyone ... Thank you. 1. Why did the Taliban shoot Malala? 2. Why was Malala awarded the Nobel Peace Prize? 3. Who all did Malala thank in her speech and why? 4. What are the activists and social workers struggling Qa for? S om Gl &) yO Unit 6 6 5 ome 68 Oo Nee MeMaMeMata Waa MaatlaWatatiatiatiatiahtataatle: | Unit 6.indd 93 30-05-2018 11:55:48 | BS [Fun fact [ fy @ @ ] @ @ @ Mw, Gaye 515050505 0505050505054505 050545054505 osu5o5 FNOEAOATUEACTOUACEMTEOOORCACTAEOEUECAEOONAAAA ge GHANA | Unit 6.indd 94 Common mistake Good vs Well Good is an adjective. It is used to modify a noun. Well is an adverb. It is used to modify a verb. It is also used as an adjective. Examples: You did a good job. (Adj.) You did your job well. (Adv.) She is well. (Adj.) La) 5. What rights did she talk about in her speech? Tick (Vv) the right answers. (a) right to live in peace (b) right to be treated with dignity (c) right to have a safe home (d) right to equality of opportunity (e) right to fight for self (f) right to be educated 6. From whom did Malala learn (a) compassion (b) the philosophy of non-violence (c) forgiveness tk) @ SPEAKING 1. Prepare five slips with the following words written on them. The class will be divided into 4 groups. Each group will be asked to pick up a slip and discuss the topic for 5 minutes. Finally, one representative from the group will make a brief presentation on the topic. ancestral house secure childhood primary school social barriers communal harmony Some words given in the box below may be helpful.