being pumped out from the roads. The residents are requested by the Municipal Corporation to remain indoors. WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] 30-05-2018 11:55:47 | (b) The fire caused by crackers (c) Bank robbed in broad daylight (d) Taxes lowered for some commodities 3. Phrasal Verb S In the lesson My Childhood in your textbook, Beehive, S the phrasal verb break out is used by combining a verb S) (break) with a preposition (out) denoting the meaning @ (G) ll (a\ Gi) ry Unit 6 S 5) os OO Nee MeMaMeMata Waa MaatlaWatatiatiatiatiahtataatle: Unit 6.indd 89 30-05-2018 11:55:47 | [Fun fact i fy @ @ ] @ (0), @Q ws PST4 Spelling Rules Desert & Dessert The first syllable of desert is stressed, and the word is spelled with only one s . Dessert, on the other hand, has the stress placed on the second syllable, and is spelled with two s . Examples: The desert has animals and plants that are uniquely adapted to dry environments. His favourite dessert is chocolate cake. Gaye SME MS MS HSM SHSM SMS HEM SMS MSHS MSHS HSS HSM SMS Me | Unit 6.indd 90 to begin . Many more phrasal verbs can be formed with the same verb break joining with other prepositions. They are break into break away break open break down break up Now, replace the underlined words with a phrasal verb from the list given above using the correct form. (a) The passengers were troubled when the bus stopped due to engine failure. (b) Neha s relationship with Rohan came to an end over a very silly matter. (c) The burglar in spite of all security, entered Mr Khan s house and took away all valuables. (d) The child attempted to leave the mother s grasp, but she held fast. (e) The new director desired to discard the age-old practices in the office. WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] 30-05-2018 11:55:47 | EDITING Use capital letters, full-stops, commas and inverted commas wherever necessary in the following story. Some words are also wrongly spelt. Check the spelling errors and correct them. once the Fairies of the Trees set out to choose their dwelling places some were wise in making their choices and some were foolis the wise fairies shunned the trees that stood alone in the open fields, and settld in a thick forest. but the foolish ones said, Why should we crowd together in a forest Let us go and live in lonely trees near villages, where humans will bring us gifts. One night a greate tempest swept over the countri the lonely trees were blown down, and the foolis fairys became homeless; but the great, dense forest resisted the fury of the storm. The wise fairies said to the foolish ones Peopl should stand together like a dense forest. It is only the solitary tree, growing unprotekted in the open field that is overthrown by a silly thing like a storm Write the corrected story here. Unit 6 Gl oS S