black kill felt proof tour joy harmony Write the words here. 3. You would have come across some words from Indian languages used in the chapter My Childhood in your textbook, Beehive. Example: pucca. Look up the dictionary in the English language and find ten words which are of Indian origin. Two are done for you: Unit 6 wy Fun fact | Common Phrasal Verbs OUT Act out We can act out the scene. Bring out The waiter will bring out the food. Draw out Can you draw out the plans? Eat out They eat out on Sundays. Empty out I emptied out the bag. Find out Did she find out about the party? Get out Get out and enjoy the day! Go out Let s go out for dinner. Hang out We will school. hang out after Jump out He jumped out of the plane. Leave out The cook left out the sugar. Let out Please let out the dog. Miss out Don t miss out on the prize. Qa S S om eilig &S @ i) & Oo Move out He moved out of his house. @ Nee MeMaMeMata Waa MaatlaWatatiatiatiatiahtataatle: | Unit 6.indd 87 30-05-2018 11:55:47 | fy @ @ ] av [Fun fact [i Immigrate / Emigrate To immigrate is to settle in a new country or region. To emigrate is to leave a native country or region to settle elsewhere. Immigrate is usually followed by to, and emigrate is usually followed by from. The em words have to do with leaving , and the imm words have to do with entering . a, SRN SME MS MS HSM SHSM SMS HEM SMS MSHS MSHS HSS HSM SMS Me | Unit 6.indd 88 (a) Chutney (b) Karma 3 GRAMMAR 1. 2. Fill in the blanks to complete the process of washing clothes in a machine. Use passive form of the verbs given in brackets. Dirty clothes are (take) for washing. Clothes are (separate) on the basis of texture, colour, etc., and (make) into piles. Each pile is (put) in the washing machine tub. Then detergent powder is (add) and the required programme is (set). Once the washing is over the clothes are (remove) from the tub and (hang) for drying. Passive voice Expand the News Headlines into three to four sentences of a short article. Use passive voice wherever it is required. Example: (a) Mumbai flooded with rain water Yesterday Mumbai was hit by incessant rain. The city is flooded with rain water now. Water is being pumped out from the roads. The residents are requested by the Municipal Corporation to remain indoors. WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] 30-05-2018 11:55:47 | (b) The fire caused by crackers (c) Bank robbed in broad daylight (d) Taxes lowered for some commodities 3. Phrasal Verb S In the lesson My Childhood in your textbook, Beehive, S the phrasal verb break out is used by combining a verb S) (break) with a preposition (out) denoting the meaning @ (G) ll (a\