care about the hours, about the hardships, because to me everything is a joy. So whatever you do, please look upon it as a Calling, a Passion, not as a job, not as something temporary. The third and the most important one, please help others rise. Greatness comes not from a position, but from helping build a future. All of us in position of power have an obligation to pull others up. You know, as I stand here today, I look at my responsibility not as accepting an honour, I look upon it as accepting a challenge and a responsibility, an obligation to actually make it possible for people who are younger to come up and achieve levels of greatness, so they too can be on the stage sometime in the future. (Source: Speech delivered by Indra Nooyi at the Rashtrapati Bhawan on 14 December 2013) 1. What has Malcom Gladwell said in his book, that Indra Nooyi is refering to in her speech? 2. What according to Indra Nooyi helped her achieve great success? 3. What is the first lesson that Indra Nooyi has talked about in her speech? Unit 6 WZ Fun fact Contradictory proverbs All good things come to those who wait. but Time and tide wait for none. The pen is mightier than the sword. but Actions speak louder than words. Look before you leap. but Strike when the iron is hot. Gl oS S e | ag iG) S City +) EN Fen Meme FeO en fe Nema en Fe CN Pen FCN Fe CN mo FeO =n Fe CN Pen Fen Fea CN INUVENAOONTAUONOGOGSPOENTTAONTTAOOOOO NNO OE 31-05-2018 16:10:38 | Nore 4._ Watt element should we have to be a lifelong student? 5. How does she look at her job? 6. What is her third lesson? Why is it important? 7. What obligation does she talk about in her speech? *] @ VocaBULARY 1. Make noun forms of the given words. One is done for you. Example: happen happening (a) know (b) accept } O. (c) separate 2 (d) S oblige YJ (e) achieve eile I) ) r) B [se WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] (OTS) SME MS MS HSM SHSM SMS HEM SMS MSHS MSHS HSS HSM SMS Me | Unit 6.indd 86 30-05-2018 11:5547 | 2. Take words from the box given below and match the words that go along with them. You may use some of the words more than once. Example: Communal-harmony tune paper system fine water communal news heart sound study black kill felt proof tour joy harmony Write the words here. 3. You would have come across some words from Indian languages used in the chapter My Childhood in your textbook, Beehive. Example: pucca. Look up the dictionary in the English language and find ten words which are of Indian origin. Two are done for you: Unit 6 wy Fun fact | Common Phrasal Verbs OUT Act out We can act out the scene. Bring out The waiter will bring