One night a greate tempest swept over the countri the lonely trees were blown down, and the foolis fairys became homeless; but the great, dense forest resisted the fury of the storm. The wise fairies said to the foolish ones Peopl should stand together like a dense forest. It is only the solitary tree, growing unprotekted in the open field that is overthrown by a silly thing like a storm Write the corrected story here. Unit 6 Gl oS S om CY) @ S ow: OB Oo Nee MeMaMeMata Waa MaatlaWatatiatiatiatiahtataatle: | Unit 6.indd 91 30-05-2018 11:55:47 | [Fun fact i PST Commonly misspelt words Incorrect Correct Accomodate Accommodate Recieve Receive Arguement Argument Commitee Committee Embarass Embarrass fy @ @ ] 0 /g, Ss QO MH Gaye SME MS MS HSM SHSM SMS HEM SMS MSHS MSHS HSS HSM SMS Me | Unit 6.indd 92 Q 3 LisTENING Given below is an extract from Malala Yousafzai s speech at the UN General Assembly on 12 July 2013. Malala Yousafzai is a young Pakistani girl who was shot at by the Taliban because she wanted to study. She was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 2014 for her struggle for the right of all children to education. The teacher or one of your classmates will read out the extract. Answer all the questions after listening to the extract. Honourable UN Secretary General Mr Ban Ki-moon, respected President of the General Assembly Vuk Jeremic, honourable UN envoy for global education Mr Gordon Brown, respected elders and my dear brothers and sisters: Assalamu alaikum. Today it is an honour for me to be speaking again after a long time. Being here with such honourable people is a great moment in my life and it is an honour for me that today I am wearing a shawl of late Benazir Bhutto. I don t know where to begin my speech. I don t know what people would be expecting me to say, but first of all thank you to God for whom we all are equal and thank you to every person who has prayed for my fast recovery and new life. I cannot believe how much love people have shown me. I have received thousands of good-wish cards and gifts from all over the world. Thank you to all of them. Thank you to the children whose innocent words encouraged me. Thank you to my elders whose prayers strengthened me. I would like to thank my nurses, doctors and the staff of the hospitals in Pakistan and the UK and the UAE government who have helped me to get better and recover my strength. WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] 30-05-2018 11:55:47 | ... There are hundreds of human rights activists and social _ __ -_ - -__4N6T ES) workers who are not only speaking for their rights, but who are struggling to achieve their goal of peace, education and equality. Thousands of people have been killed by the terrorists and millions have been injured.