976CHO6 ee ee eee eee eee A. Photographs of the Presidents of India are chronologically given below. Can you identify them? . Discuss in pairs and write down their names. B C. Why is the President of India known as the First Citizen of the country? s \ Unit 6.indd 80 Reprint 2025-26 1/7/2019 10:10:41 AM @ 3REaDING COMPREHENSION Read the following passages and answer the questions that follow. I must have been about seven when my father left Porbandar for Rajkot to become a member of the Rajasthanik Court. There I was put into a primary school, and I can well recollect those days, including the names and other particulars of the teachers who taught me. As at Porbandar, so here, there is hardly anything to note about my studies. I could only have been a mediocre student. From this school I went to the suburban school and thence to high school, having already reached my twelfth year. I do not remember having ever told a lie, during this short period, either to my teachers or to my school-mates. However, I used to be very shy and avoided all company. My books and my lessons were my sole companions. To be at school at the stroke of the hour and to run back home as soon as the school closed that was my daily habit. There is an incident which occurred at the examination during my first year at high school and which is worth recording. Mr Giles, the educational Inspector, had come on a visit of inspection. He had set us five words to write as a spelling exercise. One of the words was Kettle . I had misspelt it. The teacher tried to prompt me with the point of his boot, but I would not be prompted. It was beyond me to see that he wanted me to copy the spelling from my neighbour s slate, for I had thought that the teacher was there to supervise us against copying. The result was that all the boys, except myself, were found to have spelt every word correctly. I could never learn the art of copying . Yet the incident did not in the least diminish my respect for my teacher. I was by nature, blind to the faults of elders. Later I came to know of many other failings of this teacher, but my regard for him remained the same. Two other incidents belonging to the same period have always clung to my memory. As a rule I had distaste for any reading beyond my school books. The daily lessons had to be done, because I disliked being taken to task by my teacher as much as I disliked deceiving him. Therefore I would do the lessons, Unit 6 prompt: cause someone to take a course of action deceive: give a mistaken S impression G oS om CY) @ ow 0 Oo Nee MeMaMeMatata a MaatlaWatatiatiahtiatiatatatat: | Unit 6.indd 81 30-05-2018 11:55:47 | fy @ @ ]