the picture of Shravana convey to Mohandas Gandhi? (f) Pick out five qualities and traits which young Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi had. One is done for you. Absolutely non-judgemental, couldn t see the bad qualities of his teacher. Gl oS S om Gl &) yO Unit 6 6 5 o> 68 Oo Nee MeMaMeMata Waa MaatlaWatatiatiatiatiahtataatle: | Unit 6.indd 83 30-05-2018 11:5547 | meritocracy: a ruling or influential class of educated or able people atrophy: gradual decline in (a i) effectiveness or vigour due to underuse or neglect 2) ] 0 /g, Ss @ Mm Gaye SME MS MS HSM SHSM SMS HEM SMS MSHS MSHS HSS HSM SMS Me | Unit 6.indd 84 3. Locate words from the passage with similar meaning: (a) reduce (b) only one (c) dupe (d) permanent effect Indra Krishnamurthy Nooyi is an Indian American business executive. She is the Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Pepsico. She is one among the world s most powerful women. She delivered the following speech at the Rashtrapati Bhawan on 14 December 2013. She was named one of the 25 Greatest Living Legends by NDTV, and was awarded by the then President of India, Pranab Mukherjee at the Rashtrapati Bhawan. Read the speech delivered by Indra Nooyi and answer the questions that follow. Mr President and NDTV, thank you very much for this incredible honour. Malcom Gladwell in his book, Outliers says: Who you are cannot be separated from where you came from. I left India 35 years ago, went to the USA and had tremendous success in the meritocracy. But none of that could have happened if I would not have had wonderful upbringing very much here in India. So I have a lot to thank India for. Now my three lessons I would like to share with you. First, please be a lifelong student. You know when we were kids, we used to ask questions like Why is the sky blueP , Why the birds flying so high? But for some reasons, as we get older, that curiosity goes away. And if we are happy with the knowledge we have, then we are actually going to atrophy. So, please remain a lifelong student, don t lose that curiosity. Second, whatever you do, throw yourself into it, throw your head, heart and hands into it. I look at my job not as a WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] 30-05-2018 11:55:47 | | Unit 6.indd 85 job, Ilook at it as a Calling, as a Passion and I don t care about the hours, about the hardships, because to me everything is a joy. So whatever you do, please look upon it as a Calling, a Passion, not as a job, not as something temporary. The third and the most important one, please help others rise. Greatness comes not from a position, but from helping build a future. All of us in position of power have an obligation to pull others up. You know, as I stand here today, I