I had distaste for any reading beyond my school books. The daily lessons had to be done, because I disliked being taken to task by my teacher as much as I disliked deceiving him. Therefore I would do the lessons, Unit 6 prompt: cause someone to take a course of action deceive: give a mistaken S impression G oS om CY) @ ow 0 Oo Nee MeMaMeMatata a MaatlaWatatiatiahtiatiatatatat: | Unit 6.indd 81 30-05-2018 11:55:47 | fy @ @ ] indelible: not able to be forgotten ave On time / In time On time: At the planned time, neither early nor late In time: With time to spare, before something happens Examples: The flight arrived on time. We arrived in time to check in. I reached the station just in time to catch the train. If you are not on time, the teacher won't let you enter the classroom. SLE) 582) ea =] @ Ws Gaye SME MS MS HSM SHSM SMS HEM SMS MSHS MSHS HSS HSM SMS Me | Unit 6.indd 82 but often without my mind in them. Thus, when even the lessons could not be done properly, there was of course no question of any extra reading. But somehow my eyes fell on a book purchased by my father. It was Shravana Pitribhakti Nataka. I read it with intense interest. One of the pictures I was shown was of Shravana carrying, by means of slings fitted for his shoulders, his blind parents on a pilgrimage. The book and the picture left an indelible impression on my mind. 2. (An excerpt from The Story of My Experiments with Truth, Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi) Choose the correct option from the bracket and fill in the blanks. (a) Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi student. ( average, poor, intelligent) (b) As a boy, Mohandas used to be very and avoided all outspoken) (c) The teacher tried to a/an fearful, him with the point of his boot. (suggest, force, instruct) (d) Young Mohandas any reading beyond his school books. (disliked, liked, hated) (e) He read Shravana Pitribhakti with interest. (great, least, little) Answer the following questions in brief. (30 words) (a) Where did Mohandas complete his primary education? WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] 30-05-2018 11:55:47 | (b) Who were Mohandas Gandhi s sole companions in his childhood? (c) Which incident given in the passage reflects Mohandas s honesty? ca Common Error (d) Which two things did Mohandas dislike the most? Incorrect: Are you a Saler, Raju? Correct: Are you a salesman, Raju? (e) What did the picture of Shravana convey to Mohandas Gandhi? (f) Pick out five qualities and traits which young Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi had. One is done for you. Absolutely non-judgemental, couldn t see the bad qualities of his teacher. Gl oS S om Gl &) yO Unit 6 6 5 o> 68 Oo Nee MeMaMeMata Waa MaatlaWatatiatiatiatiahtataatle: | Unit 6.indd 83 30-05-2018 11:5547 | meritocracy: a ruling or influential class of educated or able people atrophy: gradual decline in (a i) effectiveness