THE OTHER SIDE OF ZERO > Integers 0674CH10 More and More Numbers! Recall that the very first numbers we learned about in the study of mathematics were the counting numbers 1, 2, 3,4, ... Then we learned that there are even more numbers! For example, there is the number 0 (zero), representing nothing, which comes before 1. The number 0 has a very important history in India and now in the world. For example, around the world we learn to write numbers in the Indian number system using the digits 0 to 9, allowing us to write numbers however large or however small using just these 10 digits. We then learned about more numbers that exist between the numbers 0,1,2,3,4, ... , such as x ; 3 , and 2 . These are called fractions. But are there still more numbers? Well, 0 is an additional number that we didn t know about earlier, and it comes before 1 and is less than 1. Are there perhaps more numbers that come before 0 and are less than 0? Phrased another way, we have seen the number line: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 However, this is actually only a number ray , in the language we learned earlier in geometry; this ray starts at 0 and goes forever to the right. Do there exist numbers to the left of 0, so that this number ray can be completed to a true number line? That is what we will investigate in this chapter! Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 10_The Other Side of Zero.indd 242 13-08-2024 17:32:05 The Other Side of Zero %e& Can there be a number less than 0? Can you think of any ways to have less than 0 of something? 10.1 Bela s Building of Fun Children flock to Bela s ice cream factory to see and taste her tasty ice cream. To make it even more fun for them, Bela purchased a multistoried building and filled it with attractions. She named it Bela s Building of Fun. But this was no ordinary building! Observe that some of the floors in the Building of Fun are below the ground. What are the shops that you find on these floors? What is there on the ground floor? A lift is used to go up and down between the floors. It has two buttons: + to go up and ~ to go down. Can you spot the lift? To go to the Art Centre from the Welcome Hall , you must press the + button twice. We say that the button press is + + or +2. To go down two floors, you must press the ~ button twice, which we write as - or -2. So if you press +1 (i.e., if you press the + button once), then you will go up one floor and if you press 1 (i.e., if you press the ~ button once), then you will go down 1 floor. Lift