social groups. How was our Constitution developed? The Indian Constitution was developed and written by the Constituent Assembly over a period of almost three years. It was formed on 9 December 1946, with its members elected by the legislative assemblies of the provinces (whose members had been, in turn, elected by the people). Dr. Rajendra Prasad was the Chairman of the Constituent Assembly. The work was completed on 26 November 1949, and the resulting document was adopted as the Constitution of India on 26 January 1950, which is why we celebrate this day annually as Republic Day. The initial text of the Constitution was prepared by a Drafting Committee chaired by Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, an eminent social reformer and the first Law and Justice minister of independent India (Fig. 10.3). Fig. 10.3. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar (seated, centre) with a few other members of the Drafting Committee. 08-04-2025 12:54:58 LET'S EXPLORE a6 In small groups, try to find out the names of people from your region who may have participated in the making of the Constitution. What sources can you use to gather this information? (Hint: Look for books in your school or local library. You could also ask your teacher, parents and other elders in the neighbourhood. Explore https://sansad.in/ls/ about/constituent-assembly ) What Shaped and Influenced the Indian Constitution? While the Constitution was developed by the Constituent Assembly, it had many influences. The experience, ideas and ideals of the Indian freedom movement were a significant influence. India s civilisational heritage and culture also played a key role. Useful learnings from constitutions of other countries were also considered. Influence of the Indian Freedom Movement Many key ideals and values of the Indian freedom struggle were enshrined in the Constitution. The Constitution was the cornerstone for an independent India. A number of leaders of India s freedom movement were members of the Constituent Assembly and, therefore, carried their experience and ideas from the freedom struggle to the Constitution. Some of these values and ideals are: equality of all, justice for all, freedom, fraternity, preservation ofIndia s cultural heritage, and the idea of using the Constitution as a tool for and means of achieving these values and ideals. The experience and learnings from the freedom struggle also % yee ay provided answers to many of Me Mme the how and what questions: Fig. 10.4.1. Workings of the Constituent Assembly 10 - The Constitution of India An Introduction Governance and Democracy Chapter 10.indd 215 08-04-2025 12:54:58 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 SS Chapter 10.indd 216 Fig. 10.4.2. and 10.4.3. Workings of the Constituent Assembly How do we make sure that = What should be the process every adult citizen has a right if we want to amend the to vote? Constitution? How do we ensure that the = What should be the powers of the executive, legislature and judiciary are relationship between the Central and State governments? kept separate? And so on. How do we guarantee that We will get