The Constitution of India An Introduction I would like to point out that if we are able to act according to the Constitution which has been adopted..., Iam sure we shall be able very soon to make our country great. This is a goal which is within our power to reach, but its realisation would require hard physical and mental labour and above all great moral regeneration. We have prepared a democratic Constitution. But the successful working of democratic institutions requires in those who have to work with them willingness to respect the viewpoint of others, capacity for compromise and accommodation. Dr. Rajendra Prasad, first President of India Chapter 10.indd 209 (0820452025) WIZ2S4ior7 is a gas that doesn t react with paper or Helium ink, helping to preserve the Constitution Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 = Chapter 10.indd 210 over time. It was yet another chilly January morning in Delhi, much like every Republic Day. Ma s voice echoed through the house, Wake up! It s time, or you'll miss the parade! Papa, already up, switched on the television to Doordarshan and called out, Kumar, Niharika, come quickly! The parade has started! The children jumped out of their warm beds, rushing to sit in front of the television, eager not to miss even a moment of the Republic Day Parade. The sight of the majestic marching bands, vibrant displays, and the unfurling of the tricolour at Kartavya Path filled the room with pride and excitement. This day carries a deep significance it marks the coming into effect of the Indian Constitution on 26 January 1950. The book in the picture is our Constitution. To keep it safe, it is carefully preserved in a helium-filled glass case in Parliament. But what exactly is a constitution, and why is it so important? LET'S REMEMBER Recall that in Grade 6, we saw the meaning of the word constitution - a document that lays down the _ basic principles and laws of a nation. In small groups of three, list all the questions that come to your mind about a country s constitution. 08-04-2025 12:54:58 The Constitution of India is the document that many of the important officials of our country pledge to uphold. The president takes an oath to preserve, protect, and defend it. The prime minister, council of ministers, and judges promise to follow its provisions. What Is a Constitution? A simple answer is that it is a document that spells out a nation s basic principles and laws. It lays out: the framework of the three organs of the government (legislature, executive, and judiciary) and their roles and responsibilities; checks and balances amongstthe three organs of government to ensure fairness, responsibility and accountability; the rights and duties of the citizens; an outline of the long-term goals and aspirations of the nation. Why do we need a constitution? LET'S EXPLORE Chapter 10.indd 211 Imagine that your school has reached the final tournament in kabaddi at the state-level.