representatives from all over India? Read the statements below carefully and identify which key features / values in the Constitution of India are reflected in each statement. a. Sheena, Rajat, and Harsh are standing ina line. They are excited to cast their first vote in the general elections. b. Radha, Imon, and Harpreet study in the same class in the same school. c. Parents must make arrangements to ensure their children s education. d. People of all castes, genders, and religions can use the village well. It is said that All citizens in India are equal before the law . Do you think this is a fact? If yes, why? If not, why not? Formulate your arguments. You have learnt that India is the only country that provided universal adult franchise to its citizens from the beginning. Can you explain why India did it? How did the freedom struggle inspire the making of the Constitution of India? How did India s civilisational heritage inspire some of the key features in the Constitution of India? Explain. Do you think we, as a society, have achieved all the ideals of the Constitution? If not, what can we each do as citizens to move our country closer to these ideals? Read the clues carefully to solve the crossword on the next page to uncover important concepts from the Indian Constitution. 10 - The Constitution of India An Introduction Governance and Democracy 10-Apr-25 10:53:23 AM Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 SS Chapter 10.indd 228 Across 2. 10. The branch of government that makes laws. The part of the Constitution that outlines the duties of citizens towards the country. The highest court in India that protects the Constitution. A system where the head of state is elected, not hereditary. The process by which the Constitution can be changed over time. Down 1. The group of people who wrote the Indian Constitution. 3. The statement at the beginning of the Constitution that tells us the values it upholds. 4. The document that lays out the rules and laws of a country. 5. The gas used to preserve the original Constitution safely. 6. Basic rights given to every citizen, like freedom and equality. 08-04-2025 12:55:04