of One of the prescribed purposes. The draft amendments cre placed on the Ministry's website at https:/ /www.melty.govin/content/dratt Smencments-aodhcer-authentication-geed-govemance-rul s-2020-enable-performance. The teat of the rules os they would stand after effecting the amendments (with the amended portions of the text shown in colour) is also placed at hittpsi//wwwmeity.gov.in/content/dratt-omendments-cednaor-cuthentication= good- governance: rules 2020 enable -performance. Feedbock ts invited tram the public on these drott amendments, Submissions will not be ottributed to individuals pubsicly and will be held in fiduciary cCapocity to enable persons submitting the feedback to provide the sume free! VENIMANEE oi Start Dote: 20th April 2023 Anor AXONAL AACeraa End Date: 20th Moy 2023 Fig 10.15 Understanding the Preamble: The Guiding Values of the Constitution of India The Constitution s core values are the guiding principles for | policies and decision-making, which the government is expected to follow. Citizens are also expected to practise them to the best of their ability. These guiding values are present across the Constitution, but their essence is written in the Preamble. So, let us study the Preamble, which is a fitting end to this chapter. India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Exploring Society: Chapter 10.indd 224 08-04-2025 12:55:03 WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA The Constitution has been drawn up and enacted by the people through their representatives, and not handed down to them by a king or any outside powers. SOVEREIGN The people have supreme right to make decisions on internal as well as external matters. No external power can dictate the government of India. SOCIALIST Wealth is generated socially and should be shared by the society. Government should regulate the ownership of land and industry to reduce socio-economic inequalities. SECULAR Citizens have complete freedom to follow any religion. But there is no Official religion. Government treats all & religious beliefs and practices with equal respect. PREAMBLE OF THE INDIAN CONSTITUTION ce (RE THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly resolved fo constitute India into a SOVEREIGN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC and fo secure to all its citizens: JUSTICE, social,economic and political; LIBERT Y of thought, expression, belief, faith and worship ; EQUALITY of status and of opportunity; and to promote among them all FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual and the unity of the Nation; IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twentysixth day of November, 1949,do HEREBY ADOPT, ENACT AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS CONSTITUTION. DEMOCRATIC A form of government where the people enjoy equal political rights, elect their rulers and hold them accountable. The government is run according to some basic rules. FRATERNITY All of us should behave as if we are members of the same family. No citizen as inferior. Note: The terms Socialist and Secular were added in the Preamble through the 42" Constitutional Amendment in 1976 Fig. 10.16. Preamble of the Indian Constitution one should treat a fellow REPUBLIC The head of the state is an elected person and not a hereditary position. JUSTICE Citizens cannot be discriminated on the grounds of caste, religion and gender. Social inequalities have