and laws. It lays out: the framework of the three organs of the government (legislature, executive, and judiciary) and their roles and responsibilities; checks and balances amongstthe three organs of government to ensure fairness, responsibility and accountability; the rights and duties of the citizens; an outline of the long-term goals and aspirations of the nation. Why do we need a constitution? LET'S EXPLORE Chapter 10.indd 211 Imagine that your school has reached the final tournament in kabaddi at the state-level. The opponent is a strong team that has won the tournament two years in a row. They are aiming to win a third time, a hat-trick. The match is on, and a player from your team has just got one of the players from the other team out ; then a dispute breaks out. The player from the other team insists that she had already crossed into her team area before your team player caught her. The referee has seen that the player from the other team was indeed out . To settle the dispute amicably, she pulls out a little official rulebook. The team captains confer with the referee and look at the rules. They then agree that the player was indeed out , and your team has won the state-level trophy. 10 - The Constitution of India An Introduction Governance and Democracy 08-04-2025 12:54:58 Discuss in your group what might have happened if there was no official rulebook that the referee and the team captains could refer to. What is required to ensure everyone agrees to abide by the rulebook? What might happen if the team captains did not agree to refer to the rulebook at all? Think of a game that you play often and list the rules you follow. Each group will then present their set of rules to the rest of the class. Listen to each presentation, discuss the rules, and work together to decide on a common set of rules for the game. What challenges do you face in reaching a consensus on rules that everyone agrees with? What could be the rulebook for a country? How would it be made? Our Constitution is something like a rulebook for the country. <=: DON'T MISS OUT Just as your textbook has many sections and chapters, the Constitution of India has 25 parts and 12 schedules. Each part has sections within it. It is the world s largest written constitution. When it came into effect, it had 22 Parts and 8 schedules. You don t need to remember these numbers, but can you guess why they have increased since 1950? The basic rules and principles in a constitution determine what kind of government will be there, how it will be formed, and how it will function. This includes many principles we saw in the previous chapter, such as how the legislature, executive and judiciary are formed and how they work. A constitution describes, for example, how laws are to be made and implemented, who elects the