but also a work of art. Calligrapher Prem Behari Narain Raizada wrote its text by hand, while Nandalal Bose and his team illustrated its pages with scenes from Indian history, from Mohenjo-daro to the freedom movement (see Figs. 10.6 to 10.13). 10 - The Constitution of India An Introduction Governance and Democracy Chapter 10.indd 223 08-04-2025 12:55:02 uy English Cove Home otestinitictivess Postinitiotives Qo Inviting comments on a draft amendments to the Aadhaar Authentication for Good Governance | 4 f, "ha Rules, 2020 Government invites feedback on amendments to the Aacthoor Authentication for Good Governance Rules, 2020 to enable performance of Aodhoor cuthentication by entities other than Ministries and Departments of the Central Government and State Governments tor prescribed purposes Home / Acdhoor IT Rules About in fine with Government's commitment to make Aodhoar people-triendily and enable its voluntary use to perform Aadhaar authentication under any low or os prescribed, it is proposed to provide for preparation of the proposal for performance of such cuthentication by entities Other than Government Ministries and AALMAAN AUTHEN CATON nti ox COW LUNANEE & 27 Deportments for prescribed purposes. SUBMISSION CLOSED > Through on amendment enacted in 2019 to the Aadhaor (Targeted Delivery of Financiol ond: Other Subsidies: Banefits ard Services) Act, 206. it wos provided under section 4(4) of the Act that entities May be allowed to perform authentication if the Unique identification Authority of India (UiDal) is sotistied that the requesting | scr | > antity is compliant with standards of privecy and secunty specified by regulations and is permitted by law to offer authentication services or seeks authentication tor a prescribed purpose, Pursuant to this amendment, the soid purposes were prescribed by the Aadhoar Authentication for Good Governonce (Social Welfare. innovation, Knowledge) Rules, 2020. These rules provided that Aadhaar authentication by Wve RAnPIAM requesting entities may be Gliowed in the interest of good governance, preventing leakage of public funds, promoting ease of living of residents and enabling better access to services for them, for the purposes of usage of digital platforms to ensure good governance, prevention of dissipation of socio! welfare benefits and enablement of innovation and the spread of knowledge, The amendments now proposed to the rules will provide for preparation of the proposal for performance of Aochoor authentication by entities other than Ministries ond Departments of the Central Government and State Governments for prescribed purposes. Further, It is proposed to Include the promoting of ease of living of r sidents and enabling of better access to services for them of One of the prescribed purposes. The draft amendments cre placed on the Ministry's website at https:/ /www.melty.govin/content/dratt Smencments-aodhcer-authentication-geed-govemance-rul s-2020-enable-performance. The teat of the rules os they would stand after effecting the amendments (with the amended portions of the text shown in colour) is also placed at hittpsi//wwwmeity.gov.in/content/dratt-omendments-cednaor-cuthentication= good- governance: rules 2020 enable -performance. Feedbock ts invited tram the public on these drott amendments, Submissions will not be ottributed to individuals pubsicly and will be held in fiduciary cCapocity to