Uniform Civil Code e Article 38: Social, Political, and Economic Justic to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the National Flag, and the National Anthem; e Article 48-A: Environment and Wildlife Protection Article 49: Protection of monuments, places, and objects of national importance Article 47: Nutrition, standard of living, and public health b. to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so; c. to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture; d. to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life, and to have compassion for living creatures; e. to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so that the nation constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement; f. ifaparent or guardian, to provide opportunities for education to his or her child or, as the case may be, ward between the age of six and fourteen years; Fig 10.14. A glimpse of how the parts of the Constitution are organised 08-04-2025 12:55:02 The Constitution is a Living Document Our Constitution makers realised that a need for new laws and rules would emerge over time. For example, Part IV-A: Fundamental Duties was added in 1976. However, we must remember that any changes (called amendments ) to the Constitution are rigorously debated in the Parliament before they are accepted. Some require a debate in legislative assemblies as well. Many times, opinions are sought from the general public. Some changes can also be initiated by popular movements. LET'S EXPLORE > There was a time when people were not allowed to fly the national flag at their homes. This changed in 2004 when a citizen felt it was his right to express pride in his country and challenged the rule in court. The Supreme Court agreed, saying that flying the flag is part of the Fundamental Right to Freedom of Expression. We can now fly the tricolour with pride, keeping in mind that it should never be dishonoured. > Westudied the Panchayati Raj System in Grade 6. This was not a part of the original Constitution; it was integrated in it in 1992 with the 73" Constitutional Amendment Act. > Canyou find out the amendments made to the Constitution in the past ten years? The government also creates opportunities for people to provide feedback on proposed laws or changes in rules. See the highlighted portion on the next page. DON'T MISS OUT The Indian Constitution is not just a legal document but also a work of art. Calligrapher Prem Behari Narain Raizada wrote its text by hand, while Nandalal Bose and his team illustrated its pages with scenes from Indian history, from Mohenjo-daro to the freedom movement (see Figs. 10.6 to 10.13). 10 - The Constitution of India An Introduction Governance and Democracy Chapter 10.indd 223 08-04-2025 12:55:02 uy English Cove Home otestinitictivess Postinitiotives Qo Inviting comments on a draft amendments to the Aadhaar Authentication for Good Governance | 4 f,