1 SS Chapter 10.indd 216 Fig. 10.4.2. and 10.4.3. Workings of the Constituent Assembly How do we make sure that = What should be the process every adult citizen has a right if we want to amend the to vote? Constitution? How do we ensure that the = What should be the powers of the executive, legislature and judiciary are relationship between the Central and State governments? kept separate? And so on. How do we guarantee that We will get glimpses of how all every individual s fundamental | these have been structured in the rights are respected? U Constitution later in this chapter. India s civilisational heritage and history LET'S REMEMBER In the chapter on Unity in Diversity, or Many in the One in Grade 6, we studied what makes India one country and the underlying unity that embraces the diversity. This idea of India being one country is embedded in the Constitution. Some fundamental principles are embedded in _ our culture acceptance of the idea that people could have different points of view, Nature as sacred, the pursuit of learning and knowledge, respect for women, the concepts of vasudhaiva kutumbakam ( the world is one family ) and sarve bhavantu 08-04-2025 12:54:59 sukhinah (an invocation for the well-being of all creatures). All these principles find a place in our Constitution though you might find them expressed a little differently. 6. LET'S REMEMBER Earlier, we described various types of governance systems that we experimented within India from the janapadas, sanghas, rulers and their councils, Kautilya s concept of saptdnga, ragjadharma and so on. On the whole, there has been a great emphasis on the duties and role of the people in governance. It was, therefore, quite natural that the Constitution makers would incorporate these ideas of our civilisational heritage into our Constitution Fundamental Duties , for instance, are part of it. Learnings from across the world In addition, in the Indian tradition of a@ no bhadrah kratavo yantu vishwatah Let noble thoughts come to me from every side the Constitution makers studied the constitutions of France, USA, UK, Ireland, Australia, and other countries that have a democratic system, to explore their usefulness for our context. For example, the ideals of liberty, equality, fraternity were adopted from France s constitution (which enshrined them from the French Revolution of 1789); the idea of the Directive Principles of State Policy (which we will study shortly) was Fig. 10.5. This Declaration of the Rights of Man inspired by the Irish Constitution; and of the Citizen , which focused on equality, . ae liberty and justice for all, was formulated and the American Constitution gyring the 1789 French Revolution. It helped the helped shape the concept of an _ spread of such ideals in many parts of the world; indevendent judicia many constitutions (including the French one) p J ty. adopted or adapted its values and principles. 10 - The Constitution of India An Introduction Governance and Democracy Chapter 10.indd 217 08-04-2025 12:55:00 Some