to remember these numbers, but can you guess why they have increased since 1950? The basic rules and principles in a constitution determine what kind of government will be there, how it will be formed, and how it will function. This includes many principles we saw in the previous chapter, such as how the legislature, executive and judiciary are formed and how they work. A constitution describes, for example, how laws are to be made and implemented, who elects the executive, how the judiciary is made, and what rights and duties individual citizens have. Many constitutions, including the Indian Constitution, also state the values and ideals the country is committed to for instance, Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 SS Chapter 10.indd 212 08-04-2025 12:54:58 equality and justice for all, fraternity, pluralism and freedom. In fact, it is these values and ideals that usually form the basis for the laws and principles in a constitution. Some of the important things that most constitutions contain: Constitution Values and Political Structure and ideals of a formation of the society system government Functions of different Guiding principles for parts of the government government Writing the Constitution of India Iwish your labours success, and invoke Divine blessings that your proceedings may be marked not only by good sense, public spirit, and genuine patriotism, but also by wisdom, toleration, justice, and fairness to all; and above all with a vision which may restore India to her pristine glory, and give her a place of honour and equality amongst the great nations of the world. Dr. Sachidananda Sinha, President of the Constituent Assembly at the start of the process of the writing of the Constitution While India was struggling for independence from British rule, it was necessary to start planning for how we would govern ourselves. There were many important questions to be answered in a large, culturally diverse and complex country like India: What type of government should we have? What rules and principles should guide us? Who should have the right to vote? How should we decide on disputes? 10 - The Constitution of India An Introduction Governance and Democracy Chapter 10.indd 213 08-04-2025 12:54:58 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 = Chapter 10.indd 214 To answer these and many other questions, a Constituent Assembly was formed in 1946, initially with 389 members (later reduced to 299 after the Partition of India), of which 15 were women. These members represented India s diverse regions, professions, and social groups. How was our Constitution developed? The Indian Constitution was developed and written by the Constituent Assembly over a period of almost three years. It was formed on 9 December 1946, with its members elected by the legislative assemblies of the provinces (whose members had been, in turn, elected by the people). Dr. Rajendra Prasad was the Chairman of the Constituent Assembly. The work was completed on 26 November 1949, and the resulting document was adopted as the Constitution