FRATERNITY All of us should behave as if we are members of the same family. No citizen as inferior. Note: The terms Socialist and Secular were added in the Preamble through the 42" Constitutional Amendment in 1976 Fig. 10.16. Preamble of the Indian Constitution one should treat a fellow REPUBLIC The head of the state is an elected person and not a hereditary position. JUSTICE Citizens cannot be discriminated on the grounds of caste, religion and gender. Social inequalities have to be reduced. Government should work for the welfare of all, especially of less advantaged groups. LIBERTY There are no unreasonable restrictions on the citizens in what they think, how they wish to express their thoughts and the way they wish follow up their thoughts in action. EQUALITY All are equal before the law. The social inequalities have to be ended. The > government s should 2 ensure equal sS opportunity 3 for all. @ =i o fe) o o 10 - The Constitution of India An Introduction Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 10.indd 226 LET'S EXPLORE Below is the list of features given in the Preamble. Read them closely from the image above and write down examples of the application of these values in daily life around you. Two have been completed to help you with the exercise. Features of _. the Preamble How we see them in our daily lives Sovereign Secular A person does not have to take permission from the State to practice the rituals of their religion if the practice does not interfere with anyone else s day-to-day life. Republic Justice The State provides equal opportunity to all in jobs, regardless of gender, caste, religion, etc. Liberty Equality Fraternity Before we move on... Vv v Vv Vv The Constitution of India is a guiding book or rulebook which protects the rights of all citizens. Citizens are also expected to follow the fundamental duties of the Constitution. The rich civilizational heritage of India, the freedom struggle and good practices from the constitutions of other countries served as the building blocks of the Indian Constitution. Its key features define the social, economic, and political structure of the country and its parliamentary form of government. It is a living document that can be improved as per the country s needs. 08-04-2025 12:55:04 Chapter 10.indd 227 Questions and activities 1. The Constituent Assembly had representatives from diverse backgrounds in India. Why do you think it was important to have a diverse set of representatives from all over India? Read the statements below carefully and identify which key features / values in the Constitution of India are reflected in each statement. a. Sheena, Rajat, and Harsh are standing ina line. They are excited to cast their first vote in the general elections. b. Radha, Imon, and Harpreet study in the same class in the same school. c. Parents must make arrangements to ensure their children s education. d. People of all castes, genders, and