in the beginning of all NCERT textbooks). The Directive Principles of State Policy (DPSP, as they are popularly called) represent the essence of the social and economic vision that the framers of the Constitution had for India. The examples we present in the infographic illustrate the principles they wanted governance to follow. 08-04-2025 12:55:02 3 DON T MISS OUT Directive Principles are goals that the government should try to achieve. They reflect the direction they wished the country take to make India better for all; for example, everybody in the country must have a good standard of living. But if the government does not make efforts to follow this, one cannot go to a judge and complain about it. The DPSP are more like guidelines than strict rules. Fundamental Rights, on the other hand are promises that must be kept. If someone treats you unfairly because of who you are, you can actually go to court and the judge can help you. The people who wrote our Constitution created this system on purpose. They wanted some rights that could be demanded immediately (Fundamental Rights) and some bigger goals (Directive Principles) that might take time to achieve as our country progressed. LET'S EXPLORE Read the quotation given below. Which article of the Constitution do you think she was referring to? Why do you think she said that the equality of women was not a new concept for India? Discuss in the class. C C Sir, the women of India are happy to step into their rightful Chapter 10.indd 221 heritage of complete equality with men in all spheres of life and activity. I say so because I am convinced that this is no new concept which has been postulated for the purposes of this Constitution, but is an ideal that has long been cherished by India, though social conditions for some time had tragically debased it in practice. This Constitution affirms that ideal and gives the solemn assurance that the rights of women in law will be wholly honoured in the Indian Republic. Begum Aizaz Rasul, 22 November 1949, during the Constituent Assembly s debates 10 - The Constitution of India An Introduction Governance and Democracy 08-04-2025 12:55:02 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 SS Chapter 10.indd 222 Right to Equality (Article 14. Equality before law) Right to Freedom (Article 21. Protection of life and personal liberty) Right against Exploitation Article 21-A. (Right to education) Fundamental Article 41: Welfare Fundamental Government ND) uti es e Article 44: Uniform Civil Code e Article 38: Social, Political, and Economic Justic to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the National Flag, and the National Anthem; e Article 48-A: Environment and Wildlife Protection Article 49: Protection of monuments, places, and objects of national importance Article 47: Nutrition, standard of living, and public health b. to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so; c. to value and preserve the rich heritage of