slightly moist by adding a moderate amount of water on a regular basis. Place this pot in direct sunlight. @ Indicate the availability of air, sunlight and water for the seeds in each of these cases in Table 10.2. @ When a seed turns into a sprout, it is said to have germinated. Predict whether the seeds in each pot will germinate. Record your predictions for each pot kept under different conditions in Table 10.2. Table 10.2: Effect of certain conditions on seed germination Possible reason for the observation Pot with bean seeds Seed Availability of or germination Air Sunlight Water Prediction Observation A: In direct sunlight and without water No B: In direct sunlight and excess water C: In complete dark and moist soil D: In direct sunlight and moist soil Reprint 2025-26 Living Creatures: Exploring their Characteristics 10/4/2024 3:10:39 PM Embryo Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 10.indd 190 Germinated bean seed @ Regularly observe the pots for 7-10 days to check the status of germination of the seeds. Record your observations in Table 10.2. @ Compare your predictions with your observations. Do you think sunlight is necessary for germination of seeds? Do the seeds in all the pots receive air, water and sunlight? Is there any pot in which air is not available to the seeds? If so, why is it not available? What happens to the seeds in the pot where water is provided in excess? Which seeds receive both air and water? Identify the pots where you can notice the germination of seeds. Do your observations match with your predictions? Write possible reasons in favour of your observations in Table 10.2. Based on your observations, state the conditions which favour seed germination. Which ofthe following are essential for seed germination air, water and sunlight? Compare the available conditions in each pot. Germination of bean seeds requires the right amount of water and air. Why do seeds require these conditions for germination? Do you think that the absence Seed Coat of one or more of these conditions will affect seed germination? Let us understand how these conditions help in seed germination. The effects of the following conditions have been seen in Activity 10.2. Water: Seeds require water for germination. Water enables the seeds to carry out the processes necessary for their growth. The outer covering of the seed is called seed coat. Water softens the seed coat and helps the tiny embryo inside it to develop into a plant. Air and Soil: Seeds need air for germination. They use the air available in the spaces between soil particles. Moreover, spaces between the soil particles allow roots to grow easily. Light and/or dark conditions: We have learnt that for the bean seeds, presence of light is not essential for their germination. In general, most seeds do not require light for germination. But after germination, sunlight is required for further growth of the seedling. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:10:53 PM Chapter 10.indd 191 Do you know?