Death of (Appearance plant of flowers) Stage V (Appearance of fruits) Fruit (Pod with seeds) Stage I (Seed) Stage het ipee N of leaves) Stage II (Seed germination) Fig. 10.4: Life cycle of a bean plant Zs | ().5 | ife Cycle of Animals Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 10.indd 196 We have learnt about the life cycle of a plant. We have seen that a plant goes through many changes in its life cycle. Have you ever observed how animals grow over time? Draw sketches of their young ones and name them. 10.5.1 Life cycle of a mosquito Mosquitoes buzzing aroundis a common experience for all of us. Female mosquitoes are bloodsucking insects that transmit several diseases like malaria, dengue and chikungunya. You might have learnt from newspapers, school noticeboards or awareness campaigns that mosquito breeding should be prevented. We are advised not to allow water to stagnate anywhere in our surroundings. Why is it so? Does stagnant water have any relation with mosquitoes laying eggs? Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:11:38 PM Chapter 10.indd 197 Conduct a safety audit in your school, or at your home and surroundings to check for stagnant water (if available, carry a hand lens to observe any small creatures). Some common places where stagnant water is likely to gather are desert coolers, planted pots and any open container. You may find two different types of worm-like creatures (Fig. 10.5). They are larva and pupa, two distinct life stages during the development of mosquito. In case you observe larvae and pupae, report to your teacher. Discuss with the teacher and classmates about the necessary measures one can take to prevent breeding of mosquitoes. What differences do you observe in the shape of larvae and pupae? Fig. 10.5: Larvae and pupae of mosquitoes in a stagnant water body Mosquito larvae and pupae observed in water bodies repeatedly come to the water surface. What can be the reason for this? Mosquito larvae and pupae live in water and require air to respire. They move to the surface of the water for air. How can the I have seen my mother life cycle of a spraying kerosene oil mosquito be >? on stagnant water. Why disrupted? e does she do so? Kerosene oil forms a thin layer over the water surface. This layer separates water from air, and does not allow larvae and pupae to inhale air. As a result, they die. Reprint 2025-26 Living Creatures: Exploring their Characteristics 10/4/2024 3:11:56 PM Activity 10.5: Let us analyse Let us solve an interesting puzzle. How will you decide which stage (larva or pupa) comes immediately after the egg stage? Suppose you are given a container with water from a puddle containing larvae and pupae. Design an activity to find out the correct sequence of these stages. You can take help of the following activity designed by Avadhi to create your own activity Step 1: Ihave a water container with mosquito larvae and pupae. Step 2: I