built a machine called acrescograph to record how plants respond to stimuli like light, heat, electricity and gravity. With this machine, he could measure how fast plants grow. He also showed that plants can sense and respond to stimuli. es | () 4 | ife Cycle of a Plant We have learnt about conditions required for germination and how plants grow and exhibit movement. Let us now explore the changes a plant undergoes in its whole life. Activity 10.4: Let us explore - EEE Plant a bean seed and provide suitable conditions for its growth. Observe regularly for three months. @ Record your observations in Table 10.4 as and when changes become visible. @ Note the date when any change is observed. Record answers for the following questions = How long does it take for any change to occur? Make sketches of various changes that you observe in Table 10.4. = After how many days does the first flower appear? Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 10.indd 194 10/4/2024 3:11:19 PM Chapter 10.indd 195 After some parts of the flower have dried, can you see any further growth? Which structure do the remaining parts of flower develop into? Can you notice a pod or a fruit with seeds develop from a flower? What happens to the plant after the fruits containing seeds are formed? Table 10.4: Changes observed during the growth of the plant Date Observations Sketches Seeds are sown Go through the observations you recorded regarding the growth of the bean plant in Table 10.4. What changes do you observe after the fruits are formed? Does the plant become yellow and dry even when you continue watering it? Sow the seeds obtained from your bean plant. Watch how the seeds give rise to a new generation of bean plants. Compare the sketches that you have drawn in Table 10.4 with Fig. 10.4. A seed grows into a young plant and matures to produce flowers and fruit. The fruit, in this case a pod, contains seeds which give rise to a new generation of bean plants. The entire process from a seed to a plant, and then, to the next generation of seeds is called the life cycle of a plant (Fig. 10.4). When a plant stops growing and all activities of life gradually come to an end, even after the availability of all the necessary conditions, the plant is considered dead. Reprint 2025-26 Living Creatures: Exploring their Characteristics 10/4/2024 3:11:19 PM Stage IV _ Death of (Appearance plant of flowers) Stage V (Appearance of fruits) Fruit (Pod with seeds) Stage I (Seed) Stage het ipee N of leaves) Stage II (Seed germination) Fig. 10.4: Life cycle of a bean plant Zs | ().5 | ife Cycle of Animals Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 10.indd 196 We have learnt about the life cycle of a plant. We have seen that a plant goes through many changes in its life cycle. Have