from the other eggs that you may have seen? @ Which stage has the shortest duration? @ Is there a change in the habitat during the various stages in the life cycle of a frog? @ How do the special features support that stage? Observe Fig. 10.8. You will see that tadpoles develop legs but still have tails. Tails help them swim in water. Tadpoles grow gradually and start looking like little frogs called froglets. They still live in water but begin to spend some time on land. They continue to grow and lose their tails completely. Their legs become strong to help them jump and land. They become fully developed adult frogs who live both in water and on land. Reprint 2025-26 Stage I,- Embryo (Day 3-4) Living Creatures: Exploring their Characteristics ) 5 10/4/2024 3:12:02 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 10.indd 202 Do you think that birds also show significant changes in the various stages of their life cycle? How does the life cycle of animals differ from that of plants? Plants and animals are a part of the living world. They go through various changes during the course of their lives. We have learnt that a tiny plant grows and develops into a big tree. We have also learnt how animals grow and change from young ones to adults. This journey varies for each animal, making it unique and special. We have seen pupae change into insects, and tadpoles change into frogs. Such changes are important for plants and animals to survive and to maintain continuity of their kind. We should also take care of them and their homes. By nurturing and preserving their homes, we contribute to this flourishing living world. _ * Keywords Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:12:08 PM Chapter 10.indd 203 The objects around us can be categorised into two types living and non-living. The essential features of living beings are that they move, eat, grow, breathe, excrete, respond to stimuli, reproduce and die. Absence of any of these features indicates that they are not living beings. Each living being goes through several stages during its life. Germination of seeds depends upon the availability of water, air and suitable light and/or dark conditions. During germination of seeds, roots generally grow downwards, while shoots grow upwards. A plant s life cycle starts with seed germination, followed by several stages of its growth and development. These include flowering and seed production. Seeds produced during their life cycle would germinate into new plants and the cycle continues. The life cycle of an animal as a result of reproduction, begin with a newborn that undergoes various stages of growth and development followed by an adult stage and finally death. The process of reproduction maintains the continuity of its kind. Mosquitoes pass through the stages of egg, larva, pupa and adult. The life stages of a frog include eggs, tadpoles, froglets and adults. In some living beings, such as mosquitoes and frogs, significant changes occur