of one s own kind. Why is reproduction necessary? It is necessary for the continuity of life. When a living being is not able to exhibit all of the above mentioned characteristics, despite the availability of all resources (like food, air and water) needed for being alive, it is said to be dead. From the above discussion, we can understand that all living beings share some common characteristics. For example, all living beings show movement, they need Reprint 2025-26 Touch-me-not (chhui-mui) plant Living Creatures: Exploring their Characteristics 10/4/2024 3:10:24 PM food, and they grow. They also respire, reproduce, excrete, respond to stimuli, and eventually, die. Absence of any of these features indicates that they are non-living things. Now that you know how to identify a living being, fill up the remaining two columns (IV and V) of Table 10.1 and complete the activity. In which category would you place a seed living or nonliving? Why? Let us explore how a seed germinates to observe some of these essential characteristics in plants. ms = 1() 2 Essential Conditions for Germination of a Seed Have you observed a seed germinating? You might have wondered what conditions are required for germination of a seed. What conditions do you think are required for seed germination? How will you investigate whether these conditions have an effect on the germination of a seed? Let us find out by performing Activity 10.2. Activity 10.2: Let.us experiment == Take four identical pots filled with garden soil. Sow four bean seeds in each pot. Now, keep these pots in the following conditions for 15 days. = Pot A: Do not water the soil. Place this pot in direct sunlight. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 (a) Pot A kept in (b) Pot B kept in (c) PotC with (d) Pot D with moist direct sunlight, no direct sunlight, moist soil, kept _ soil, kept in direct =~ water excess water in the dark sunlight 188 | Fig 10.1: Bean seeds exposed to different conditions Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 10.indd 188 10/4/2024 3:10:39 PM Chapter 10.indd 189 = Pot B: Add excess water to the soil such that water is always present above the soil. Keep adding water on a regular basis if water reduces. Place this pot in direct sunlight. = Pot C: Keep the soil in this pot slightly moist by adding a moderate amount of water on a regular basis. Place this pot in a dark location. = Pot D: Maintain the soil in this pot slightly moist by adding a moderate amount of water on a regular basis. Place this pot in direct sunlight. @ Indicate the availability of air, sunlight and water for the seeds in each of these cases in Table 10.2. @ When a seed turns into a sprout, it is said to have germinated. Predict whether the seeds in each pot will germinate. Record your predictions for each pot kept under different conditions in Table 10.2. Table 10.2: Effect of certain