Now, which characteristics have you used to classify a car as non-living? Continue your discussion in a similar way to identify the essential characteristics of living beings. What are some common characteristics that make living beings very different from the non-living things? Let us learn about them. Can we consider movementas one of the characteristics to differentiate between the living and the non-living? List five things around you that can move on their own. Do you think that all five things that you have listed can be considered as living just because they can move on their ee own? However, unlike animals, plants do not move from one place to another. Do you consider them as living? Even though plants do not move from one place to another, they do show certain types of movements. Opening of flowers is one ofthe examples of movementin plants. Another example of movement in plants is seen in insectivorous plants. Insectivorous Drosera plants are dependent on insects for their nutrition. Drosera is one of the examples of an insectivorous plant. Drosera is featured with saucer-shaped leaves having many hair-like projections of unequal length with sticky ends. Whenever an insect enters the saucer, hairs move inward and trap the insect with their sticky ends. Try to observe the mechanism of movement in other insectivorous plants. Climbers also wind themselves around any object placed close to them. That means, even though plants do not move from one place to another, they do show some movements. Compare yourself with the picture of your childhood. Can you Growth ofa child Reprint 2025-26 Living Creatures: Exploring their Characteristics 10/4/2024 3:10:10 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 10.indd 186 wear the dress that you used to wear four years ago? No, because you have become larger in size. This is due to growth in your body. Plants and other living beings also grow. Can we consider growth as a characteristic of living beings? Living beings need food (nutrition) for their growth and development. List five living beings that require food to grow. Now, think of a process without which we cannot live. Count the number of breaths you take per minute after a normal walk, after a run, and after a few dance steps. Record the data and observe. Do you notice any difference in the number of breaths after each situation? Do you notice the process of breathing in other animals like dogs, cats, cows and buffaloes? Notice the movement of their abdomen while they are taking rest. In the process of breathing, when we inhale, the air moves from outside to inside our body. When we breathe out, the air moves from inside our body to outside. Breathing is part of a process called respiration. Do plants also respire? There are tiny pores called stomata on the surface of leaves. These pores help plants in taking air in and out. Interact with senior class students in your school and request if they can demonstrate