are taking rest. In the process of breathing, when we inhale, the air moves from outside to inside our body. When we breathe out, the air moves from inside our body to outside. Breathing is part of a process called respiration. Do plants also respire? There are tiny pores called stomata on the surface of leaves. These pores help plants in taking air in and out. Interact with senior class students in your school and request if they can demonstrate stomata using a microscope in your class. All living beings respire. Have you noticed white patches forming on shirts around the armpits during summers? These patches are formed due to sweat. The sweat consists of water and salts removed by the body as waste products. Removal of waste products from the body is called excretion. Urine is also formed as a product of excretion in animals. Do you know that plants also excrete? You may notice plants excrete excess water and minerals in the form of small droplets on leaves. For example, grasses and roses. All living beings excrete. Let us look at another characteristic. What is your reaction if you unexpectedly Water droplets on grass step on a sharp object, such as a thorn, Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:10:11 PM Chapter 10.indd 187 while walking without shoes, or you accidentally touch a hot cup of tea? Stepping on a thorn and touching a hot object are stimuli. Any thing or any event that prompts living beings to respond is called a stimulus. List three stimuli (plural of stimulus) and your body s instant response to them. Do plants also respond to stimuli? Yes, plants also respond to stimuli. For example, touchme-not (mimosa, chhut-mut, lajjalu) plants fold their leaves when we touch them. Have you also observed that certain plants fold their leaves after sunset? Specifically, the leaves of certain plants facing each other tend to come together. This can be observed in the sleeping leaves of amla (Indian gooseberry) tree. All living beings respond to stimuli. Find a few more plants in your neighbourhood which fold their leaves after sunset. Why do the leaves of chhui-mui and amla plants respond in this way? Which stimulus could be responsible for their behaviour? Have you seen young ones of cats, dogs or other animals? List young ones of five different animals. Have you seen young ones of any non-living things such as a pencil, a chair or an electric bulb? All living beings reproduce. Reproduction is the process of producing new ones of one s own kind. Why is reproduction necessary? It is necessary for the continuity of life. When a living being is not able to exhibit all of the above mentioned characteristics, despite the availability of all resources (like food, air and water) needed for being alive, it is said to be dead. From the above discussion, we can understand that all living beings share some common characteristics. For example, all living beings show movement, they need Reprint 2025-26 Touch-me-not