1 0 Living Creatures: Exploring their Characteristics . 0677CH10 (\y te ' > , Avadhi and Aayush go for a morning walk with their parents. Avadhi notices some shells and tries to pick them up. Her mother advises her not to do so and explains that the shell could be home to a living snail and is actually a part of its body. Avadhi and Aayush wonder how the shell that is not even moving could have a living being inside! Later that day in school, Avadhi and Aayush share this incident with their friends. They approach the teacher to understand how a shell which is not even moving could be a body part of a living snail. The teacher initiates a discussion in the class on living and non-living. Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 10.indd 183 10/4/2024 3:09:33 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 10.indd 184 Activity 10.1: Let us record We are surrounded by numerous things. Just look around in your classroom and you may find many examples the pencil that you are holding, the book that you are reading or the pigeon near the window. List them in Table 10.1 and identify each of them as living or non-living on the basis of your understanding in column II. Write areason for grouping them as living or non living in column III. Table 10.1: Living beings and non-living things in our surroundings (1) (11) (IIT) (IV) (V) My guess Reason/ Name (Living/ Reason/ Correct Remarks for Non- Remarks answer . the correct living) answer Pencil Non-living Book Pigeon Living Car Plant Any other mum 1.1 What Sets the Living Apart from the Non-living? Look at Table 10.1. Why do you think a pencil is non-living but a pigeon is living? What do you think are the differences between living beings and non-living things according to you? What similarities do the identified living beings share with each other? You may have identified movement as one of the similarities among living beings. You have also seen cars moving on a road. Does it mean that a car is living? List the Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:09:33 PM Chapter 10.indd 185 tasks that you can do but a car cannot. You are a wonderful example of a living being. Whenever you attempt to group things around you as living or non-living, you can compare them with yourself. Which characteristics help you in differentiating yourself from a car? For instance, a car does not grow. Does it mean it is non-living? Now, which characteristics have you used to classify a car as non-living? Continue your discussion in a similar way to identify the essential characteristics of living beings. What are some common characteristics that make living beings very different from the non-living things? Let us learn about them. Can we consider movementas one of the characteristics to differentiate between the living and the non-living? List five things around you that can move on their own. Do you think that all five