need air for germination. They use the air available in the spaces between soil particles. Moreover, spaces between the soil particles allow roots to grow easily. Light and/or dark conditions: We have learnt that for the bean seeds, presence of light is not essential for their germination. In general, most seeds do not require light for germination. But after germination, sunlight is required for further growth of the seedling. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:10:53 PM Chapter 10.indd 191 Do you know? In the Chapter Mindful Eating: A Path to a Healthy Body , you have learnt that human beings need a balanced diet for good health and proper growth. Similarly, plants too need favourable conditions and nutrients for their proper growth and development. What other conditions do you think would How would you affect seed germination? now categorise a In Activity 10.1, what are the seed, as living or i ] characteristics of living beings which non-living? e made you place plants in living beings? Do plants show growth in Activity 10.2? Are there any other characteristics of living beings that these plants show? Let us study another characteristic that can be seen clearly in plants growth and movement. 10.3 Growth and Movement in Plants How do plants respond to sunlight? Does sunlight affect the direction of growth of different parts of plants? In which direction would the root and shoot of a plant grow and move if the plant is placed inverted? How would you design an activity to find answers to these questions? Activity 10.3: Let us design Living Creatures: Exploring their Characteristics @ Take some bean or gram seeds and allow them to germinate on a moist cloth or a moist tissue paper. Let them germinate until each of them develop into a seedling having a small root and a small shoot. @ Now, take three glass beakers or tumblers, and label them as A, B and C. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:11:07 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 10.indd 192 Upright plant kept in sunlight from (a) Take three glass plates and attach a thick blotting paper to one side of each plate using a thick soft cotton thread. Fix one seedling on each plate using a thick soft cotton thread, as shown in Fig. 10.2, ensuring that the plant is not damaged. Now, place one glass plate upright with a seedling attached into each of the beaker A and beaker C, as shown in Fig. 10.2a and Fig. 10.2c. In beaker B, arrange the plate such that the shoot of a seedling is directed downwards and the root is directed upwards, as shown in Fig. 10.2b. nner view of the box Inverted plant kept in Upright plant kept in sunlight from all directions sunlight from one direction Fig. 10.2: Set-up showing plants kept in different conditions Pour water into all the three beakers to ensure that the seedling in each beaker remains above the water level. In each case, let the bottom of