us analyse Let us solve an interesting puzzle. How will you decide which stage (larva or pupa) comes immediately after the egg stage? Suppose you are given a container with water from a puddle containing larvae and pupae. Design an activity to find out the correct sequence of these stages. You can take help of the following activity designed by Avadhi to create your own activity Step 1: Ihave a water container with mosquito larvae and pupae. Step 2: I will separate 4-5 larvae and pupae into two separate containers with the same water. Step 3: I will observe them every day until I see them changing to the next stage. Step 4: Ifthe larvae change into pupae, it would mean that the larval stage comes before the pupal stage or vice-versa. Step 5: I will keep watching both the containers to see in which one a mosquito appears first. These observations will help us to learn the correct sequence of growth. Now, suppose you are given a container filled with water from a puddle which contains larvae and pupae. Without separating them from the container, how would you design an activity to decide which stage, out of the two, gives way to the next? Stage IV (Adult mosquito) Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Stage I Stage III (Ege) (Pupa) Stage II (Larva) Fig. 10.6: Life cycle of a mosquito Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 10.indd 198 10/4/2024 3:11:58 PM Let us learn more about these stages in the life cycle of a mosquito. Mosquitoes pass through four stages in their life cycle egg, larva, pupa and adult (Fig. 10.6). The adult mosquito that emerges from the pupa rests briefly on the surface of water and then flies away. The adult mosquito may survive for 10 to 15 days. We have seen that a mosquito begins its life as an egg (stage I), the egg develops into a larva (stage II), the larva grows into pupa (stage III), and the pupa transforms into an adult mosquito (stage IV). The adult female mosquito lays eggs directly on or near water, and the cycle continues. Significant changes occur in the appearance, body shape and structure during the various stages in the life cycle of a mosquito. The shape of the egg is quite different from the larva; the larva appears very different from the pupa. The pupa appears very distinct from the adult mosquito. Is it easy to imagine that a mosquito emerges from a pupa? J mummmes 10.5.2 Life cycle of a frog Chapter 10.indd 199 Activity 10.6: Let us analyse Avadhi and Aayush are dressed up in full sleeves shirts and full pants today. It has been raining intermittently for a week. They are going out with their classmates for an activity. After a brief walk led by their science teacher, they reach a shallow pond. It is surrounded by trees and tall grasses. The teacher cautions them to watch everything from a distance Reprint 2025-26 Living Creatures: Exploring