the plate such that the shoot of a seedling is directed downwards and the root is directed upwards, as shown in Fig. 10.2b. nner view of the box Inverted plant kept in Upright plant kept in sunlight from all directions sunlight from one direction Fig. 10.2: Set-up showing plants kept in different conditions Pour water into all the three beakers to ensure that the seedling in each beaker remains above the water level. In each case, let the bottom of the blotting paper get completely wet by soaking in the water. In this way, the seedling will get the moisture from the wet blotting paper. Place beaker A and beaker B in sunlight as shown in Fig. 10.2a and Fig. 10.2b. Position beaker C as shown in Fig. 10.2c. Place a cardboard box in such a way that the seedling gets light from one direction only through a small circular hole. Fill Table 10.3 with your predictions and observations. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:11:11 PM Table 10.3: Growth of root and shoot under different conditions Direction of growth of Direction . : root and shoot Beakers of of plant sunlight smoot! Predictions Observations Shoot A di Ot Upright irections Root Shoot B di Ot Inverted irections Root Only Shoot C from one Upright direction Root What is the direction of growth of root and shoot in beakers A, B and C based on your observations? Do your predictions match your observations? What do youconclude from this activity? Upright plant kept in sunlight from all (a) 4 . . Inner view directions of the box Inverted plant kept in Upright plant kept in sunlight sunlight from all directions from one direction Fig. 10.3: Direction of growth of root and shoot under different conditions From the results of this experiment (Table 10.3 and Fig. 10.3), we note that 1. When the plantis kept upright, the root grows downwards and the shoot grows upwards. Living Creatures: Exploring their Characteristics 3 ] Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 10.indd 193 10/4/2024 3:11:13 PM 2. When the plant is kept inverted, the root bends and grows downwards. Also, the shoot bends and grows upwards. 3. When the plant gets sunlight only from one direction, the shoot grows in the direction of light while the root continues to grow downwards. After conducting Activity 10.3, we can conclude that shoots of plants grow upward and exhibit movement towards sunlight but roots of plants grow downwards. Jagadish Chandra Bose (1858-1937) was an Indian scientist who did some fascinating experiments with plants. He built a machine called acrescograph to record how plants respond to stimuli like light, heat, electricity and gravity. With this machine, he could measure how fast plants grow. He also showed that plants can sense and respond to stimuli. es | () 4 | ife Cycle of a Plant We have learnt about conditions required for germination and how plants grow and exhibit movement. Let us now explore the changes a plant undergoes in its whole life. Activity 10.4: Let