and the cycle continues. The life cycle of an animal as a result of reproduction, begin with a newborn that undergoes various stages of growth and development followed by an adult stage and finally death. The process of reproduction maintains the continuity of its kind. Mosquitoes pass through the stages of egg, larva, pupa and adult. The life stages of a frog include eggs, tadpoles, froglets and adults. In some living beings, such as mosquitoes and frogs, significant changes occur during the various stages of their life cycles. These changes can be seen in body shape, structure and sometimes even in the habitat. Let us enhance our learning List the similarities and differences in life cycles of plants and animals. The table on the next page shows some data. Study the data and try to find out examples appropriate for the conditions given in the second and third columns. If you think that Reprint 2025-26 Living Creatures: Exploring their Characteristics 3) 10/4/2024 3:12:14 PM Ne) v& Ss 1S) vo Co BS [S) yn ry ws lo} lo} Q fs iS} BR wn Ss = =} 1S) Chapter 10.indd 204 an example for any of the conditions given below is not possible, explain why. S. no. Does it grow? 1. No 2. No 3. Yes 4. Yes Does it respire? -Xample Remarks No Yes No Yes 3. You have learnt that different conditions are required for seed germination. How can we use this knowledge for proper storage of grains and pulses? 4. You have learnt that a tail is present in a tadpole but it disappears as it grows into a frog. What is the advantage of having a tail in the tadpole stage? 5. Charan says that a wooden log is non-living as it cannot move. Charu counters it by saying that it is living because it is made of wood obtained from trees. Give your arguments in favour or against the two statements given by Charan and Charu. Fig. 10.9: Pot kept along the ground Ti} Fig. 10.10: Experimental set-up 6. Reprint 2025-26 What are the similarities and distinguishing features in the life cycles of a mosquito and a frog? A plant is provided with all the conditions suitable for its growth (Fig. 10.9). Draw what you expect to see in the shoot and the root of the plant after one week. Write down the reasons. Tara and Vijay set up the experiment shown in the picture (Fig. 10.10). What do you think they want to find out? How will they know if they are correct? Design an experiment to check if temperature has an effect on seed germination. 10/4/2024 3:12:16 PM Chapter 10.indd 205 Learning further ) Make a field trip to a local garden. Interact with a gardener to learn about various conditions and the time required for the growth of various plants. Can we grow plants without germinating their seeds? Explore and cite some examples. Observe the life cycle of five plants grown at home, school,