(using modern spelling). The translator was Charles Wilkins. first translations of Sanskrit texts into a European language; the French, the Germans and others soon followed. The motivations were mixed: some scholars were genuine students or admirers of India s ancient culture, while others were convinced that by studying Indian languages and texts, it would be easier to demonstrate the superiority of Christianity. The spread of Sanskrit studies and texts in Europe (followed later by other Indian languages) was like the discovery of a new continent , in the words of the German philosopher Georg Hegel. Indian texts had a great impact on European philosophers, writers, poets, artists, and sometimes statesmen; this influence extended to the United States of America in the 19" century. This is a reminder that although political domination may flow in one direction, cultural influence sometimes flows in the opposite direction. 4 - The Colonial Era in India Tapestry of the Past Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Chapter 4.indd 114 Before we move on... > The Portuguese, the Dutch, the French and the British were attracted to India primarily because of her great wealth. They fought among themselves for dominance of the Subcontinent, with the British gaining the upper hand. The British ruthless taxation policy inflicted great misery on the people, causing severe famines in particular and millions of deaths. The deliberate deindustrialization of India devastated her once-thriving manufacturing sector. Gradually, the British imposed their administrative structures, legal systems and educational institutions to ensure total colonial control over the Indian society. The Portuguese focused on religious conversion and cultural transformation in Goa created long-lasting social divisions. The French policy of assimilation created a small elite of culturally French Indians in Pondicherry. Several uprisings took place from the late 18" century onward, with the Great Rebellion of 1857 threatening the colonial rule for a while. Most of these uprisings were brutally repressed. In the 19 century, India s classical culture (in particular through translated Sanskrit texts) flowed back to the West, creating a lasting influence. Questions and activities 1. What is colonialism? Give three different definitions based on the chapter or on your knowledge. Colonial rulers often claimed that their mission was to civilise the people they ruled. Based on the evidence in this chapter, do you think this was true in the case of India? Why or why not? How was the British approach to colonising India different from earlier European powers like the Portuguese or the French? 08-07-2025 10:42:12 Chapter 4.indd 115 . Indians funded their own subjugation. What does this mean in the context of British infrastructure projects in India like the railway and telegraph networks? . What does the phrase divide and rule mean? Give examples of how this was used by the British in India? . Choose one area of Indian life, such as agriculture, education, trade, or village life. How was it affected by colonial rule? Can you find any signs of those changes still with us