was unacceptable. The seed would grow early in the 20" century into a full-fledged struggle for freedom, though with different methods. Meantime, in 1858, the British Crown took direct control of India from the East India Company, initiating the period of the British Raj. British policies shifted from aggressive territorial expansion to consolidation of control. The Indian Army was reorganised so as to prevent unified resistance in the future. THE LEGACY OF EUROPEAN COLONIALISM IN INDIA The European (mostly British) conquest and rule of India was not a civilising mission India s own civilisation was much older than Europe s. It was a process of subjugation and 05-07-2025 17:14:40 . Twoheroines | _ Rani Lakshmibai of Jhansi fought bravely tosave ~ herkingdom from British annexation; assisted y the Maratha Tatia (or Tantia) Tope, Nana Saheb s military adviser, Rani Lakshmibai managed to escape a besieged Jhansi and - to conquer the Gwalior fort, seizing the treasury and the arsenal. She was killed on 18 June 1858 on the battlefield. The British army officer who commanded the attack on ; . Fig. 4.19. A miiacgee P Jhansi noted that the Rani was remarkable _ portrait of Rani Lakshmibai_ for her beauty, cleverness, perseverance (1853 or earlier) _ [and] generosity to her subordinates. These \ = = qualities, combined with her rank, rendered her most aenher ete of hh $ * ge all the rebel leaders. ... [She was the] best and bravest of the rebels. ; ; Tatia Tope continued fighting until early 1859 but was betrayed and handed over to the British, who hanged him. Begum Hazrat Mahal of Awadh (north- | central portion of Uttar Pradesh) also resisted the British-led resistance after her kingdom was annexed and joined the rebels during the 1857 uprising, leading the defence of Lucknow when the Britis! 7 attempted to recapture the city. Sh rejected British offers of safe passage if she surrendered and ultimately had to take refuge in nearby Nepal. In | November 1858, Queen Victoria issued F Fig. 4.20. Detail ofa a proclamation marking the end of the portrait of Begum Hazrat = : : : _ = Mahal in the 1850s East India Company s rule in India; s 4 <> promised non-interference in seu 8 atters and greater inclusion of Indians in the administration. Begu <Be 5 rat Mahal issued a counter-proclamation, warning Indians ni tte < : Q 2 ust such assurances, as it is the unvarying custom ee oe 3 iJ i er to forgive a fault t be it great or pute v 4 - The Colonial Era in India Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 SS exploitation executed systematically, with brutal repression if necessary. Except for a small Indian elite who accepted British rule as inevitable, the Indians suffered the fate of many of the world s colonised populations: abuse, exploitation, violence and uprooting. At the same time, the colonial rule had some largely unintended consequences. It opened (or re-opened) India