regionalrulers or succession disputes within ruling houses, so as to benefit from these conflicts the divide and rule policy. The British were equally skilled at exploiting existing divisions within Indian society: they identified and often encouraged tensions between religious communities, for instance. The Battle of Plassey (1757) exemplifies this approach. When tensions arose between _ Siraj-ud-daulah, the Nawab of Bengal, and the East India Company officials led by Robert Clive, the latter identified disgruntled elements within Fig. 4.7. Clive leading the East India Company s troops the Nawab s court. Clive at Plassey, 1757 (painting by William Heath, 1821) hatched a conspiracy with Mir Jafar, the Nawab s military commander, promising to install him as the new Nawab in exchange for his betrayal. The battle took place at Palashi (Plassey as the British spelt it), some 150 kilometres north of present-day Kolkata. Some French forces assisted the Nawab, but Mir Jafar s forces constituting the majority of the Nawab s army stood aside, ensuring a British victory despite their smaller number. Even today, Mir Jafar in India remains a synonym for traitor ! By positioning themselves as a kingmaker, the East India Company gradually established control over increasingly large territories. In the 19 century, it went a step further and introduced the infamous Doctrine of Lapse, according to which any princely state would be annexed if its ruler died 4 - The Colonial Era in India Tapestry of the Past 05-07-2025 17:14:37 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 without a natural male heir. This deliberately disregarded the Hindu tradition of adoption, which was a legitimate means of succession in Indian royal houses. DON'T MISS OUT In the Indian context, a princely state was a region that remained under the rule of an Indian prince, maharaja or nawab, but which had accepted British protection and guidance in exchange for maintaining internal autonomy. There were hundreds of them, from large ones (such as Hyderabad, Mysore, Travancore or Jammu & Kashmir) to smaller ones. At the time of India s Independence, there were over 500 princely states, covering about 40 per cent of the Subcontinent. The Doctrine of Lapse led to the annexation of numerous states, contributing to the expansion of the territorial control of the British. This created much resentment in sections of Indian society and contributed to the 1857 Rebellion (to which we return below). Another stratagem (known as subsidiary alliance ) was to install a British Resident in the courts of Indian rulers to protect them against internal or external threats; in exchange, they would have to maintain British troops at their own expense and conduct foreign relations only through the British. While appearing to preserve the sovereignty of princely states, the system effectively transferred real power to the British while burdening Indian rulers with the costs of their own subjugation! The ruler of Hyderabad was among the first to enter such an alliance in 1798; several others soon followed. These so-called alliances allowed the British