(pass), requiring all ships in the Arabian Sea to purchase Portuguese permits for navigation. Ships without these permits were seized. This naval dominance allowed them to monopolise the spice trade between Inquisition: A tribunal set up by the Roman India and Europe for nearly a century. Catholic Church to judge heretics (i.e. Christians suspected of holding opinions contrary to the Church's doctrine). Over some 600 years, across Europe many thousands of supposed heretics were tortured and executed. Alongside commercial exploitation, the Portuguese 4a presence in western ASCO,- DA> GAMA India was_ characterised Pel by religious persecution. KhorKatavy In Goa, they established IN "WHE YEAR the Inquisition in 1560, 1498. which severely persecuted Hindus, Muslims, Jews, and Christian converts Oo Fig. 4.4. A plaque in suspected of practising Kozhikode marking Vasco their original faith. Such da Gama s arrival in 1498 05-07-2025 17:14:36 Chapter 4.indd 89 persecution was accompanied by forced conversions and the destruction of many Hindu temples, among other forms of abuse of the native population. (The Goa Inquisition was only abolished in 1812.) The Dutch: commerce and competition The Dutch arrived in India in the early 17" century and, unlike the Portuguese, focused primarily on commercial dominance, particularly in the spice trade. They established a Dutch East India Company, with trading posts in various parts of India, including, on the west coast, Surat, Bharuch, Cochin (Kochi), and on the east coast Nagapattinam and Masulipatnam (presentday Machilipatnam). Their most significant presence was in the Malabar region of Kerala, where they displaced the Portuguese from several trading centres. Fig. 4.5. A depiction of the surrender of Dutch forces to King Marthanda Varma of Travancore after the Battle of Colachel, 1741 CE (Padmanabhapuram Palace). 4 - The Colonial Era in India Tapestry of the Past 05-07-2025 17:14:37 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 S| Chapter 4.indd 90 The Dutch presence in India was ultimately limited; it declined significantly after their defeat at the Battle of Colachel in 1741, where the forces of Travancore under King Marthanda Varma decisively defeated the Dutch both on land and at sea (the Travancore kingdom was in the southern part of presentday Kerala). This battle was a rare instance of an Asian power successfully repelling a European colonial force. The French: colonial ambitions The French entered India later, establishing their first trading post at Surat in 1668 and subsequently at Pondicherry (presentday Puducherry) in 1674, where they established their East India Company (Compagnie des Indes Orientales) and developed ambitious plans to establish a French empire in India. Dupleix, who served as Governor-General of French India from 1742 to 1754, pioneered several colonial strategies that would later be adopted by the British. In particular, he trained Indian soldiers in European military techniques, creating disciplined infantry soldiers known as sepoys. Dupleix also developed the strategy of indirect rule through puppet Indian rulers, who were installed through interventions in local succession disputes. The French colonial ambitions in India were ultimately checked during the Carnatic Wars