parts of the world. As you will discover in higher grades, European powers in particular, Spain, Portugal, Britain, France, and Netherlands established colonies across Africa, Asia, the Americas, Australia and many Pacific islands, Enslavement: after conquering large parts of those regions of the world Turning q p & - a someone into Often, the conquests were achieved through military campaigns a slave. that involved the massacre or enslavement of native populations. What impelled those nations to undertake such campaigns? Political competition between European powers created a race for territorial expansion and global influence. Territorial expansion had obvious economic advantages: access to new natural resources, new markets and new trade routes and, often, plunder, as we will see. Converting indigenous populations to Christianity was another powerful motivation. A lesser one, but significant nonetheless, was scientific inquiry the 4 - The Colonial Era in India Tapestry of the Past Chapter 4.indd 85 05-07-2025 17:14:36 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 | Chapter 4.indd 86 Demonise: To falsely portray an individual or agroup of people in avery negative light. desire to explore unknown lands so as to accumulate knowledge of the planet s geography and natural history. While colonisers often claimed they had the civilising mission of bringing progress to the colonised peoples, who were often demonised as savage , primitive or barbaric , the reality was very different: loss of independence, exploitation of resources alremteiny Lise tnite et 8 S85 Fig. 4.3. A cartoon depicting a British business magnate straddling Africa while he holds a telegraph wire (Edward Linley Sambourne in Punch magazine, London, 1892). by the colonisers, the destruction of traditional ways of life, and the imposition of foreign cultural values. It is true that the colonial age brought the world together, saw a rapid growth of economies and technologies, but the benefits were mostly for the colonisers; many historical studies have documented the immense hardships that the colonised people had to endure. 05-07-2025 17:14:36 LET'S EXPLORE What do you think the cartoon (Fig. 4.3) is trying to express? (Keep in mind that the telegraph, which permitted instant communications for the first time, was then a recent invention.) Analyse different elements of the drawing. In many of the colonised regions, resistance built up against the colonisers. The phenomenon of colonialism declined in the mid-20" century, especially after World War II; many factors contributed to rapid worldwide decolonisation, with most colonised countries attaining independence. Here, however, we will focus on the special case of India. EUROPEANS IN INDIA India traded with the Greeks and the Romans over two millennia ago. Indian goods spices, cotton, ivory, gems, sandalwood, teakwood, wootz steel, among other commodities were highly sought after in the Mediterranean world. Until the 16" century CE, when European powers began sailing to the Indian Subcontinent, India was a vibrant economic and cultural powerhouse. Historical estimates (by economist Angus Maddison, in particular) suggest that India contributed at least one-fourth of the world GDP during this whole period, making it