India, sank into deep poverty and never recovered. The drain of India s wealth As we saw earlier, economic exploitation of India formed the foundation of British colonial policy. In 1895, the U.S. historian and political scientist Brooks Adams noted: C C Very soon after [the Battle of] Plassey, the Bengal plunder Chapter 4.indd 97 began to arrive in London, and the effect appears to have been instantaneous, for all authorities agree that the industrial revolution ... began with the year 1760. ... Possibly since the world began no investment has ever yielded the profit reaped from the Indian plunder. In other words, according to Adams, the Industrial Revolution in Britain, which required much investment, was made possible at least partly by the stolen wealth from India (this phrase is by the U.S. historian Will Durant). 4 - The Colonial Era in India Tapestry of the Past 08-07-2025 10:00:05 House of Commons is the name for the elected lower house of the bicameral parliament of the United Kingdom. Dadabhai Naoroji was the first Indian to be elected to the British House of Commons. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 = Fig. 4.10. Brooks Adams Digby Y THINK ABOUT IT Taking his cue from scholars such as Adams and Digby, Dadabhai Naoroji, a respected political figure, authored in 1901 Poverty and Un-British Rule in India, in which he compiled from British reports the wealth estimated to have been drained out of India. About the same time, Romesh Chunder Dutt, a historian, did a similar exercise in his Economic History of India. All these studies showed that the colonisers had extracted many billions of pounds from India. A more recent estimate (by Utsa Patnaik) for the period 1765 to 1938 comes to 45 trillion U.S. dollars (in today s value), or about 13 times Britain s GDP in 2023! This was extracted not just through taxes, but by charging Indians for the colonial power s expenditures on building the railways, the telegraph network, and even on wars! Had this wealth remained invested in India, it would have been a very different country when it attained Independence. LET S EXPLORE Why do you think Dadabhai Naoroji means by un-British rule in India ? (Hint: he was an MP in the House of Commons in 1892.) Fig. 4.11. William Fig. 4.13. R.C. Dutt Fig. 4.12. Dadabhai Naoroji Let us return to this painting (Fig. 4.14), but now with some clues to its symbolism. Note how Britannia (a symbolic Britannia, with the lion symbolising God Mercury, symbolising commerce and travel Old Father = > Two dark figures Thames , (Indians?) offering symbolising London bales of cotton Fig. 4.14. The East offering its riches to Britannia making sense of the painting s symbolism figure for Britain) sits higher than the colonies, pointing to her superior power; contrast with the lower position and bent posture of the colonies. Did they really offer their wealth? Or did Britain seize it by force or ruse?