t be it great or pute v 4 - The Colonial Era in India Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 SS exploitation executed systematically, with brutal repression if necessary. Except for a small Indian elite who accepted British rule as inevitable, the Indians suffered the fate of many of the world s colonised populations: abuse, exploitation, violence and uprooting. At the same time, the colonial rule had some largely unintended consequences. It opened (or re-opened) India to the world and the world to India. The British (and the French to a much smaller extent) were systematic in documenting every aspect of their conquest, from its geography (they conducted meticulous surveys of the Subcontinent). They created impressive lists of all ethnic groups, although the lists were flawed because of the unscientific but prevalent notions of race (as genetics has shown, races do not exist). They also documented India s monuments, studying their art and architecture, restoring some of the ruined ones, and initiating the discipline of archaeology. But in the process, they (and other colonial powers) stole thousands of statues, paintings, jewels, manuscripts and other cultural artefacts from India and sent them to European museums or private collections. While this represented a profound cultural loss and violation of India s heritage, it also promoted some appreciation of Indian art in the European public. Such massive theft took place over much of the colonised world; today, there are ongoing debates and efforts to repatriate some of these cultural treasures to their countries of origin. LET'S EXPLORE > In the sentence It opened (or re-opened) India to the world and the world to India , why do you think we added re-opened ? > Some argue that stolen cultural heritage has been better preserved abroad than it would have been in India. What is your view on its repatriation? Discuss in groups. Finally, although British scholars were not the first Europeans to master the Sanskrit language, they started publishing some of the THE BHAGVAT-GEET A, OR DIALOGUES or KREESHNA anv ARFOON; IN EIGHTEEN LECTURES; witht N oO Ay E S. TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL, IN THE Sdnferi@t, OR ANCIENT LANGUAGE oF THE Brabmdns, BY CHARLES WILKINS, SENIOR MERCHANT IN THE SERVICE OF THE HONOURABLE THE EAST INDIA COMPANY, ON THEIR BENGAL ESTABLISHMENT. pe LONDON: PRINTED FOR C. NOURSE, OPPOSITE CATHARINE-STREET, IN THE STRAND. M.DCC.LXXXY. Fig. 4.21. The title page of the first English translation (in 1785) of a Sanskrit text: The Bhagavad Gita or Dialogues of Krishna and Arjuna (using modern spelling). The translator was Charles Wilkins. first translations of Sanskrit texts into a European language; the French, the Germans and others soon followed. The motivations were mixed: some scholars were genuine students or admirers of India s ancient culture, while others were convinced that by studying Indian languages and texts, it would be easier to demonstrate the superiority of Christianity. The spread of Sanskrit studies and texts in Europe (followed later by other Indian languages) was like the