thousands of Santhals, including, eventually, the rebel leaders. However, the daring Santhal rebellion inspired other tribal communities to resist colonial rule. Fig. 4.17. An 1856 sketch in the Illustrated London News depicting an unequal confrontation between Santhal rebels and gun-wielding sepoys LET'S EXPLORE Note how the Santhals are depicted in the 1856 sketch (Fig. 4.17) drawn from an artist s imagination: observe their complexion, dress, weapons and draw your conclusions as regards the image this depiction would create in the popular mind in Britain. Peasant uprisings against economic exploitation Even without famines, peasants suffered under the unfair British revenue collections, often losing their lands to moneylenders or new landlords. The Indigo Revolt (1859-1862) 4 - The Colonial Era in India Tapestry of the Past @ Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Mutiny: In this context, mutiny refers toa rebellion by soldiers, or sailors in the case of anavy, against their officers. illustrates this exploitation. European planters forced peasants in the northern parts of Bengal to abandon food crops and, instead, grow indigo plants, as the indigo dye was then in great demand in Europe. From planters to traders, everyone earned huge profits except the peasants, who were so poorly paid that they got trapped in debt slavery. When they refused to grow indigo, they faced imprisonment, torture, and destruction of their property. Their uprising was directed mostly at the planters, who retaliated by hiring mercenaries to attack the peasants. Their cause was supported by educated Bengalis and the Bengali press; the British authorities were eventually forced to restrict some of the worst abuses. '_LET S EXPLORE | Indigo is a natural deep blue pigment used in dyeing. Can you think of other natural substances that have been traditionally used in India to dye cloth? There are several more notable examples of uprisings across the Subcontinent, which, along with the other aspects of the British rule that we saw earlier, built up to the largest uprising of the 19" century. Let us turn to it. THE GREAT REBELLION OF 1857 The British called it the Sepoy Mutiny . Sepoys , let us recall, were the Indian soldiers enrolled in the East India company s British Army; its officers, of course, were almost all British. After India s Independence, historians rejected the term Sepoy Mutiny , proposing a few others instead; following many scholars, we will call the event the Great Rebellion of 1857 . But what exactly happened? Why do you think was the term Sepoy Mutiny rejected after Indian Independence? Write one paragraph explaining your reasons. Fig. 4.18. Imaginary depiction of the sepoys rebellion at Meerut (Illustrated London News, 1857) Even earlier, there were several signs of severe discontent among the sepoys, beginning with the so-called Vellore Mutiny of 1806, which erupted when the British introduced new uniform regulations that violated the religious practices of both Hindu and Muslim sepoys. For example, they were forbidden from wearing religious marks on their foreheads and were required to