move raw materials from the interior to ports for export and to distribute British manufactured goods throughout India. Railway routes largely ignored existing trade =] WY Voi = 4 2 - =~, . ~ | _W\ Ase > A Fig. 4.15. A steam locomotive of the Madras Railway (one of the companies operating the rail network in British India) in 1860 4 - The Colonial Era in India Tapestry of the Past e 05-07-2025 17:14:39 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 = patterns to serve colonial economic interests. Another purpose was to move armies quickly from their cantonments if they had to fight a distant rebellion or war. Besides, the construction of India s railways was not a gift from the colonial rulers to India. Most of it was paid for by Indian tax revenue, which means that Indian funded infrastructure that primarily served British strategic and commercial interests, instead of being focused on serving the people s needs. The same can be said of the telegraph network. Even the administrative costs of colonialism were borne by Indian subjects. The colonial administrative apparatus, military installations, and the lavish lifestyles of British officials in India were all financed by Indian taxation. In short, Indians funded their own subjugation. EARLY RESISTANCE MOVEMENTS: CHALLENGING COLONIAL AUTHORITY India was such an enormous source of wealth, natural and human resources for the British that they nicknamed her the jewel in the crown of the British Empire . And they asserted that India would forever remain part of the British Empire, on which the sun never sets. Y THINK ABOUT IT What is meant by the sun never sets on the British Empire ? Do you think this was a correct statement? However, almost from the beginning of the British conquest of India, resistance movements manifested to try and repel this self-imposed guest . We will briefly survey a few such movements, but before we do so, let us have a good look at the map of the British Indian Empire (Fig. 4.16). The red and pink territories are those directly under British administration, while the yellow ones are the princely states we discussed earlier. (The black lines stand for the railway lines.) mperial Gazetteer Adas of India. Flate 20. | NATIVE STATES AND TERRITORES ALWAYS GHOWN THUS Fig. 4.16. A map of the British Indian Empire in 1909 LET'S EXPLORE Examine the map. What are the main differences with the | map of today s India, in terms both of borders and of names? | 3 The Sannyasi-Fakir rebellion oz One of the earliest organised resistance movements, often 33 called the the Sannyasi (or Sannyasi-Fakir) Rebellion , ee began in Bengal after the terrible famine of 1770. Groups of cm sannyasis (Hindu ascetics) and fakirs (Muslim ascetics), who Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 S Chapter 4.indd 106 traditionally travelled freely for pilgrimage and charity, found their movements restricted by the British East India Company policies, especially