and of names? | 3 The Sannyasi-Fakir rebellion oz One of the earliest organised resistance movements, often 33 called the the Sannyasi (or Sannyasi-Fakir) Rebellion , ee began in Bengal after the terrible famine of 1770. Groups of cm sannyasis (Hindu ascetics) and fakirs (Muslim ascetics), who Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 S Chapter 4.indd 106 traditionally travelled freely for pilgrimage and charity, found their movements restricted by the British East India Company policies, especially by the new land and taxation policies. The precise motivations of the sannyasis and fakirs have been debated, but over the next three decades they attacked British treasuries and tax collectors. The British called them bandits , executed some of them and used their superior forces to eventually defeat them. This rebellion later inspired the Bengali writer Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay s novel Anandamath (1882); it contained the song Vande Mataram , which would inspire Indians during the struggle for freedom in the early 20" century and, after Independence, became India s national song. Tribal uprisings India s tribal communities faced unique threats as the British expanded into forests and hills, disrupting their traditional way of life. The British described tribals as primitive , restricted their access to forests and forest produce, sometimes acquiring tribal land or turning it into private property, imposing cash taxes, catching tribals in debt traps, replacing traditional tribal councils with the British legal system and encouraging missionaries to civilise and convert tribals to Christianity. Besides, a colonial law categorised hundreds of tribal communities as criminal tribes , causing them to be unjustly harassed for decades. Some of the above abuse led some tribes to rise in rebellion against the colonial power. Among the first such events, the Kol Uprising (1831-1832) in Chota Nagpur (in present-day Jharkhand) started when the British introduced land policies that favoured outsiders over the original tribal inhabitants. The Kol tribes (which included the Mundas and Oraons, among others) temporarily established their control over significant territory before being defeated by the British forces. The Santhal Rebellion of 1855-1856, a widespread uprising of the Santhal people across parts of present-day Jharkhand, Bihar and West Bengal, was led by two brothers, Sidhu and Kanhu Murmu, and rebelled against moneylenders and landlords who were taking away their ancestral lands with British support. The Santhals 05-07-2025 17:14:40 declared their own government and vowed to fight to the last drop of blood . The British response was brutal; after some initial losses, they burned entire villages and killed thousands of Santhals, including, eventually, the rebel leaders. However, the daring Santhal rebellion inspired other tribal communities to resist colonial rule. Fig. 4.17. An 1856 sketch in the Illustrated London News depicting an unequal confrontation between Santhal rebels and gun-wielding sepoys LET'S EXPLORE Note how the Santhals are depicted in the 1856 sketch (Fig. 4.17) drawn from an artist s imagination: observe their complexion, dress, weapons and draw your conclusions as regards the image this depiction would create in the