{UCIT GRMRHSAAH ERTL AREPNATUYDUESCUACEPUNUUALAAL AE Fig. 4.6. A 1764 plan of Pondicherry showing the city enclosed in fortifications and grid planning. The large structure facing the sea (at the bottom) was the fort. (The top of the plan points to the west.) ENTER THE BRITISH Britain dominated the Indian subcontinent for nearly two centuries. How did this happen? Many books have dissected the methods of the British rulers; we will not attempt to tell a complete story, but will focus on the main aspects of their colonial presence in India. 4 - The Colonial Era in India Tapestry of the Past 05-07-2025 17:14:37 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 From traders to rulers The British conquest of India is one of history s most remarkable examples of how a trading company could transform into an imperial power. Unlike classic conquests, the British takeover of India was gradual, calculated, and often disguised as commercial enterprise rather than military invasion. The English East India Company was established as a trading company and was granted a royal charter by Queen Elizabeth I, which gave it special powers to raise a private army, for instance. Nevertheless, its agents initially kept up a pretence of being mere traders, which allowed them, in the 17" century, to establish footholds along India s coast with minimal resistance: Surat, Madras, Bombay and Calcutta among the first. Local rulers did not mind these trading posts, as they generally welcomed foreign trade (which, let us recall, was a longstanding practice in India). These modest beginnings concealed the Company s longterm ambitions. LET US EXPLORE Before you read further, have a good look at the painting on the first page of this chapter. It was specially ordered for the London headquarters of the East India Company and is over three metres long. Observe every aspect of it the people in it, the objects, the symbols and the attitudes. Form groups of four or five students and let each group present its conclusions as regards the messages the painting conveys. (You will find our answers a few pages down, when we return to the painting, but avoid looking at them right now!) The strategy of divide and rule While maintaining an appearance of traders, the Company s agents cultivated political relationships with local rulers, offering military support to some against their rivals, thus inserting themselves into Indian political conflicts and emerging as power brokers rather than foreign invaders. They would also Chapter 4.indd 93 play on rivalries between regionalrulers or succession disputes within ruling houses, so as to benefit from these conflicts the divide and rule policy. The British were equally skilled at exploiting existing divisions within Indian society: they identified and often encouraged tensions between religious communities, for instance. The Battle of Plassey (1757) exemplifies this approach. When tensions arose between _ Siraj-ud-daulah, the Nawab of Bengal, and the East India Company officials led by Robert Clive, the latter identified disgruntled elements within Fig. 4.7. Clive leading