Great Famine of 1876-1878, for instance, up to 8 million Indians perished, mostly in the Deccan plateau. Paradise: Ina religious context, heaven. Here, an ideal, wealthy or perfectly happy place. Tapestry of the Past 4 - The Colonial Era in India 05-07-2025 17:14:37 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Chapter 4.indd 96 Ae, it \ ieee Weta Fig. 4.8. Grain bags on Madras beach, ready for export, | while people were dying of hunger in large numbers. Fig. 4.9. People waiting for famine relief in Bangalore (today Bengaluru) during the 1877 famine (Illustrated London News) Disregarding the severity ofthe crisis, some Indian traders would hold onto their stocks in the hope of price rise, causing an artificial scarcity, and the British administration continued to export grain to Britain about one million tonnes of rice alone per year during the three years of the famine (Fig. 4.8). Apart from the factors mentioned above, the British economic policy of free market , which left prices of commodities free to fluctuate, contributed to the severity of the famines. Thus Lord Lytton, Viceroy of India during the 1876-1878 famine, issued an order that there is to be no interference of any kind on the part of the Government with the object of reducing the price of food. At the same time, in 1876, at 05-07-2025 17:14:38 the height of the Great Famine, Lytton organised an extravagant durbar in Delhi which involved a week-long feast for 68,000 officials, satraps and maharajas . Precise numbers of severe famines during the entire British rule vary from a dozen to over 20. According to several Famine Commissions and other reports, it has been estimated that the total number of human victims ( human since millions of cattle and other animals also died) is anywhere between 50 and 100 million nearly the number of deaths caused by World War II. The British administration did open famine relief camps in some cities (Fig. 4.9), but far too few and with inadequate supplies. Some officials argued that famine relief should be deliberately kept very low; the Famine Commission of 1878-80, for example, stated: The doctrine that in time of famine the poor are entitled to demand relief ... would probably lead to the doctrine that they are entitled to such relief at all times. We should note that famines in India had occurred throughout history, caused by droughts, floods, military campaigns and other factors, but never on such a scale. During the colonial era, India, especially rural India, sank into deep poverty and never recovered. The drain of India s wealth As we saw earlier, economic exploitation of India formed the foundation of British colonial policy. In 1895, the U.S. historian and political scientist Brooks Adams noted: C C Very soon after [the Battle of] Plassey, the Bengal plunder Chapter 4.indd 97 began to arrive in London, and the effect appears to have been instantaneous, for all authorities agree that the industrial revolution ... began with the