the lion symbolising God Mercury, symbolising commerce and travel Old Father = > Two dark figures Thames , (Indians?) offering symbolising London bales of cotton Fig. 4.14. The East offering its riches to Britannia making sense of the painting s symbolism figure for Britain) sits higher than the colonies, pointing to her superior power; contrast with the lower position and bent posture of the colonies. Did they really offer their wealth? Or did Britain seize it by force or ruse? Note also the Indians dark complexion (in contrast with that of Britannia), reflecting the belief in the superiority of white people over the dark-skinned natives . CHANGING LANDSCAPES Ey & The expanding colonial rule impacted nearly every aspect of zs Indian life, as the rulers were convinced that India should be vt reshaped according to their superior conceptions. Let us briefly a Ft look at a few of those impacts. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 | Embossed: With a design stamped on the cloth in sucha way that it stands out in relief. Decline of India s indigenous industries Before the 18" century, India was renowned for its manufacturing capabilities, particularly in textiles cotton, silk, wool, jute, hemp and coir being the chief ones. Indian cotton textiles, in particular, with rich and intricate designs, bright colours, and textures ranging from ultra-thin muslins to richly embossed fabrics were in high demand in many parts of the world. Do you understand all the terms used above to list and describe Indian textiles? If not, form groups of four or five and try to find out more, then compare your findings with the help of your teacher. British policy imposed heavy duties on Indian textiles imported into Britain while forcing India to accept British manufactured goods with minimal tariffs. Moreover, Britain now controlled most of the sea trade as well as exchange rates, so Indian traders found it difficult to export as earlier. The result was the ruin of Indian textile industry. In the 19 century, India s textile exports fell sharply, while Britain s imports into India grew even more sharply. Communities of skilled artisans who had practised their craft for generations were reduced to poverty and forced to return to subsistence agriculture on increasingly overtaxed land. As William Bentinck, then Governor-General of India, observed in 1834, The bones of the cotton weavers are bleaching the plains of India. Similar scenarios unfolded for India s manufactures of iron, steel, paper and other goods. India s share of the world GDP kept declining throughout the colonial rule, reaching hardly 5 per cent at the time of Independence. In less than two centuries, one of the richest lands of the world had become one of the poorest. Dismantling traditional governance structures Before British colonisation, India possessed well-organised systems of local self-governance. Village councils managed community affairs, resolved disputes, and organised public works such as irrigation, roads, etc. Regional kingdoms maintained complex administrative structures that had evolved over centuries to