and arithmetic, upon a system so economical, ... and at the same time so simple and effectual... A sharp turning point in India s educational history was marked by the notorious 1835 Minute on Indian Education of British historian and politician, Thomas B. Macaulay. In it, although he admitted that he had no knowledge of either Sanskrit or Arabic, he expressed his conviction that European knowledge was vastly superior to India s: I have never found one among them [Orientalists] who could deny that a single shelf of a good European library was worth the whole native literature of India and Arabia. Indians, therefore needed British education, whose objective would be to create a class of Indians who would be Indian in blood and colour, but English in taste, in opinions, in morals, and in intellect. Although a few prominent British Orientalists argued that Indian students should be left to study in their own languages, Macaulay s policy gained the upper hand and India s traditional schools slowly disappeared, while English became a language of prestige associated with the colonial masters, resulting in lasting divisions in Indian society between English-educated elites and the masses. The new education system served multiple colonial objectives. It created a pool of Indian clerks and minor officials who could staff the lower ranks of the colonial administration at a fraction of the cost of British personnel. It also sidelined traditional sources of knowledge and authority, creating generations of Indians disconnected from their own cultural heritage. VY THINK ABOUT IT What exactly did Macaulay mean when he wrote that a single shelf of a good European library was worth the whole native literature of India and Arabia ? And why should he want to make Indians English in taste, in Chapter 4.indd 103 opinions, in morals, and in intellect ? How does this relate to the civilising mission mentioned at the start of the chapter? Ask your teacher to guide a class debate on these questions. Reshaping economic structures to serve imperial needs The British transformed India s economy from a self-sufficient agricultural system supplemented by craft and manufacture production into a supplier of raw materials for British industry and a market forced to buy British goods. Without going into the technical details of this economic transformation, let us take the example of the construction of India s vast railway network, often cited as a colonial blessing. While the railways did bring people closer together and integrated India s internal market, it was designed primarily to move raw materials from the interior to ports for export and to distribute British manufactured goods throughout India. Railway routes largely ignored existing trade =] WY Voi = 4 2 - =~, . ~ | _W\ Ase > A Fig. 4.15. A steam locomotive of the Madras Railway (one of the companies operating the rail network in British India) in 1860 4 - The Colonial Era in India Tapestry of the Past e 05-07-2025 17:14:39 Exploring Society: India and Beyond