against internal or external threats; in exchange, they would have to maintain British troops at their own expense and conduct foreign relations only through the British. While appearing to preserve the sovereignty of princely states, the system effectively transferred real power to the British while burdening Indian rulers with the costs of their own subjugation! The ruler of Hyderabad was among the first to enter such an alliance in 1798; several others soon followed. These so-called alliances allowed the British to control vast territories without the administrative costs of direct rule, creating what was called an empire on the cheap . Once a state entered the system, exiting it was virtually impossible, as any attempt to break free would face overwhelming British military response. Chapter 4.indd 95 FROM PARADISE TO HELL? Devastating famines A few years after its victory at Plassey, the East India Company secured the right to collect revenue in Bengal, Bihar, and Odisha some of India s richest regions. Clive described Bengal in particular as the paradise of the earth . The Company s agents extracted maximum revenue while investing minimally in governance or development, with devastating consequences for the population. In 1770-1772, coming on top of two years of crop failure, the harsh revenue collection targets imposed by the East India Company in Bengal requiring farmers to pay a high rate of cash taxes on the produce of their lands, regardless of harvest conditions caused a catastrophic famine which killed nearly one-third of its population or an estimated 10 million people. In fact, the Company maintained harsh revenue collection targets, even increasing the land tax during the famine. Such cruelty was denounced later not only by Indian personalities but by some British officials and public intellectuals (such as William Digby whom we quoted at the start of this chapter). For instance, a century later, W.W. Hunter, an official, wrote: C C While the country every year became a total waste, the English government constantly demanded an increased land-tax. ... All through the stifling summer of 1770 the people went on dying. The husbandmen [farmers] sold their cattle; they sold their implements of agriculture; they devoured their seed-grain; they sold their sons and daughters, till at length no buyer of children could be found; they ate the leaves of trees and the grass of the field. ... Day and night a torrent of famished and diseasestricken wretches poured into the great cities. Such tragic famines were going to recur throughout the British rule in India. During the Great Famine of 1876-1878, for instance, up to 8 million Indians perished, mostly in the Deccan plateau. Paradise: Ina religious context, heaven. Here, an ideal, wealthy or perfectly happy place. Tapestry of the Past 4 - The Colonial Era in India 05-07-2025 17:14:37 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Chapter 4.indd 96 Ae, it \ ieee Weta Fig. 4.8. Grain bags on Madras beach, ready for export, | while people were dying of hunger in large