India traded with the Greeks and the Romans over two millennia ago. Indian goods spices, cotton, ivory, gems, sandalwood, teakwood, wootz steel, among other commodities were highly sought after in the Mediterranean world. Until the 16" century CE, when European powers began sailing to the Indian Subcontinent, India was a vibrant economic and cultural powerhouse. Historical estimates (by economist Angus Maddison, in particular) suggest that India contributed at least one-fourth of the world GDP during this whole period, making it one of the two largest economies globally alongside China (whose contribution was of the same order). It is remarkable that from the 16" century onward, many European travellers to India described her as flourishing and noted her manufacturing capabilities, diverse agricultural output, and extensive internal as well as external trading networks. However, this economic prosperity also made India an attractive target for European colonial ambitions. Let us survey Europe s first colonial powers in India. The Portuguese: commerce and atrocities The Portuguese explorer and navigator Vasco da Gama s arrival at Kappad (near Kozhikode in Kerala) in May 1498 paved the way for the beginning of European colonisation in India. GDP: Abbreviation of gross domestic product , a measure of the value of goods and services a country (or the world, in this case) produces in one year. 4 - The Colonial Era in India Tapestry of the Past Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 [>] Chapter 4.indd 88 A few centuries ago, the port town of Ullal (in present-day southern Karnataka) was an_ important trading point controlled by Rani Abbakka I. In the latter half of the 16" century, the Portuguese repeatedly attempted to take it over, but Rani Abbakka I formed strategic alliances with neighbouring kingdoms and thwarted their attempts. She was eventually captured and died fighting in prison. Her successor Rani Abbakka II is reported to have created fireballs out of coconut shells and set several ships of the Portuguese navy on fire. Their inspirational stories are remembered even today through the Yakshagana, a traditional form of dance-drama. Though he was well received, his aggressive ways failed to establish friendly relations with the local rulers. During his second voyage four years later, he seized, tortured and killed Indian merchants, and bombarded Calicut from the sea. The Portuguese captured strategic ports, including Goa (in 1510), which became the capital of their colony in India, as well as several trading posts along the Malabar and Coromandel coasts. The Portuguese implemented a system known as cartaz (pass), requiring all ships in the Arabian Sea to purchase Portuguese permits for navigation. Ships without these permits were seized. This naval dominance allowed them to monopolise the spice trade between Inquisition: A tribunal set up by the Roman India and Europe for nearly a century. Catholic Church to judge heretics (i.e. Christians suspected of holding opinions contrary to the Church's doctrine). Over some 600 years, across Europe many thousands of supposed heretics were tortured and executed. Alongside commercial exploitation,