his Disquisitiones Arithmeticae. Carl Friedrich Gauss 1s often referred to as the Prince of Mathematicians and is considered one of the three greatest mathematicians of all time, along with Archimedes and Newton. He has made fundamental Carl Friedrich Gauss contributions to both mathematics and science. (1777 1855) The Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic says that every composite number can be factorised as a product of primes. Actually it says more. It says that given any composite number it can be factorised as a product of prime numbers in a unique way, except for the order in which the primes occur. That is, given any composite number there is one and only one way to write it as a product of primes, as long as we are not particular about the order in which the primes occur. So, for example, we regard 2 x 3 x 5 x 7as the same as 3 x 5 x 7 x 2, or any other possible order in which these primes are written. This fact is also stated in the following form: The prime factorisation of a natural number is unique, except for the order of its factors. Reprint 2025-26 4 MATHEMATICS In general, given a composite number x, we factorise it as x = p,p, ... P,, Where P\> Py Pp, are primes and written in ascending order, i.e., p, < p, <...<p,.Ifwe combine the same primes, we will get powers of primes. For example, 32760 =2*2x2x3x3x5x7x 13=2?x3?x5x7x 13 Once we have decided that the order will be ascending, then the way the number is factorised, is unique. The Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic has many applications, both within mathematics and in other fields. Let us look at some examples. Example 1 : Consider the numbers 4 , where 7 is a natural number. Check whether there is any value of n for which 4 ends with the digit zero. Solution : Ifthe number 4", for any 1, were to end with the digit zero, then it would be divisible by 5. That is, the prime factorisation of 4 would contain the prime 5. This is not possible because 4 = (2)? ; so the only prime in the factorisation of 4 is 2. So, the uniqueness of the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic guarantees that there are no other primes in the factorisation of 4 . So, there is no natural number n for which 4 ends with the digit zero. You have already learnt how to find the HCF and LCM of two positive integers using the Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic in earlier classes, without realising it! This method is also called the prime factorisation method. Let us recall this method through an example. Example 2 : Find the LCM and HCF of 6 and 20 by the prime factorisation method. Solution : We have : 6 =2!x 3! and 20=2x2x5=2?x 5). You can find HCF(6, 20) = 2 and LCM(6, 20) = 2 x 2 x 3 x 5 = 60, as done