on or near the earth. But for objects far from the earth, the acceleration due to gravitational force of earth is given by Eq. (9.7). 9.2.1 To CALCULATE THE VALUE OF 2 To calculate the value of g, we should put the values of G, Mand Rin Eq. (9.9), namely, universal gravitational constant, G=6.7 x 107 N m? kg , mass of the earth, M= 6 x 10 kg, and radius of the earth, R=6.4 x 10 m. M OR _ 6.7x10'' Nm * kg x6x10 kg (6.4.x 10 mj? =9.8ms . Thus, the value of acceleration due to gravity of the earth, g=9.8 ms . 9.2.2 MOTION OF OBJECTS UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF GRAVITATIONAL FORCE OF THE EARTH Let us do an activity to understand whether all objects hollow or solid, big or small, will fall from a height at the same rate. 9.3 e Take a sheet of paper and a stone. Drop them simultaneously from the first floor of a building. Observe whether both of them reach the ground simultaneously. e We see that paper reaches the ground little later than the stone. This happens because of air resistance. The air offers resistance due to friction to the motion of the falling objects. The resistance offered by air to the paper is more than the resistance offered to the stone. If we do the experiment in a glass jar from which air has been sucked out, the paper and the stone would fall at the same rate. Activity Reprint 2025-26 We know that an object experiences acceleration during free fall. From Eq. (9.9), this acceleration experienced by an object is independent of its mass. This means that all objects hollow or solid, big or small, should fall at the same rate. According to a story, Galileo dropped different objects from the top of the Leaning Tower of Pisa in Italy to prove the same. As g is constant near the earth, all the equations for the uniformly accelerated motion of objects become valid with acceleration a replaced by g. The equations are: v=utat (9.10) s=ut+ 5 at (9.11) uv? =u? + 2as (9.12) where wand vare the initial and final velocities and sis the distance coveredin time, t. In applying these equations, we will take acceleration, a to be positive when it is in the direction of the velocity, that is, in the direction of motion. The acceleration, a will be taken as negative when it opposes the motion. Example 9.2 A car falls off a ledge and drops to the ground in 0.5 s. Let g = 10 m s* (for simplifying the calculations). (i) What is its speed on striking the ground? (ii) What is its average speed during the 0.5 s? (iii) How high is the ledge from the ground? Solution: Time, t= 4% second Initial velocity, u=Oms" Acceleration due to gravity, g=10ms? Acceleration of the car, a=+ 10ms2 (downward) (i) speed v = at v = 10ms?x0.5s = 5ms! ut+v (ii) average speed=