exerted by the water on the bottle is known as upthrust or buoyant force. In fact, all objects experience a force of buoyancy when they are immersed in a fluid. The magnitude of this buoyant force depends on the density of the fluid. 9.5.3 WHY OBJECTS FLOAT OR SINK WHEN PLACED ON THE SURFACE OF WATER? Let us do the following activities to arrive at an answer for the above question. Activity Take a beaker filled with water. e Take an iron nail and place it on the surface of the water. Observe what happens. The nail sinks. The force due to the gravitational attraction of the earth on the iron nail pulls it downwards. There is an upthrust of water on the nail, which pushes it upwards. But the downward force acting on the nail is greater than the upthrust of water on the nail. So it sinks (Fig. 9.5). Fig. 9.5: An iron nail sinks and a cork floats when placed on the surface of water. SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 Activity e Take a beaker filled with water. e Take a piece of cork and an iron nail of equal mass. e Place them on the surface of water. Observe what happens. The cork floats while the nail sinks. This happens because of the difference in their densities. The density of a substance is defined as the mass per unit volume. The density of cork is less than the density of water. This means that the upthrust of water on the cork is greater than the weight of the cork. So it floats (Fig. 9.5). The density of an iron nail is more than the density of water. This means that the upthrust of water on the iron nail is less than the weight of the nail. So it sinks. Therefore objects of density less than that of a liquid float on the liquid. The objects of density greater than that of a liquid sink in the liquid. uestions 1. Why is it difficult to hold.a school bag having a strap made ofa thin and strong string? 2. What do you mean by buoyancy? 3. Why does an object float or sink when placed on the surface.of water? 9.6 Archimedes Principle Activity e Take a piece of stone and tie it to one end of a rubber string or a spring balance. Suspend the stone by holding the balance or the string as shown in Fig. 9.6 (a). e Note the elongation of the string or the reading on the spring balance due to the weight of the stone. e Now, slowly dip the stone in the water in a container as shown in Fig. 9.6 (b). GRAVITATION (a) (b) Fig. 9.6: (a) Observe the elongation of the rubber string due to the weight of a piece of stone suspended from it in air. (b) The elongation decreases as the stone is immersed in water. Observe what happens to elongation of the string or the reading on the balance.