the spring balance due to the weight of the stone. e Now, slowly dip the stone in the water in a container as shown in Fig. 9.6 (b). GRAVITATION (a) (b) Fig. 9.6: (a) Observe the elongation of the rubber string due to the weight of a piece of stone suspended from it in air. (b) The elongation decreases as the stone is immersed in water. Observe what happens to elongation of the string or the reading on the balance. You will find that the elongation of the string or the reading of the balance decreases as the stone is gradually lowered in the water. However, no further change is observed once the stone gets fully immersed in the water. What do you infer from the decrease in the extension of the string or the reading of the spring balance? We know that the elongation produced in the string or the spring balance is due to the weight of the stone. Since the extension decreases once the stone is lowered in water, it means that some force acts on the stone in upward direction. As a result, the net force on the string decreases and hence the elongation also decreases. As discussed earlier, this upward force exerted by water is known as the force of buoyancy. What is the magnitude of the buoyant force experienced by a body? Is it the same in all fluids for a given body? Do all bodies in a given fluid experience the same buoyant force? The answer to these questions is contained in Archimedes principle, stated as follows: Reprint 2025-26 When a body is immersed fully or partially Archimedes principle has many in a fluid, it experiences an upward force that applications. It is used in designing ships and is equal to the weight of the fluid displaced submarines. Lactometers, which are used to by it. determine the purity of a sample of milk and Now, can you explain why a further hydrometers used for determining density of decrease in the elongation of the string was _ liquids, are based on this principle. not observed in activity 9.7, as the stone was fully immersed in water? uestions 1. You find your mass to be 42 kg on a weighing machine. Is your mass more or less than 42 kg? 2. You have a bag of cotton and an iron bar, each indicating a mass of 100 kg when measured on a weighing machine. In reality, one is heavier than other. Can you say which one is heavier and why? What you have learnt The law of gravitation states that the force of attraction between any two objects is proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. The law applies to objects anywhere in the universe. Such a law is said to be universal. Gravitation is a weak force unless large masses are involved. The force of gravity decreases with altitude. It also varies on