the force that binds us to the earth; (ii) the motion of the moon around the earth; (iii) the motion of planets around the Sun; and (iv) the tides due to the moon and the Sun. 9.2 Free Fall Let us try to understand the meaning of free fall by performing this activity. Activity 9.2 e Take a stone. e Throw it upwards. e It reaches a certain height and then it starts falling down. We have learnt that the earth attracts objects towards it. This is due to the gravitational force. Whenever objects fall towards the earth under this force alone, we say that the objects are in free fall. Is there any SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 change in the velocity of falling objects? While falling, there is no change in the direction of motion of the objects. But due to the earth s attraction, there will be a change in the magnitude of the velocity. Any change in velocity involves acceleration. Whenever an object falls towards the earth, an acceleration is involved. This acceleration is due to the earth s gravitational force. Therefore, this acceleration is called the acceleration due to the gravitational force of the earth (or acceleration due to gravity). It is denoted by g. The unit of gis the same as that of acceleration, that is, m s . We know from the second law of motion that force is the product of mass and acceleration. Let the mass of the stone in activity 9.2 be m. We already know that there is acceleration involved in falling objects due to the gravitational force and is denoted by g. Therefore the magnitude of the gravitational force F will be equal to the product of mass and acceleration due to the gravitational force, that is, F=mg (9.6) From Eqs. (9.4) and (9.6) we have Mxm mgs 7 d _ M or 9=G ra (9.7) where Mis the mass of the earth, and dis the distance between the object and the earth. Let an object be on or near the surface of the earth. The distance din Eq. (9.7) will be equal to R, the radius of the earth. Thus, for objects on or near the surface of the earth, Mxm a (9.8) (9.9) The earth is not a perfect sphere. As the radius of the earth increases from the poles to the equator, the value of gbecomes greater at the poles than at the equator. For most GRAVITATION calculations, we can take gto be more or less constant on or near the earth. But for objects far from the earth, the acceleration due to gravitational force of earth is given by Eq. (9.7). 9.2.1 To CALCULATE THE VALUE OF 2 To calculate the value of g, we should put the values of G, Mand Rin Eq. (9.9), namely, universal gravitational constant, G=6.7 x 107 N m? kg , mass of the earth, M= 6 x 10 kg, and radius of the earth, R=6.4 x 10 m. M OR