one is heavier and why? What you have learnt The law of gravitation states that the force of attraction between any two objects is proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. The law applies to objects anywhere in the universe. Such a law is said to be universal. Gravitation is a weak force unless large masses are involved. The force of gravity decreases with altitude. It also varies on the surface of the earth, decreasing from poles to the equator. The weight of a body is the force with which the earth attracts it. The weight is equal to the product of mass and acceleration due to gravity. The weight may vary from place to place but the mass stays constant. SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 All objects experience a force of buoyancy when they are immersed in a fluid. Objects having density less than that of the liquid in which they are immersed, float on the surface of the liquid. If the density of the object is more than the density of the liquid in which it is immersed then it sinks in the liquid. Ms Exercises 10. 11. 12. GRAVITATION How does the force of gravitation between two objects change when the distance between them is reduced to half ? Gravitational force acts on all objects in proportion to their masses. Why then, a heavy object does not fall faster than a light object? What is the magnitude of the gravitational force between the earth and a 1 kg object on its surface? (Mass of the earth is 6 x 10%4 kg and radius of the earth is 6.4 x 10 m.) The earth and the moon are attracted to each other by gravitational force. Does the earth attract the moon with a force that is greater or smaller or the same as the force with which the moon attracts the earth? Why? If the moon attracts the earth, why does the earth not move towards the moon? What happens to the force between two objects, if (i) the mass of one object is doubled? (ii) the distance between the objects is doubled and tripled? (iii) the masses of both objects are doubled? What is the importance of universal law of gravitation? What is the acceleration of free fall? What do we call the gravitational force between the earth and an object? Amit buys few grams of gold at the poles as per the instruction of one of his friends. He hands over the same when he meets him at the equator. Will the friend agree with the weight of gold bought? If not, why? [Hint: The value of gis greater at the poles than at the equator.] Why will a sheet of paper fall slower than one that is crumpled into a ball? Gravitational force on the surface of the moon is only 6 as strong as gravitational force on the earth. What is the weight in newtons