W=mxg W=10kgx9.8ms?=98N Thus, the weight of the object is 98 N. Example 9.5 An object weighs 10 N when measured on the surface of the earth. What would be its weight when measured on the surface of the moon? Solution: We know, Weight of object on the moon = (1/6) x its weight on the earth. That is, W, _10 m6 6 = 1.67N. Thus, the weight of object on the surface of the moon would be 1.67 N. uestions 1. What are the differences between the mass of an object and its weight? 2. Why is the weight of an object on the moon 6 its weight on the earth? 9.5 Thrust and Pressure Have you ever wondered why a camel can run in a desert easily? Why an army tank weighing more than a thousand tonne rests upon a continuous chain? Why a truck or a motorbus has much wider tyres? Why cutting tools have sharp edges? In order to address these questions and understand the phenomena involved, it helps to introduce the concepts of the net force in a particular direction (thrust) and the force per unit area (pressure) acting on the object concerned. Let us try to understand the meanings of thrust and pressure by considering the following situations: Situation 1: You wish to fix a poster on a bulletin board, as shown in Fig 9.3. To do this task you will have to press drawing pins with your thumb. You apply a force on the surface area of the head of the pin. This force is directed perpendicular to the surface area of the board. This force acts on a smaller area at the tip of the pin. Fig. 9.3: To fix a poster, drawing pins are pressed with the thumb perpendicular to the board. Situation 2: You stand on loose sand. Your feet go deep into the sand. Now, lie down on the sand. You will find that your body will not go that deep in the sand. In both cases the force exerted on the sand is the weight of your body. SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 You have learnt that weight is the force acting vertically downwards. Here the force is acting perpendicular to the surface of the sand. The force acting on an object perpendicular to the surface is called thrust. When you stand on loose sand, the force, that is, the weight of your body is acting on an area equal to area of your feet. When you lie down, the same force acts on an area equal to the contact area of your whole body, which is larger than the area of your feet. Thus, the effects of forces of the same magnitude on different areas are different. In the above cases, thrust is the same. But effects are different. Therefore the effect of thrust depends on the area on which it acts. The effect of thrust on sand is larger while standing than while lying. The thrust on unit area