centre. This force is called the centripetal (meaning centre-seeking ) force. Reprint 2025-26 In the absence of this force, the stone flies off along a straight line. This straight line will be a tangent to the circular path. Tangent to a circle A B = = i?) = = Astraight line that meets the circle at one and only one point is called a tangent to the circle. Straight line ABC is a tangent to the circle at point B. The motion of the moon around the earth is due to the centripetal force. The centripetal force is provided by the force of attraction of the earth. If there were no such force, the moon would pursue a uniform straight line motion. It is seen that a falling apple is attracted towards the earth. Does the apple attract the earth? If so, we do not see the earth moving towards an apple. Why? According to the third law of motion, the apple does attract the earth. But according to the second law of motion, for a given force, acceleration is inversely proportional to the mass of an object [Eq. (8.4)]. The mass of an apple is negligibly small compared to that of the earth. So, we do not see the earth moving towards the apple. Extend the same argument for why the earth does not move towards the moon. In our solar system, all the planets go around the Sun. By arguing the same way, we can say that there exists a force between the Sun and the planets. From the above facts Newton concluded that not only does the earth attract an apple and the moon, but all objects in the universe attract each other. This force of attraction between objects is called the gravitational force. GRAVITATION 9.1.1 UNIVERSAL LAW OF GRAVITATION Every object in the universe attracts every other object with a force which is proportional to the product of their masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them. The force is along the line joining the centres of two objects. Mm F=G Fig. 9.2: The gravitational force between two uniform objects is directed along the line joining their centres. Let two objects A and B of masses Mand mlie at a distance dfrom each other as shown in Fig. 9.2. Let the force of attraction between two objects be F: According to the universal law of gravitation, the force between two objects is directly proportional to the product of their masses. That is, F Mxm (9.1) And the force between two objects is inversely proportional to the square of the distance between them, that is, a (9.2) Combining Eqs. (10.1) and (10.2), we get Mm F 2 (9.3) Mxm or, F=G - (9.4) where G is the constant of proportionality and is called the universal gravitation constant. By multiplying crosswise, Eq. (9.4) gives Fxd?=GMxm Reprint 2025-26 Fd or G= Mm The SI unit of G can be obtained by substituting the units of