communities of living organisms interact with abiotic components in an ecosystems. There are two main types of ecosystems in nature. Aquatic ecosystems Fig. 12.6: Overlap of terrestrial and include ponds, rivers, and lakes while terrestrial ecosystems include forests, farms or even large trees like banyan, mango, or pilkhan. Hence, ecosystems can be large or small. Can you find overlapping ecosystems in Fig. 12.6? Fig. 12.6 shows an overlap of different terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. In this figure, you can see a small river (an aquatic ecosystem) along with mountains, forests, grassland, and farmland, which are examples of terrestrial ecosystems. Farmland is a human-made ecosystem. These ecosystems are interacting with each other at any given point. In Activity 12.4, we have seen the importance of the components and their interactions in an ecosystem. For example, sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water are essential for producing food in plants; soil provides medium and essential nutrients for plant growth; air provides oxygen for respiration in plants as well as animals; water is essential for all living organisms. This shows how living organisms depend on the non-living component of an ecosystem. Just as biotic components depend on abiotic components, abiotic components also depend on biotic components. For example, plants release oxygen during photosynthesis, roots hold soil in place and prevent erosion, and plants retain soil moisture and help cool the atmosphere. Youcanidentify and study any ecosystem in your surroundings and observe different types of interactions among the biotic and abiotic components. While studying biotic interactions, notice how organisms depend on each other for food. | Activity 12.5: Let us classify Observe Fig 12.1b, which illustrates a forest ecosystem. e Study the picture carefully and spot the organisms listed in Table 12.4. aquatic ecosystems Individual Population Ecosystem Fig. 12.7: Individual to ecosystem 6/28/2025 6:09:48 PM e Using the internet or your school library, find out what do these organisms eat. e Record your observations in Table 12.4 by identifying whether each organism feeds only on plants and plant products, only on animals, or on both. Table 12.4: Eating habits of different organisms Feeds on Feeds on Name of the Performs Feeds on | both plants organism | photosynthesis SLAG Cine animals and/or plant products animals Deer No CRESS Eine Weenies No Only on plants of plants Horse Vulture Bengal Fox Bird (Shikra) Squirrel Mouse Mushroom Tree Yes How do plants get their food? As you know, plants make their own food by the process of photosynthesis. Thus, they are called producers or autotrophs (auto=self + troph=food). - Organisms that cannot produce their own food and depend f on other organisms for their food are called consumers or Pros heterotrophs (hetero = other + troph= food). List the heterotrophs from Table 12.4. t . Organisms that eat only plants are called herbivores, such | PA \ as deer and hare. Those that eat only animals are carnivores, such as leopard. Organisms that eat both plants and animals are omnivores, such as crows, foxes, and mice. 12.5 Who