habitat, but they face different conditions. This is how living organisms coexist in harmony in the same habitat. 12.2 Who All Live Together in Nature? You have observed fish in a pond in Activity 12.1. Did you see only a single fish? Most likely, you may have seen many fish of the same kind. This group of fish of the same kind living together in a pond habitat is called a population of that particular fish. In this way, we can observe and record populations of different kinds of organisms in a single habitat. | Activity 12.2: Let us record We can understand the population of a particular type of plant by counting them at a given place and time. e Divide students into four to five groups. e Each group may identify any two organisms, plant(s) or animal(s). Mark an area of 1 m x 1 min your school garden. Identify four organisms in this area, and count their numbers. Record the number of the organisms in Table 12.2. Compile the data from all groups. Table 12.2: Number of particular organisms at a given space and time . Population (Number of individual Name of organism : organisms) Plantt: 20 Plant2: SSS 05 Animal 1: Animal 2: In the given example, there is a population of 20 plants and is only 5 plants in the same 1x1 m area. 6/28/2025 6:09:33 PM From Activity 12.2, we can explain that the population is a group of the same type of organisms in a habitat at a given time. Can a habitat have only one type of living organism? What might happen then? If all organisms are the same, they would have the same requirements food, water, space leading to competition and possible scarcity of resources. What else do you think could happen? In Activities 12.1 and 12.2, you observed that different group of organisms live together in a habitat. A community comprises different populations sharing the same habitat. The biotic components of a habitat, such as the plants, animals, and microorganisms together form the community. These organisms interact and depend on one another for survival. Ever heard of ... You may have seen brightly coloured flowers blooming around you. Have you ever looked closely at their parts? A flower has a stalk, green leafy structures called sepals, coloured petals and two reproductive parts. Carpels (female) and stamens (male). Sar Stamens burst release yellow dust like pollen grains. Wind, water insects, bats and birds helps carry pollen from the stamens to the carpels of the same and different flowers. This process is called pollination (Fig.12.2). It is essential for the formation of fruits and seeds. Fig. 12.2: Insect pollination 12.3 Does Every Organism in a Community Matter? Let us find out the role of different organisms in a community. | Activity 12.3: Let us read e Researchers conducted a study to see how fish in ponds affect seed production in the plants nearby. They observed Pond A Pond B Fig. 12.3: Pond