carpels of the same and different flowers. This process is called pollination (Fig.12.2). It is essential for the formation of fruits and seeds. Fig. 12.2: Insect pollination 12.3 Does Every Organism in a Community Matter? Let us find out the role of different organisms in a community. | Activity 12.3: Let us read e Researchers conducted a study to see how fish in ponds affect seed production in the plants nearby. They observed Pond A Pond B Fig. 12.3: Pond A with fish and Pond B without fish uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 |e oe fe le Se oe Se Sle cle oe Se cle Chapter 12.indd 194 6/28/2025 6:09:39 PM oe ce Se ee cle Se Se Se oe ote oe] Chapter 12 How Nature Works in Hacmony + two ponds A with fish and large number of flowering plants around it; B without fish and fewer flowering plants around it (Fig. 12.3). Think of a reason for these observations. Dragonft e Compare the number of dragonflies, _ bees, and butterflies in both the ponds. Do you find any relationship between the number of dragonflies and bees/butterflies? We observed that in Pond A (with fish) the number of dragonflies were less as compared to Pond B. Why? dragonfly e Fish eat dragonfly larvae, so ponds with fish rig. 12.4: Fish have indirect effect on plants had fewer dragonflies. Dragonflies usually in and around ponds. The solid arrows eat flies, bees and butterflies With fewer represent the direct effect, and the dashed dragonflies, more bees, flies, and butterflies arrows represent the indirect effect were found. These insects help pollinate flowers from nearby areas moving pollen from one flower to another, which helps plants produce seeds. So, flowers near ponds with fish may produce more seeds than those near ponds without fish. e What does this study show? How does the population of fish in a pond affect the seed production in nearby plants? e This study shows how biotic components (fish, dragonflies, pollinators, plants) and abiotic components (temperature, water, nutrients) interact with and affect each other (Fig. 12.4). Similarly, can overfishing by humans change this balance? How do you think it may affect the living and non-living parts of the habitat? 12.4 What Are the Different Types of Interactions Among Organisms and their Surroundings? In Curiosity, Grade 7, you learn about how plants and animals need air, water, soil, and sunlight to grow. Living organisms, or the biotic community, depend on non-living things, that is abiotic components for their survival. Plants and animals also depend on each other for nutrition, respiration, and reproduction. These are interactions among the biotic components. Both types of interactions among biotic components, and between biotic and abiotic components are important for survival in any habitat. Fig. 12.5: Biotic and abiotic interactions Chapter 12.indd 195 6/28/2025 6:09:45 PM Look at Fig. 12.5, and try to identify interactions among biotic components, and between biotic and abiotic components based on your learnings till now. | Activity