their survival. Plants and animals also depend on each other for nutrition, respiration, and reproduction. These are interactions among the biotic components. Both types of interactions among biotic components, and between biotic and abiotic components are important for survival in any habitat. Fig. 12.5: Biotic and abiotic interactions Chapter 12.indd 195 6/28/2025 6:09:45 PM Look at Fig. 12.5, and try to identify interactions among biotic components, and between biotic and abiotic components based on your learnings till now. | Activity 12.4: Let us relate and identify e Basedonthe given criteria, identify and describe the interactions between biotic and abiotic components shown in Fig. 12.5. Criterion 1 Interactions between abiotic and biotic components. These may influence life processes like nutrition, respiration, and reproduction in biotic components. Criterion 2 Interaction between two abiotic components these may influence the physical characteristics of a habitat. Criterion 3 Interaction among the biotic components. These may influence the availability of resources needed for life processes like nutrition, respiration, and reproduction. e Relate your learning with your observations. e Record your observations in Table 12.3 at the appropriate places. Table 12.3 is filled with examples for your reference. Table 12.3: Interaction of biotic and abiotic components in a habitat Criterion 1: Interactions Criterion 2: Criterion 3: between biotic and Interaction between two Interaction among the abiotic components abiotic components biotic components Earthworms live in The day temperatureis __ A frog eats insects. moist soil. high due to the bright sunlight. Many microbes are Water is evaporating fast A water snake eats fish. present in the pond. due to the sunlight. A fish lays eggs in Air current is blowing Frogs and fish may water. slowly on the water compete for small insects surface creating gentle larvae. waves. The soil near the pondis A fish lays eggs in water near moist. vegetation to protect them from other fish or frogs. uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 |e oe fe le Se oe Se Sle cle oe Se cle Chapter 12.indd 196 6/28/2025 6:09:45 PM Chapter 12.indd 197 oe ce Se ee cle Se Se Se oe ote oe] Chapter 12 How Nature Works in Harmony) In Activity 12.4, you understood different types ofinteractions occur withinahabitat.From 4 this, you can infer that the biotic components 4 (plants, animals, and microorganisms) and the abiotic components (air, water, soil, sunlight, and temperature) in a habitat interact with each other to form an ecosystem. Organisms in an ecosystem interact with abiotic components for food, shelter, and protection in an ecosystem. Different communities of living organisms interact with abiotic components in an ecosystems. There are two main types of ecosystems in nature. Aquatic ecosystems Fig. 12.6: Overlap of terrestrial and include ponds, rivers, and lakes while terrestrial ecosystems include forests, farms or even large trees like banyan, mango, or pilkhan. Hence, ecosystems can be large or small. Can you find overlapping ecosystems in Fig. 12.6? Fig. 12.6 shows an overlap of different terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems. In this figure, you can see