future generations. Fig. 12.17: Mangrove forest in Sundarbans uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 |e oe fe le Se oe Se Sle cle oe Se cle Chapter 12.indd 204 01-07-2025 12:18:26 oe ce Se ee cle Se Se Se oe ote oe] Chapter 12 How Nature Works in Hacmony 205 Chapter 12.indd 205 12.9.1 Human-made ecosystems Humans have created artificial ecosystems like fish ponds, farms, and parks to meet their needs. When well designed, these can help reduce pollution, support biodiversity, and provide recreational spaces for people. Unlike natural ecosystems, these need human care and management. Can you name any human made ecosystem in your area? 12.9.2 How do healthy ecosystems serve our farms? Farming, a major livelihood in India, can become unsustainable if not managed well by applying environment friendly farming practices. Humans have been practising farming for thousands of years to grow food. As the population grew, our dependence on agriculture increased. Between 1950 and 1965, India faced a food crisis due to low crop production. In the mid-20th century, the use of tractors, machines, synthetic fertilisers, and pesticides helped increase food production. This period is known as the Green Revolution. However, these farming methods are now considered unsustainable because of the overuse of synthetic chemicals, excessive groundwater extraction, and growing only one type of crop for commercial gain. How do these practices harm both the environment and human health? Many scientists believe that overusing pesticides and growing the same type of crop repeatedly on the same land leads to soil degradation. Understanding ecosystems can help us adopt better and more sustainable farming practices. | Activity 12.10: Let us survey Visit a nearby farm with your parents or teacher/interact with farmers in your community to find out about the farming practices they adopt. e Prepare a list of questions for farmers to find out the pesticides and other farm inputs they use, and whether they reuse or recycle materials to improve their crops. Here are some sample questions: o How have your farming practices changed over time? And why? o Whateffects do you notice when using synthetic fertilisers and pesticides? o Have you seen any changes in soil health after using these synthetic fertilisers and pesticides? e Interact with farmers based on these questions. Based on your findings, prepare a report. 01-07-2025 12:18:40 What inference do you draw from your interactions with farmers? Synthetic fertilisers and pesticides have played a vital role in improving crop production and helped countries like India become food secure. However, their long-term use can affect the environment and soil health. Overuse of synthetic fertilisers may reduce soil fertility by decreasing friendly microorganisms in soil and lowering organic matter (humus), which helps bind soil Fig. 12.18: Natural control of pests by particles. Without enough humus, soil becomes predators Beetle feeding on pests | Prone to erosion. Also, it reduces the population of natural predators which ultimately increase the population of pests (Fig. 12.18). Heavy irrigation and repeated ploughing can also disturb soil organisms