commensalism (one benefits, other is unaffected), and parasitism (one benefits, one is harmed). The benefits that ecosystems offer are crucial for human survival and well-being. They provide clean air, water, food, medicine, and climate regulation. Human activities like pollution, deforestation, habitat loss, climate change, invasive species, and overexploitation of natural resources threaten ecosystems. Protecting them through efforts, such as conservation like national parks and sanctuaries is vital. statement. (i) Acommunity is larger than a population. (ii) A community is smaller than an ecosystem. 2. A population is part of a community. If all decomposers suddenly disappear from a forest ecosystem, what changes Population do you think would occur? Explain why decomposers are Community oe ce Se ee cle Se Se Se oe ote oe] Chapter 12 How Nature Works in Hacmony 207 Ecosystem essential. Fig. 12.19: Population, community, and . Selvam from Cuddalore district, Tamil Nadu, shared that his village was less affected by the 2004 Tsunami compared to nearby villages due to the presence of mangrove forests. This surprised Sarita, Shabnam, and Shijo. They wondered if mangroves were protecting the village. Can you help them understand this? ecosystem 6/28/2025 6:10:50 PM 4. Look at this food chain: S \ Grass Grasshopper Frog > Snake If frogs disappear from this ecosystem, what will happen to the population of grasshoppers and snakes? Why? 5. In a school garden, students noticed fewer butterflies the Grass and previous season. What could be the possible reasons? plants What steps can students take to have more butterflies on campus? 6. Why is it not possible to have an ecosystem with only producers and no consumers or decomposers? 7. Observe two different places near your home or school a (e.g., a park and a roadside). List the living and non-living components you see. How are the two ecosystems different? 8. Human-made ecosystems like agricultural fields are necessary, but they must be made sustainable. Comment on rr the statement 9. Ifthe Indian hare population (Fig. 12.20) drops because of a Eagle disease, how would it affect the number of other organisms? He 12.20: Parts of a food web Discover, design, and debate e Plan a clean-up day at school or a nearby park. Wearing gloves and using bags, collect the litter you find. Discuss the kinds of waste you found. Which was the most common? How can we reduce such waste? e In Arunachal Pradesh, the Nyishi and Mishmi tribes treat the Tiger as sacred. In Chhattisgarh, the Baiga tribe worships Bagheshwar or Bagesur Dev and believes the Tiger is the protector of the forest. Find out about another Indian tribe that has a special bond with any animal. e Pick a tree near your home or school. Observe it once a week for 4 weeks. Note any new leaves, flowers, fruits, or visiting birds and insects. Record your observations. You may even upload your findings to www.seasonwatch.in and become a young citizen scientist. Prepare some questions based on your learnings so far ... Chapter 12.indd 208