Let us explore Caution: Explore the habitat in groups with your teacher. e Identify two habitats in your surroundings. e These could be any two of the following: a pond, a forest, an agricultural farm, or even a large tree like banyan, mango, or pilkhan (white fig) tree. e List the living beings and non-living things that you observe in these habitats. e Record your observations in Table 12.1. 6/28/2025 6:09:26 PM Table 12.1: Different components of two habitats ee ee eee Living beings Non-living things Fish Water (b) Forest habitat Fig. 12.1: Two types of habitats Living beings Non-living things Plants Soil Grass Trees Birds What common characteristics do you observe in the two habitats in Activity 12.1? The similarities are that both habitats have living beings as well as non-living things. However, the types of living beings are different and the non-living things also vary. The living beings you have recorded in Table 12.1 are termed as the biotic components and non-living things as the abiotic components of a habitat. Have you wondered why some organisms live on land while others live in water? Every organism needs specific conditions to survive. From this activity, you can see that different habitats offer different living conditions. In Activity 12.1, you listed fish as a biotic component of the pond. How do fish survive in a pond? A pond provides food, oxygen, shelter, and space to grow conditions essential = for survival of organisms. Fish obtain 1 their biotic needs, such as food, from small plants and animals, and abiotic needs, such as oxygen, from water. Other living beings also inhabit the pond, such as frogs, fresh turtles, snakes, dragonflies, mosquitos, snails, and ducks, along with plants like algae, diatoms, duckweeds, and lotus. They all interact with the other living beings and non-living things present in the places where they grow and thrive. Chapter 12.indd 192 uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 |e oe fe le Se oe Se Sle cle oe Se cle 6/28/2025 6:09:33 PM Chapter 12.indd 193 oe ce Se ee cle Se Se Se oe ote oe] Chapter 12 How Nature Works in Hacmony 193 Each habitat has its own biotic components and physical conditions air, sunlight, water, temperature, and_ soil. Different organisms living in the same habitat may use the resources in different ways. A forest might be warm during the day and cool at night. A snake that comes out at night and a rodent active during the day both live in the same habitat, but they face different conditions. This is how living organisms coexist in harmony in the same habitat. 12.2 Who All Live Together in Nature? You have observed fish in a pond in Activity 12.1. Did you see only a single fish? Most likely, you may have seen many fish of the same kind. This group of fish of the same kind living together in a pond habitat is called a population of that particular fish. In this way, we