exporter of frog Fig. 12.13: One change legs, especially of the Indian bullfrog (Hoplobatrachus leads to another tigerinus) (Fig. 12.14). This large-scale harvesting led to a decline in frog populations. Since frogs eat insects, their reducednumbersresultedina rise in agricultural pests. This forced farmers to use more synthetic pesticides, which harmed the environment, soil and water quality, and affected the overall environmental and human health. The Government of India banned the export of frog legs to prevent further ecological damage. An ecosystem stays in balance when interactions among organisms and their environment keep populations and resources stable. This balance is dynamic, not fixed, and can be disrupted by natural or human-made changes. Fig. 12.14: Indian bullfrog 12.8 How Do Interactions Maintain Balance in Ecosystems? Besides feeding relationships, organisms also compete for common resources like food, water, physical space, or sunlight. This competition helps control population size and keeps the ecosystem balanced. Without it, one species could multiply too much causing an imbalance in the ecosystem (Fig. 12.15). There are other types of relationships too. Based on the example given in Fig. 12.16, what do you observe? Fig. 12.15: Competition among a community in an ecosystem uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 |e oe fe le Se oe Se Sle cle oe Se cle Chapter 12.indd 202 6/28/2025 6:10:14 PM Chapter 12.indd 203 oe ce Se ee cle Se Se Se oe ote oe] Chapter 12 How Nature Works in Hacmony 203 Mutualism: Both organisms benefit. For example: Honeybees and flowers. Commensalism: Oneorganism benefits while the other is not affected. For example: Orchids on trees. Parasitism: One organism benefits while the other is harmed. For example: Ticks on the body of dogs. These interactions are all part of the complex web of life in an ecosystem. Be a scientist Flower gets potinated v Bee gets nectar v a) Orchid gets nutrition Vv Tree branch is unaffected v The dog gets skin The tick feeds on irritation < dog blood v Fig. 12.16: Different types of interactions between organisms ) Asir Jawahar Thomas Johnsingh (A,J.T. Johnsingh) was a famous Indian wildlife biologist who helped us understand forest ecosystems through the eyes of animals. He was a pioneer in studying wildlife through modern tracking system. His research showed how % Vaal predators like tigers and leopards rely on prey, such as deer and wild boar, while he was working in Bandipur National Park, Karnataka. He proved that a healthy prey population is key to predator survival. He inspired many youngsters | bt to study wildlife and protect the forests and biodiversity of India. 12.9 What Are the Benefits of an Ecosystem? We have learnt that biotic components and abiotic components of an ecosystem depend on each other and support various life processes. Humans also benefit from ecosystems. For example, forests provide fresh air, fertile soil, food, fibres, timber, and medicines. Similarly, aquatic ecosystems provide water and food. Ecosystems also offer aesthetic and recreational value. This benefits and supports our well-being and shows how