in Fig. 12.10b. e What figure do you get? It looks like a pyramid. Complete the pyramid in Fig. 12.10b. Each organism in a food chain has a specific position, called a trophic level (troph = food): e Producers (like green plants) are at Fig. 12.10: (a) Food chain of millet, mouse, the first trophic level. and eagle in a crop field Chapter 12.indd 199 6/28/2025 6:09:53 PM ae Sa e Herbivores (like hares and deer) are at the second Pb StS, level. e Small carnivores (like frogs) are at the third level. e Large carnivores (like tigers or vultures) occupy the next level. Activity 12.8: Let us trace and link Fig. 12.10: (b) Food chain e Look at Fig. 12.11. represented in a pyramid e Look at the figure and put more arrows for the missing relationship of who eats whom . e How many other organisms might be connected to one organism through a feeding relationship inan ecosystem? Look at Fig. 12.11, and observe the relationship between different food chains owl in an ecosystem. Are these food \ Bird chains interlinked? Each of the organisms may be eaten by two or more types of organisms. Thus, in an ecosystem, the food Frog ee chains are interlinked with each Rabbit Mouse epi other to form a network, called a food web. Grasses _ . You know that living organisms : grow, perform many functions, develop, and die. During their life cycle, organisms produce a lot of waste, including dead matter and food waste. 12.6 What Happens to Waste in Nature? You may have seen small umbrella-like structures, mushrooms, growing on dead plants or trees during the rainy season (Fig. 12.12). These are a type of fungi that grow on dead matter. Microorganisms like fungi and Fig. 12.12: Mushroom growing bacteria break down complex substances in dead plants on dead organic matter and animals into simpler ones. This process returns uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 |e oe fe le Se oe Se Sle cle oe Se cle Chapter 12.indd 200 6/28/2025 6:09:57 PM oe ce Se ee cle Se Se Se oe ote oe] Chapter 12 How Nature Works in Hacmony 201 important nutrients to the soil. You can also find tiny insects, such as beetles and flies, on animal droppings like elephant dung as they help break it down and recycle nutrients, back into the environment. This process is called decomposition and the organisms carrying out the process are called decomposers or saprotrophs (sapro= rotten + trophs = food). Plants grow in soil and many of the nutrients in soil come from the decomposition process. Thus, decomposers play an important role in recycling nutrients. In nature, nothing is wasted everything is reused. Does nature really waste anything? Ever heard of ... India is a country with diverse habitats and seasons. Many migratory birds fly thousands of miles and reach different habitats in India. They migrate from different parts of the world to avoid harsh climate, and in