= food). Plants grow in soil and many of the nutrients in soil come from the decomposition process. Thus, decomposers play an important role in recycling nutrients. In nature, nothing is wasted everything is reused. Does nature really waste anything? Ever heard of ... India is a country with diverse habitats and seasons. Many migratory birds fly thousands of miles and reach different habitats in India. They migrate from different parts of the world to avoid harsh climate, and in search for food. Birds not only enhance the aesthetics of those habitats but also play a significant role in keeping the balance in an ecosystem as pollinators or seed dispersers along the path they migrate. This way they link two habitats. These birds are predators of insect pests and help farmers to control pest populations, and indirectly help in healthy crop growth. Migratory birds, Demoiselle Crane visit the water body of Khichan village in Jodhpur district during the winter months. Do you know which birds in your area are seen only during winter? Collect postal stamps and covers of migratory birds released by the Indian Postal Department, and collect information about their place of origin and reasons for their migration to different localities in India and more. Showcase the postal stamps in your science laboratory/school library to popularise migratory birds. 4 ; . MITA INDIA 7M =GARGANEY TEAL yell 1 ROSY PASTOR frtaq uf 2000 (NDEPEX ASIANA g oi Ura 2000 _ S@Re INDEPEX ASIANA iol a 12.7 How Does One Change Lead to Another? Look at Fig. 12.13. It shows how one small change can lead to many others. For example, many plants in a pond start dying because of pollution. With fewer plants less oxygen will be Chapter 12.indd 201 6/28/2025 6:10:00 PM produced in water which will lead to a drop in the aed fish population in that water body. Reduction in fish | population will have cascading effects and there will be less number of consumers in the pond. As a result, @ | Less oxygen insects will increase in number. These insects will y spread to nearby farmlands. This is how farmers will ~ >. be compelled to use pesticides to grow their crops * | Fish die which may again adversely affect the environment. Further consequences may emerge in the form of ; other environmental issues. More insects y What happens when we intervene in nature? wate _ Fonsi 7, g G Activity 12.9: Let us read In the 1980s, India was a significant exporter of frog Fig. 12.13: One change legs, especially of the Indian bullfrog (Hoplobatrachus leads to another tigerinus) (Fig. 12.14). This large-scale harvesting led to a decline in frog populations. Since frogs eat insects, their reducednumbersresultedina rise in agricultural pests. This forced farmers to use more synthetic pesticides, which harmed the environment, soil and water quality, and affected the overall environmental and human health. The Government of India banned the export of frog legs to prevent further ecological damage. An