Elephant Corridor ULI IT60) 60T euLol LD How Nature Works in Harmony Chapter 12.indd 190 O877CHi2 Probe and ponder How might the loss of forest cover and changes in rainfall patterns lead to elephants to enter human farms and villages? Imagine you are a tree in a dense forest. What kind of relationships would you have with water, sunlight, other animals, and other components of the forest? Do you think the Earth can thrive without humans? Can humans survive without the earth? If two kinds of birds compete for the same fruit, how might their way of living change over time? Can human actions cause natural disasters? Share your questions 6/28/2025 6:09:26 PM | Chapter 12.indd 191 oe ce Se ee cle Se Se Se oe ote oe] Chapter 12 How Nature Works in Hacmony 191 In several parts of India, particularly in states like Odisha, Jharkhand, West Bengal, Assam, and Chhattisgarh, elephants often enter farms and villages. When vegetation is scarce and waterholes dry up in their natural habitat, elephants may wander in to nearby farms or plantations in search of food like bananas and sugarcane. This can lead to in crop damage and at times, even harm people and domestic animals. Changes in rainfall and temperature affect vegetation. Cutting down trees for constructing roads and buildings makes it worse. This leads to the shrinking and drying of forests, the natural home of animals. When forests cannot support wildlife, animals tend to move into human habitats. Elephants are adapted to forest life, but sudden changes make it hard for them to survive. Wildlife ecologists have identified and marked corridors in many parts of the country to allow safe movement of animals. These corridors correct forest habitats, enabling wildlife such as elephants to travel in need between large forest areas without coming into conflict with human settlements. This chain of events shows how closely nature s elements are connected. To understand such interconnections, we must study the components of our environment. 12.1 How Do We Experience and Interpret Our Surroundings? You have learnt in Curiosity, Grade 6 chapter Diversity in the Living World that different habitats have different kinds of plants and animals. A habitat is simply place where an organism lives. It could even be just the bark of a tree. The plants and animals interact with each other and adapt to survive in the surrounding conditions they live in. Explore two nearby habitats and identify both the living organisms and the non-living components in each. | Activity 12.1: Let us explore Caution: Explore the habitat in groups with your teacher. e Identify two habitats in your surroundings. e These could be any two of the following: a pond, a forest, an agricultural farm, or even a large tree like banyan, mango, or pilkhan (white fig) tree. e List the living beings and non-living things that you observe in these habitats. e Record your observations in Table 12.1. 6/28/2025 6:09:26 PM Table 12.1: Different components of two habitats ee