use can affect the environment and soil health. Overuse of synthetic fertilisers may reduce soil fertility by decreasing friendly microorganisms in soil and lowering organic matter (humus), which helps bind soil Fig. 12.18: Natural control of pests by particles. Without enough humus, soil becomes predators Beetle feeding on pests | Prone to erosion. Also, it reduces the population of natural predators which ultimately increase the population of pests (Fig. 12.18). Heavy irrigation and repeated ploughing can also disturb soil organisms like earthworms and snails, which are important for maintaining ecological balance. Some pests may develop resistance to pesticides, making them difficult to control. Growing the same crop repeatedly, known as monoculture, can reduce crop diversity and affect pollinators, which are crucial for food production. To make farming more sustainable, some farmers are exploring organic and natural farming methods. These aim to reduce the use of synthetic fertilisers and support sustainable farming, with minimal interference in natural ecosystems. Based on your learning, what practices do you think can help farmers protect the soil, the environment, and our food security for the future? Our scientific heritage The ancient text Vrikshayurveda emphasises on soil health and nourishment. The text strongly advocates for the continuous nourishment of the soil through organic manure like Kunapa Jala (a liquid fertiliser made from animal and plant waste by the process of fermentation; that breaks complex substances into simpler ones) and other composted materials. Snapshots @ Ahabitat isa place that provides the right conditions for an organism to live and grow. uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 |e oe fe le Se oe Se Sle cle oe Se cle Chapter 12.indd 206 6/28/2025 6:10:50 PM Chapter 12.indd 207 Keep the curiosity alive 1. Refer to the given diagram (Fig. 12.19) and select the wrong (iii) An ecosystem is part of a community. Habitats have biotic components (plants, animals, microbes) and abiotic components (air, water, soil, temperature). The interaction between biotic components and abiotic components in an area forms an ecosystem. Ecosystems can be terrestrial (forests, grasslands, deserts) or aquatic (ponds, lakes, sea, oceans). Organisms often classified as producers (plants), consumers (herbivores, carnivores, omnivores), and decomposers (bacteria, fungi). Producers make their own food, while consumers eat plants or animals. Decomposers break down dead matter and recycle nutrients. Food chains depict who eats whom in an ecosystem, and food webs show how these chains are interconnected. The positions that different organisms occupy in a food chain are called trophic levels. Some organisms live in relationships, like mutualism (both benefit), commensalism (one benefits, other is unaffected), and parasitism (one benefits, one is harmed). The benefits that ecosystems offer are crucial for human survival and well-being. They provide clean air, water, food, medicine, and climate regulation. Human activities like pollution, deforestation, habitat loss, climate change, invasive species, and overexploitation of natural resources threaten ecosystems. Protecting them through efforts, such as conservation like national parks and sanctuaries is vital. statement. (i) Acommunity is larger than a population. (ii) A community is smaller