study wildlife and protect the forests and biodiversity of India. 12.9 What Are the Benefits of an Ecosystem? We have learnt that biotic components and abiotic components of an ecosystem depend on each other and support various life processes. Humans also benefit from ecosystems. For example, forests provide fresh air, fertile soil, food, fibres, timber, and medicines. Similarly, aquatic ecosystems provide water and food. Ecosystems also offer aesthetic and recreational value. This benefits and supports our well-being and shows how closely nature and humans are connected. However, when we overuse or misuse natural resources, we disturb the balance in nature. Now let us lookata real-life example of a threatened ecosystem the Sundarbans. 6/28/2025 6:10:31 PM The Sundarbans have the largest mangrove forests in the world. Located where the Ganges and Brahmaputra Rivers meet between India and Bangladesh, the Sundarbans forests and rivers are home to various flora and fauna, many of which are endangered. The Sundarbans protect us by slowing down strong winds and waves during storms and floods. The trees also absorb carbon dioxide from the air and release oxygen. Because of its importance, The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) declared the Sundarbans a World Heritage Site in 1987. However, the Sundarbans (Fig. 12.17) are under a serious threat. Mangrove trees are being cut for fuelwood and farming. Illegal hunting and overuse of forest resources are a threat to the wildlife living there. Pollution from industrial waste and untreated sewage in rivers are also damaging the water and habitat. These human activities disrupt the natural way ecosystems work. Similarly, other ecosystems across India are also under threat. Problems like deforestation, overuse of natural resources, the spread of invasive species, unsustainable land use, and pollution are damaging forests, rivers, scrublands, wetlands, grasslands, and coastal areas. How can we stop damaging forests, rivers, and wetlands? Think about what actions you and your community can take to protect these important places. Our scientific heritage Protected areas are parts ofland or water set aside to conserve wildlife and their habitats. India has many protected areas like national parks, wildlife sanctuaries, biosphere reserves, and community conserved areas. These places help protect entire habitats including endangered animals, birds, and many rare plants. Famous examples include Jim Corbett National Park (Uttarakhand), Manas National Park (Assam), Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve (Western Ghats), Chilika Lake (Odisha), Eaglenest Wildlife Sanctuary (Arunachal Pradesh), Hemis National Park (Leh), Keibul Lamjao National Park (Manipur), Pirotan Island Marine National Park (Gujarat). Protected areas play a big role in saving nature for future generations. Fig. 12.17: Mangrove forest in Sundarbans uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 |e oe fe le Se oe Se Sle cle oe Se cle Chapter 12.indd 204 01-07-2025 12:18:26 oe ce Se ee cle Se Se Se oe ote oe] Chapter 12 How Nature Works in Hacmony 205 Chapter 12.indd 205 12.9.1 Human-made ecosystems Humans have created artificial ecosystems like fish ponds, farms, and parks to meet their needs. When well designed, these can help reduce pollution,