Dictation Let the class divide itself into three groups. Let each group take down one passage that the teacher dictates. Then put the passages together in the right order. My Childhood /77 @& Reprint 2025-26 * oy To Sir, with Love 1. From Rameswaram to the Rashtrapati Bhavan, it s been a long journey. Talking to Nona Walia on the eve of Teacher s Day, President Dr A.P.J. Abdul Kalam talks about life s toughest lessons learnt and his mission being a teacher to the Indian youth. A proper education would help nurture a sense of dignity and self-respect among our youth, says President Kalam. There s still a child in him though, and he s still curious about learning new things. Life s a mission for President Kalam. 2. Nonetheless, he remembers his first lesson in life and how it changed his destiny. I was studying in Standard V, and must have been all of 10. My teacher, Sri Sivasubramania Iyer was telling us how birds fly. He drew a diagram of a bird on the blackboard, depicting the wings, tail and the body with the head and then explained how birds soar to the sky. At the end of the class, I said I didn t understand. Then he asked the other students if they had understood, but nobody had understood how birds fly, he recalls. 3. That evening, the entire class was taken to Rameswarm shore, the President continues. My teacher showed us sea birds. We saw marvellous formations of them flying and how their wings flapped. Then my teacher asked us, Where is the birds engine and how is it powered? I knew then that birds are powered by their own life and motivation. I understood all about birds dynamics. This was real teaching a theoretical lesson coupled with a live practical example. Sri Siva Subramania Iyer was a great teacher. That day, my future was decided. My destiny was changed. I knew my future had to be about flight and flight systems. * Re Speaking Here is a topic for you to 1. think about; 2. give your opinion on. Find out what other people think about it. Ask your friends/seniors/parents to give you their opinion. Career Building Is the Only Goal of Education. or Getting a Good Job Is More Important than Being a Good Human Being. You can use the following phrases (i) while giving your opinion: e I] think that... In my opinion ... e It seems to me that... s 78 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 I am of the view that... e As far as I know ... Ifyou ask me... (ii) saying what other people think: e According to some ... Quite a few think ... Some others favour ... e Thirty per cent of the people disagree ... e Fifty per cent of them strongly feel ... (iii) asking for others opinions: What do you think about ... What do you think of ... What is your opinion about