- possible Ill. Passive Voice Study these sentences: My parents were regarded as an ideal couple. I was asked to go and sit on the back bench. Such problems have to be confronted. s 76 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 " x The italicised verbs in these sentences are made up of a form of the verb be and a past participle. (For example: were + regarded, was + asked, be + confronted) These sentences focus on what happens, rather than who does what. Notice that the doer of the action is not included in the sentences. If necessary, we can mention the doer of the action in a by-phrase. For example: e The tree was struck by lightning. The flag was unfurled by the Chief Guest. IV. Rewrite the sentences below, changing the verbs in brackets into the passive form. In yesterday s competition the prizes (give away) by the Principal. In spite of financial difficulties, the labourers (pay) on time. On Republic Day, vehicles (not allow) beyond this point. Second-hand books (buy and sell) on the pavement every Saturday. Elections to the Lok Sabha (hold) every five years. Qa k WN Our National Anthem (compose) Rabindranath Tagore. V. Rewrite the paragraphs below, using the correct form of the verb given in brackets. 1. How Helmets Came To Be Used in Cricket Nari Contractor was the Captain and an opening batsman for India in the 1960s. The Indian cricket team went on a tour to the West Indies in 1962. In a match against Barbados in Bridgetown, Nari Contractor (seriously injure and collapse). In those days helmets (not wear). Contractor (hit) on the head by a bouncer from Charlie Griffith. Contractor s skull (fracture). The entire team (deeply concern). The West Indies players (worry). Contractor (rush ) to hospital. He (accompany) by Frank Worrell, the Captain of the West Indies Team. Blood (donate) by the West Indies players. Thanks to the timely help, Contractor (save). Nowadays helmets (routinely use) against bowlers. 2. Oil from Seeds Vegetable oils (make) from seeds and fruits of many plants growing all over the world, from tiny sesame seeds to big, juicy coconuts. Oil (produce) from cotton seeds, groundnuts, soya beans and sunflower seeds. Olive oil (use) for cooking, salad dressing etc. Olives (shake) from the trees and (gather) up, usually by hand. The olives (ground) to a thick paste which is spread onto special mats. Then the mats (layer) up on the pressing machine which will gently squeeze them to produce olive oil. & Dictation Let the class divide itself into three groups. Let each group take down one passage that the teacher dictates. Then put the passages together in the right order. My Childhood /77 @& Reprint 2025-26 * oy To Sir, with Love 1. From Rameswaram to the Rashtrapati Bhavan, it s been a long journey. Talking to Nona Walia on the eve of Teacher s Day, President Dr A.P.J. Abdul Kalam talks about life s toughest lessons learnt and his mission