the Second World War was over and India s freedom was imminent. Indians will build their own India, declared Gandhiji. The whole country was filled with an unprecedented optimism. I asked my father for permission to leave Rameswaram and study at the district headquarters in Ramanathapuram. Sivasubramania Iyer s wife took me inside her kitchen and served me food. Reprint 2025-26 My Childhood /73 @& & bv 11. He told me as if thinking aloud, Abul ! I know you have to go away to grow. Does the seagull not fly across the sun, alone and without a nest? He quoted Khalil Gibran to my hesitant mother, Your children are not your children. They are the sons and daughters of Life s longing for itself. They come through you but not from you. You may give them your love but not your thoughts. For they have their own thoughts. A.P.J. ABDUL KALAM [an extract from Wings of Fire] * Thinking about the Text Activity Find Dhanuskodi and Rameswaram on the map. What language(s) do you think are spoken there? What languages do you think the author, his family, his friends and his teachers spoke with one another? Nagappattinam Government of India Copyright, 2003 s 74 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 I. Answer these questions in one or two sentences each. Where was Abdul Kalam s house? What do you think Dinamani is the name of? Give a reason for your answer. Who were Abdul Kalam s school friends? What did they later become? How did Abdul Kalam earn his first wages? aeRO N Had he earned any money before that? In what way? Il. Answer each of these questions in a short paragraph (about 30 words) 1. How does the author describe: (i) his father, (ii) his mother, (iii) himself? 2. What characteristics does he say he inherited from his parents? Il. Discuss these questions in class with your teacher and then write down your answers in two or three paragraphs each. 1. On the whole, the small society of Rameswaram was very rigid in terms of the segregation of different social groups, says the author. (i) Which social groups does he mention? Were these groups easily identifiable (for example, by the way they dressed)? (ii) Were they aware only of their differences or did they also naturally share friendships and experiences? (Think of the bedtime stories in Kalam s house; of who his friends were; and of what used to take place in the pond near his house.) (iii) The author speaks both of people who were very aware of the differences among them and those who tried to bridge these differences. Can you identify such people in the text? (iv) Narrate two incidents that show how differences can be created, and also how they can be resolved. How can people change their attitudes? 2. (i) Why did Abdul Kalam want to leave Rameswaram? (ii) What did his father say to this? (iii) What do you think his words mean?