& * 6. My Childhood 0959CHO6 BeroreE You READ Can you think of any scientists, who have also been statesmen? A.PJ. Abdul Kalam, whose projects in space, defence and nuclear technology guided India into the twenty-first century, became our eleventh President in 2002. In his autobiography, Wings of Fire, he speaks of his childhood. 1. I was born into a middle-class Tamil family in the island town of Rameswaram in the erstwhile Madras erstwhile: former State. My father, Jainulabdeen, had neither much formal education nor much wealth; despite these disadvantages, he possessed great innate wisdom innate: inborn; (a and a true generosity of spirit. He had an ideal quality or feeling) in helpmate in my mother, Ashiamma. I do not recall "es7@ture the exact number of people she fed every day, but I am quite certain that far more outsiders ate with us than all the members of our own family put together. 2. I was one of many children a short boy with rather undistinguished looks, born to tall and handsome parents. We lived in our ancestral house, which was built in the middle of the nineteenth century. It was a fairly large pucca house, made of limestone and brick, on the Mosque Street in Rameswaram. My austere father used to avoid all austere: simple, inessential comforts and luxuries. However, all] Strict and severe necessities were provided for, in terms of food, medicine or clothes. In fact, I would say mine was a very secure childhood, both materially and emotionally. Reprint 2025-26 vk e 3. The Second World War broke out in 1939, when I was eight years old. For reasons I have never been able to understand, a sudden demand for tamarind seeds erupted in the market. I used to collect the seeds and sell them to a provision shop on Mosque Street. A day s collection would fetch me the princely princely sum: sum of one anna. My brother-in-law Jallaluddin generous amount would tell me stories about the War which I would te 70") later attempt to trace in the headlines in Dinamani. #2: an old Indian Our area, being isolated, was completely unaffected cae about six by the War. But soon India was forced to join the Allied Forces and something like a state of Allied Forces: the emergency was declared. The first casualty came armies Of 2 in the form of the suspension of the train halt at during the Second Rameswaram station. The newspapers now had to world War be bundled and thrown out from the moving train on the Rameswaram Road between Rameswaram and Dhanuskodi. That forced my cousin Samsuddin, who distributed newspapers in Rameswaram , to look for a helping hand to catch the bundles and, as if naturally, I filled the slot. Samsuddin helped me earn my first wages. Half a century later, I can still feel the surge of pride in earning my own money for the first time. 4. Every child is born, with some inherited characteristics, into a