/ Beehive Reprint 2025-26 I am of the view that... e As far as I know ... Ifyou ask me... (ii) saying what other people think: e According to some ... Quite a few think ... Some others favour ... e Thirty per cent of the people disagree ... e Fifty per cent of them strongly feel ... (iii) asking for others opinions: What do you think about ... What do you think of ... What is your opinion about ... Do you agree... Does this make you believe ... * Re Writing Think and write a short account of what life in Rameswaram in the 1940s must have been like. (Were people rich or poor? Hard working or lazy? Hopeful of change, or resistant to it?). Do your little bit of good where you are; it s those little bits of good put together that overwhelm the world. ARCHBISHOP DESMOND TuTU My Childhood /79 @& Reprint 2025-26 No Men Are Foreign Have you ever thought of some people as strange, or other countries as foreign ? We have many ways of thinking of other people as different from us , as them. They may belong to a different country, or speak a different language. In this poem, however, the poet reminds us of the many ways in which we are all the same for we are all human. Remember, no men are strange, no countries foreign Beneath all uniforms, a single body breathes Like ours: the land our brothers walk upon Is earth like this, in which we all shall lie. They, too, aware of sun and air and water, Are fed by peaceful harvests, by war s long winter starv d. Their hands are ours, and in their lines we read A labour not different from our own. Remember they have eyes like ours that wake Or sleep, and strength that can be won By love. In every land is common life That all can recognise and understand. Let us remember, whenever we are told To hate our brothers, it is ourselves That we shall dispossess, betray, condemn. Remember, we who take arms against each other It is the human earth that we defile. Our hells of fire and dust outrage the innocence Of air that is everywhere our own, Remember, no men are foreign, and no countries strange. JAMES KIRKUP Reprint 2025-26 ds GLOSSARY dispossess: dislodge; deprive defile: make dirty; pollute outrage the innocence of: violate the purity of * RK Thinking about the Poem 1. (i) Beneath all uniforms ... What uniforms do you think the poet is speaking about? (ii) How does the poet suggest that all people on earth are the same? 2. In stanza 1, find five ways in which we all are alike. Pick out the words. 3. How many common features can you find in stanza 2? Pick out the words. 4. ...whenever we are told to hate our brothers... When do you think this happens? Why? Who tells us? Should