New Beginnings: Cities and States The kingdom shall be protected by fortifying the capital and the towns at the frontiers. The land should not only be capable of sustaining the population but also outsiders in times of calamities. ... It should be beautiful, being endowed with cultivable land, mines, timber forests, elephant forests, and good pastures rich in cattle. It should not depend [only on] rain for water. It should have good roads and waterways. It should have a productive economy, with a wide variety of commodities .... Kautilya, Arthashastra Fig. 4.1. Ruins of a major structure at Rajagriha (modern-day Rajgir in Bihar), when it was the capital of the Magadha mahdjanapada. 0781CHO4 Chapter 4.indd 67 (0804-2025 1013744 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 4.indd 68 Let us recall that in the early 2nd millennium BCE (that is, over a few centuries after 2000 BCE), the Indus/Harappan/ Sindhu-Sarasvati civilisation, which we called India s First Urbanisation , disintegrated. Some of its cities were abandoned; in others, some people continued living there, but reverting to a rural or village lifestyle. They had to, since all the components of the Harappan urban order had disappeared: elaborate structures, both private and public; crowded streets and busy markets; different communities with specialised occupations (metalsmiths, potters, builders, weavers, craftspeople, and so on); a writing system; a sanitation system; the presence of an administration; and, behind it all, a larger state structure with aruling class at the head. And for awhole millennium, urban life remained absent from India, though there may have been a few towns here and there in north India. ra ve: Fig. 4.2. The fertile Gangetic plains helped the mahdjanapadas to grow and prosper. 08-04-2025 10:13:44 Chapter 4.indd 69 Indeed, there were important regional cultures, which we need not study here. Then, in the ist millennium BCE, a vibrant new phase of urbanisation began in the Ganga plains, parts of the Indus (or Sindhu) basin and neighbouring regions, gradually spreading to other parts of the Subcontinent. How do we know this? Mainly from two sources: (1) archaeological excavations that have confirmed the existence of those ancient urban centres, and (2) ancient literature describing them late Vedic, Buddhist and Jain literatures are full of references to these new urban centres. This new phase is often called India s Second Urbanisation which, incidentally, has continued right up to today! Let us see how this phase emerged. Janapadas and Mahajanapadas Towards the end of the 2nd millennium BCE, regional cultures gradually reorganised themselves in north India. As people formed clans or groups, probably sharing a common language and common customs, each clan came to be associated with a territory or janapada led by a raga or ruler. ( Janapada is a Sanskrit word which means where the people (jana) have set foot (pada), that is, have settled down.) The janapadas grew as trade networks expanded and connected them. By the 8th or 7th centuries BCE, some of those early states had