Vindhya Range of hills to proceed all the way south. We will return to these routes when we explore the formation of empires in India. Many lateral roads also connected with other parts of India, especially the important ports on the western and eastern coasts, which were vibrant centres of trade. In the eastern region, major cities emerged, such as Shishupalgarh (today Sisupalgarh, part of Bhubaneswar), which was the capital of the Kalinga region and followed a strict square ground plan, with imposing fortifications and broad streets. In the Subcontinent s southern regions, cities began emerging from about 400 BCE, although recent excavations claim to find some signs of commercial activities going further back. Around this time, three kingdoms emerged the Cholas, the Cheras and the Pandyas. Harappan Civilisation BCE BCE Janapadas Fig. 4.8. Timeline covering the period from 1900 BCE to 300 BCE. 4 - New Beginnings: Cities and States Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 10:13:49 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 4.indd 80 Fig. 4.9. Shell and gemstones industries at the site of Kodumanal (near Erode, Tamil Nadu) Apart from archaeological evidence, the most ancient Tamil literature mentions those kingdoms and several of their kings. Because the southern regions are rich in resources such as precious and semiprecious stones, gold, and spices, they profitably traded not only with the rest of India but also with kingdoms and empires overseas. By 300 or 200 BCE, almost the entire Subcontinent, including regions in the Northeast, was one vibrant interconnected land; goods and culture travelled from region to region, and often beyond India to parts of Central and Southeast Asia. About the same time, the mahdjanapadas ceased to exist, leaving the place to fresh developments that were going to reshape India. 08-04-2025 10:13:51 Before we move on... > From the end of the 2nd millennium BCE, janapadas rose in parts of north and central India; they were smaller states with a raja at the head taking counsel from an assembly of elders. The 16 mahdjanapadas were the first organised states of the 1st millennium BCE; they witnessed the Second Urbanisation of India, which spread in all directions from the Ganga region, all the way to south India. By 300 BCE or so, the mahdjanapadas ceased to exist. In the same period, a vast network of roads connected north and south, east and west, and eventually all regions of the Subcontinent. People, goods, ideas and teachings travelled along all those roads. Questions and activities 1. Chapter 4.indd 81 Consider the quotation at the start of the chapter and discuss in several groups. Compare your observations and conclusions on what Kautilya recommends for a kingdom. Is it very different today? According to the text, how were rulers chosen in early Vedic society? Imagine you are a historian studying ancient India. What types of sources (archaeological, literary, etc.) would you use to learn more about the mahdjanapadas? Explain how each source might contribute to your understanding. Why was the