reorganised themselves in north India. As people formed clans or groups, probably sharing a common language and common customs, each clan came to be associated with a territory or janapada led by a raga or ruler. ( Janapada is a Sanskrit word which means where the people (jana) have set foot (pada), that is, have settled down.) The janapadas grew as trade networks expanded and connected them. By the 8th or 7th centuries BCE, some of those early states had merged together; the resulting bigger units were known as mahdjanapadas. Although the texts have different lists of them, the more frequent list gives the names of 16 mahdjanapadas, extending from Gandhara in the northwest to Anga in the east and to Ashmaka in central India, close to the Godavari River (see map). There may have been a few more, along with some smaller janapadas continuing independently. 4 - New Beginnings: Cities and States Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 10:13:45 Y THINK ABOUT IT Notice how many of the mahdjanapadas are concentrated in the Ganga plains. There are several possible reasons for this, including the growth of agriculture in the fertile Ganga plains, the availability of iron ore in the mountains and hills (see below about iron), and the formation of new trade networks. LET'S EXPLORE > The most powerful of these new states were Magadha, Kosala, Vatsa and Avanti. Looking at the map, can you identify their capitals? Also, how many can you match with Indian cities of today? > Compare this map with the map of the regions mentioned in the Mahabharata (see Fig. 5.4 in the chapter India, That Is Bharat in Grade 6) and list the names common to both Moat: maps. What do you think this implies? A deep, wide ditch surrounding The map (Fig. 4.3) shows the mahdjanapadas capitals. Most afortora were fairly large well-fortified cities, with a moat running ang Fe ath outside the fortifications as further defence. Often, the water. gateways through the rampart walls would be deliberately kept narrow, so guards may control the movement of people and goods entering or leaving the city. It is fascinating to note that most of those ancient capitals continue to be living cities today modern cities that are often 2,500 years old! Early Democratic Traditions Each janapada had an assembly or council, called sabha or samiti, where matters concerning the clan would be discussed. (Remember, from the chapter on India s Cultural Roots , that the words sabha and samiti first appear in the Vedas, India s most ancient texts.) We may assume that most of the members were elders in the clan. The raja was not expected to rule independently or arbitrarily; Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 4.indd 70 08-04-2025 10:13:45 shina op Se + WRI ia MALLA + Vaishalry ie fi Rajagriha 4 Ghampa . . : Py Tripuri aa Kaushambt 5 bu pf ANGA s = MAGADHA ; Fig. 4.3. Map of the sixteen mahdajanapadas. Note