India s most ancient texts.) We may assume that most of the members were elders in the clan. The raja was not expected to rule independently or arbitrarily; Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 4.indd 70 08-04-2025 10:13:45 shina op Se + WRI ia MALLA + Vaishalry ie fi Rajagriha 4 Ghampa . . : Py Tripuri aa Kaushambt 5 bu pf ANGA s = MAGADHA ; Fig. 4.3. Map of the sixteen mahdajanapadas. Note that their borders are approximate. a good ruler was supposed to take the advice from those assemblies, apart from the ministers and administrators. Indeed, according to some texts, an incompetent ruler could be removed by the assembly. Of course, while such mentions are significant, it does not mean that this was an established law; let us remember that the data we have for such remote periods is incomplete. In their political systems, the mahdjanapadas expanded the basic principles of the janapadas. Some were, in effect, monarchies, in the sense that the raja was the ultimate authority, supported by ministers and an assembly of 4 - New Beginnings: Cities and States Tapestry of the Past Chapter 4.indd 71 08-04-2025 10:13:46 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 4.indd 72 elders. His position was hereditary, in the sense that a raja would usually be the son of the previous one. The king would collect taxes or revenue, maintain law and order, get impressive fortifications built around their capital, and maintain an army to defend the territory or wage war with neighbouring ones, as the case may be. Magadha (located in part of today s Bihar), Kosala (in part of today s Uttar Pradesh) and Avanti (in part of today s Madhya Pradesh) were among the most powerful such states. However, at least two mahdjanapadas, Vajji (or Vrijji) and the neighbouring Malla, had a different system: the sabha or samiti had more power and took important decisions through discussion, and, if necessary, through vote. Surprisingly, this included the selection of the raja! This means that those mahdjanapadas, which were called ganas or sanghas, were not monarchies their functioning might be called democratic, since members of the assembly were the ones to select the ruler and take major decisions. In fact, Fig. 4.4. Ruins of a complex at Kaushambt, capital of the Vatsa mahajanapada 08-04-2025 10:13:47 Chapter 4.indd 73 scholars have often called them early republics , as they are indeed one of the earliest such systems in the world. More Innovations The age of the janapadas and mahdjanapadas was an age of profound change, which would impact Indian civilisation until present times. In the chapter India s Cultural Roots in Grade 6, we saw the emergence of several new schools of thought late Vedic, Buddhist, Jain in particular, and their respective literatures. Those schools disseminated their teachings and literature through scholars, monks and nuns travelling across India or people undertaking pilgrimages. Indian art also underwent a renewal; it will