system. There is historical evidence, both in texts and inscriptions, that in the early period individuals and communities changed their professional occupations if circumstances demanded. For instance, a long drought or some natural calamity could force a community of farmers to migrate to a city and take up other occupations, or some Brahmins would turn to trade or even military activities. This complex system structured Indian society, organised its activities, including economic ones, and therefore gave it some stability. In time, however, the system became rigid and led to inequalities and discrimination towards the lower jatis or some communities excluded from the varna-jati system. This process will be studied in a higher grade. The varna-jati system has had a deep impact on Indian society, and generations of scholars have studied its countless aspects. There is a broad agreement that the system was significantly different (more flexible, in particular) in earlier periods and became more rigid with the passage of time, in particular during the British rule in India. Let us also keep in mind that while varna-jati has been an important mechanism at work in Indian society, it is not the only one; there have been many others, some of which we will explore later, especially in the theme Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions . 4 - New Beginnings: Cities and States Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 10:13:49 YW THINK ABOUT IT Inequalities within society can exist in many forms. Have you encountered any incident where you or anyone you know might have been made to feel different from others? Do you think equality is desirable in a society? If so, why? Have you come across people or initiatives that lessened inequalities? Developments Elsewhere in India In this 1st millennium BCE, important communication routes opened up for purposes of trade, pilgrimage, military campaigns, etc. Two routes became widely used and are often mentioned in the literature: the Uttarapatha and the Dakshinapatha. The first connected the northwest regions to the Ganga plains, all the way to eastern India; the second started from Kaushambi (near Prayagraj), then a capital of Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Fig. 4.7. Shishupalgarh (today a suburb of Bhubaneswar, first excavated in 1948): one of the gateways into the city, through the fortifications; the moat, full of water, is visible outside the gateway. Notice the narrowing in the gateway, for control of movement of people and goods. Chapter 4.indd 78 08-04-2025 10:13:49 Chapter 4.indd 79 one of the mahdjanapadas, and crossed the Vindhya Range of hills to proceed all the way south. We will return to these routes when we explore the formation of empires in India. Many lateral roads also connected with other parts of India, especially the important ports on the western and eastern coasts, which were vibrant centres of trade. In the eastern region, major cities emerged, such as Shishupalgarh (today Sisupalgarh, part of Bhubaneswar), which was the capital of the Kalinga region and followed a strict square ground