More Innovations The age of the janapadas and mahdjanapadas was an age of profound change, which would impact Indian civilisation until present times. In the chapter India s Cultural Roots in Grade 6, we saw the emergence of several new schools of thought late Vedic, Buddhist, Jain in particular, and their respective literatures. Those schools disseminated their teachings and literature through scholars, monks and nuns travelling across India or people undertaking pilgrimages. Indian art also underwent a renewal; it will blossom in the age of empires. Urbanisation does not happen without technologies. Let us remember that the Harappan civilisation mastered copper and bronze metallurgy. Now, in this Second Urbanisation, a major shift in technology involved iron metallurgy. In several regions of India, the techniques of extracting and shaping iron were actually perfected from the early 2nd millennium BCE, but it took a few centuries for iron to become a part of daily life. By the late 2nd millennium BCE, iron tools had become widespread, facilitating agriculture on a bigger scale. Iron also made better weapons than bronze, lighter and sharper swords, spears, arrows, shields, etc. As it happens, there is some evidence of warfare between neighbouring mahajanapadas how frequent or how intense it was, of course, is impossible to tell. Such military campaigns, but occasionally alliances too, gave rise to new kingdoms and empires, which we will turn to later in our journey. Another innovation was the first use of coins in India, made necessary by growing trade. Very soon, coins were exchanged across different regions and even with other parts of the world. The first Indian coins were made of 4 - New Beginnings: Cities and States Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 10:13:47 silver, a soft metal into which symbols could be punched ; they are called punch-marked coins . Later, coins of copper, gold and other metals were also made. Generally, a mahdjanapada issued its om own coins, but coins from neighbouring regions were used as well as exchanged in trade. LET'S EXPLORE Fill up the following table with a Yes (or tick mark) or No (or cross mark) in each square, which provides an interesting comparison between these two phases of Indian civilisation. First Second Urbanisation Urbanisation Ganga plains Copper/bronze The Varna-_Jati System We saw earlier how human societies grew more complex with the rise of civilisation. Whenever this happens, a society organises itself in several groups based on class, occupation or some other criteria. For instance, there could be different groups concerned with governance, administration, religion, education, trade, town-planning, farming, crafts, arts and all kinds of other professions. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 4.indd 74 08-04-2025 10:13:47 Fig. 4.5. A panel of the Sanchi stupa depicting a smithy (or metal workshop), where different workers bring firewood, water, stoke the fire, beat the iron, etc. 4 - New Beginnings: Cities and States Tapestry of the Past Fig. 4.6. A few punch-marked coins from various ancient cities of north India. Chapter 4.indd