education, trade, town-planning, farming, crafts, arts and all kinds of other professions. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 4.indd 74 08-04-2025 10:13:47 Fig. 4.5. A panel of the Sanchi stupa depicting a smithy (or metal workshop), where different workers bring firewood, water, stoke the fire, beat the iron, etc. 4 - New Beginnings: Cities and States Tapestry of the Past Fig. 4.6. A few punch-marked coins from various ancient cities of north India. Chapter 4.indd 75 08-04-2025 10:13:48 LET'S EXPLORE > Why should a complex society divide itself into such groups? Think about several possible factors why this happens. > List other such professions you expect in a complex society of the 1st millennium BCE. In an ideal society, all those groups would complement each other and work in harmony. But most of the time, these divisions also lead to inequalities: some groups acquire more wealth, power or influence than others. In other words, while equality is an ideal that human societies have often aspired to, very few, if any, have ever achieved it. In India, the society was organised in a two-fold system. One category was the jati, a group or community of people with a specific professional occupation closely tied to their livelihood. The skills that defined a particular jati for instance, skill in agriculture, metallurgy, commerce or any craft was generally transmitted from generation to generation. Often, a jati would get further subdivided into sub-jatis, each of which developed customs and traditions of its own, for instance concerning marriage, rituals or food habits. Along with the jati, there is another category, that of varna, a concept that emerged from Vedic texts. There were four varnas: Brahmins were engaged in preserving and spreading knowledge, and in the performance of rituals; Kshatriyas were expected to defend the society and the land, and to engage in warfare if necessary; Vaishyas were supposed to increase the society s wealth through occupations of trade, business or agriculture; finally, Shudras were the artisans, craftspeople, workers or servants. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 4.indd 76 08-04-2025 10:13:48 DON'T MISS OUT Chapter 4.indd 77 You may have heard the English word caste . It comes from a Portuguese word, casta, as Portuguese travellers to India in the 16th century CE tried to make sense of Indian society. While a few scholars consider caste to refer to varnas, most take it to apply to jatis; yet others consider caste to refer to the whole varna-jati system. There is historical evidence, both in texts and inscriptions, that in the early period individuals and communities changed their professional occupations if circumstances demanded. For instance, a long drought or some natural calamity could force a community of farmers to migrate to a city and take up other occupations, or some Brahmins would turn to trade or even military activities. This complex system structured Indian society, organised its activities, including economic ones, and therefore gave it some stability. In