by our brave soldiers defending the sovereignty and integrity of the country. I feel motivated and I am seriously thinking of joining the Armed Forces to serve my motherland. I also feel it is our duty to periodically visit such places to honour our valiant soldiers, who have made great sacrifices for us. Their sacrifices enable us to walk freely in our country without fear of enemy threats. It is nice of your teacher and school to arrange this visit to give you all a chance to learn about India s heroes and also pay your respect to them. The idea of your class to make a presentation at the school and make everyone a part of your experience is wonderful! Best of | Unit 5.indd 188 06-Mar-25 2:49:44 PM BRAVEHEARTS luck for your presentation, I hope it goes well and motivates the school students to join the Indian Armed Forces. Your letter has reminded me of a time when we visited the war memorial in our city. While visiting one of Chandigarh s gardens, we saw a lot of activity around the Bougainvillea Garden in Sector 3. As we approached the garden, we saw people offering flowers and prayers. We joined the group out of curiosity and quickly realised that they were all there to pay respect to the soldiers at the War Memorial located in the heart of the garden. When I think back about my visit where everyone was dedicating flowers as a mark of respect to our soldiers, I was reminded of the following poem: Pusup KI ABHILASHA Chaah Nahi, Main Sur Bala Ke Gehanon Mein Goontha Jaaun, Chaah Nahi, Premi-Mala Mein Bandh Pyaari Ko Lalchaaun! Chaah Nahi, Samraaton Ke Shav Par, Hey Hari, Dala Jaaun, Chaah Nahi Devon Ke Sir Par Chadhoon, Bhagya Par Ithlaun! Mujhe Tod Lena, Vanmali! Us Path Per Dena Tum Phaink, Matrabhoomi Per Sheesh Chadhane Jis Path Jaavein Veer Anek! -MAKHANLAL CHATURVEDI / d-mahdg 2:49:46 PM | Unit 5.indd 189 Poorvi I hope you like the poem. I must say, I was inspired by your idea of presenting the valourous stories of India s soldiers. There are so many stories of courage, bravery and sacrifice which remind us that many of the challenges we face in our lives are inconsequential. We can enjoy peace in our country and the luxury of exchanging ideas with our friends because our Armed Forces are alert and work hard to create that environment for us. Very recently, I read in the newspaper that Captain Anuj Nayyar, MVC, an Indian Army officer of the 17 Jat regiment was posthumously awarded the Maha Vir Chakra, India s second highest gallantry award, for exemplary valour during the Kargil War in Caprain Anuj Nayar, MahaVir Chakra 1999. I look forward to learning more about him. Meanwhile, I learnt that his mother Meena memoir: an Nayyar has written a memoir titled Tiger of Drass Capt. Anuj account ofone s_ ~~ Nayyar 23 Kargil Hero, which I shall certainly go through.