to say: 06-Mar-25 2:49:44 PM eat a areata cept fatear ot tere Ter TATE HII Fat Ha TIF: 12.3711 Hato vad prapsyasi svargam_ jitva@ va bhoksyase mahim Tasmaduttistha kaunteya yuddhaya krtaniscayah If you fight, you will either be slain on the battlefield and go to the celestial abode, or you will gain victory and enjoy the kingdom on the earth. Therefore, arise O, son of Kunti! Be determined to fight. Here is the website link for National War Memorial https://www.mygov.in. Share it with your friends to learn more about it. We reached Bengaluru yesterday. I have written a long letter as I could not help sharing this inspiring experience with you. Give my regards to your mom and dad. I miss your mom s chhole bhature. You know Iam a foodie! Say hello to Amit. Your friend, Soumya Let us discuss I Complete the table given below. An example has been done for you. Check your answers with the teacher. Name of the War Contribution and . . Award Given Hero Achievement Major Somnath Battle of Badgam in| First Param Vir Chakra Sharma 1947 awarded posthumously Captain Mahendra Nath Mulla Lance Naik Albert Ekka Major Padmapani Acharya II Find the paragraph(s) and sentences in the text that evoke the feelings given below. 1. feeling of wonder 2. heartening 3. sense of motivation Unit 5.indd 187 BRAVEHEARTS \ tN 06-Mar\25 2:49:44 PM Poorvi 4. pride 5. visually inspiring 6. sadness 7. gratitude 8. inspiration Ill Which is India s highest gallantry award? IV How would Ananda feel after reading this letter? V Do you think Soumya enjoyed writing this letter? Why or why not? II House No.... Sector... Chandigarh 24 April 20XX Dear Soumya, It was such a pleasure to receive your letter. I enjoyed reading your experience of the visit to the National War Memorial in Delhi, as well as your observations and feelings during the visit. You really have an eye for detail, and being the sensitive person that you are, you have been able to capture the essence of the emotions associated with this memorial. I was happy to hear that you got an opportunity to visit the National War Memorial. I have heard a lot about it. Some people might see a war memorial as just a monument, statue, an edifice to celebrate our war heroes or victory and commemorate those who lost their lives or got injured in the war. In my view, it is also an expression of deep gratitude for the supreme sacrifice made by our brave soldiers defending the sovereignty and integrity of the country. I feel motivated and I am seriously thinking of joining the Armed Forces to serve my motherland. I also feel it is our duty to periodically visit such places to honour our valiant soldiers, who have made great sacrifices for us. Their sacrifices enable us to walk freely in our country without fear of enemy threats. It is nice of your teacher and school to arrange this visit