Nayyar, MVC, an Indian Army officer of the 17 Jat regiment was posthumously awarded the Maha Vir Chakra, India s second highest gallantry award, for exemplary valour during the Kargil War in Caprain Anuj Nayar, MahaVir Chakra 1999. I look forward to learning more about him. Meanwhile, I learnt that his mother Meena memoir: an Nayyar has written a memoir titled Tiger of Drass Capt. Anuj account ofone s_ ~~ Nayyar 23 Kargil Hero, which I shall certainly go through. soto Iam sharing with you an excerpt of her interview with IANS. and experiences Writing about the smallest things about your child who is not with you really used to shake me, but gradually I came to terms with it by telling myself that if I didn t write about him no one would know about Anuj s sacrifice. Published on: 13 April 2022, 1:59 p.m. I have shared your experience G 4 with many of my friends. We Our flag does not all wish to visit the National fly because the War Memorial, Delhi. We have found out a mobile app 1 : National War Memorial and it flies with the last Museum . This app is very breath of each interactive and _ provides soldier who died answers to our queries in 21 languages. The murals on the protecting it. 99 walls are enchanting. A great learning experience indeed! wind moves it, https://lifenlesson.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Slide5-8 jpg 190 py | Unit 5.indd 190 06-Mar-25 2:49:47 PM Unit 5.indd 191 Murals depicting soldiers in action https://www.mygov.in Next week, I am going to share this idea with my classmates and my teacher. I think it would be great to create a collage capturing the lives and stories of people that can inspire us each day. I know that we can email each other. I really like to receive letters from you, not just because of the ideas that you share but also because the envelope of your letters often comes with beautiful stamps, which make me happy. I don t know if I ever shared it before, but collecting stamps is one of my favourite hobbies. I ve been doing it for years. But Ilearnt recently that the act of collecting stamps is called philately . This time I received a stamp that celebrates India s independence, a theme related to your letter. Okay, that s all from me for now. But before I conclude, guess what we had for breakfast! Fluffy idlis and we all remembered you. Give my regards to your parents. I am inspired by your letter! Hope to hear from you soon about your new adventures and experiences. Best wishes, Ananda BRAVEHEARTS vuwuvvreuewvrveu wvrtvvuevvedypr ww2 https://postagestamps.gov.in/stamps_List.aspx Poorvi Let us discuss I Why was Ananda reminded of the poem Pushp ki Abhilasha ? II How does Soumya s letter help Ananda in pursuing her hobby? II Ananda is inspired to act after reading the letter from Soumya. What actions does she intend to take up? Fill in the table citing