we read. I Look around and identify the people who contribute to your life selflessly with a risk to their own lives. Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher. II Work in pairs. Discuss at least three questions that you would like to ask the people identified in I. BRAVEHEARTS Let us read Oh! Defenders of borders You are great sons of my land (r~ When we are all asleep You still hold on to your deed Windy season or snowy days y Orscorching sun s sweltering rays ine Gr) You are there guarding all the time awak Treading the lonely expanses as yogis Climbing the heights or striding the valleys lefending the deserts or guarding the marshes a Surveillance in seas and by securing the air f Prime of your youth given to the nation!! Wind chimes of my land vibrate your feat We pray for you brave men!! May the Lord bless you all!! A.P.J. ABDUL KALAM I | I I I I | I I | I | | I I I I ! + * ae = e When the poet mentions great | eg sons he is actually referring | to all the soldiers (men and ! women) serving the nation. _ Unit 5.indd 200 06-Mar-25 2:50:08 PM BRAVEHEARTS Let us discuss I Complete the summary with an exact word from the poem. An example has been done for you. Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher. The poem is a tribute to the soldiers of the 1. land who defend the 2. of their country. It highlights their untiring commitment and sacrifices as they guard the nation. The soldiers remain vigilant and dedicated, whether it s windy, snowy, or 3. hot. They walk on 4. stretches of land like the yogis. Their duty takes them to different terrains, including mountains, valleys, 5. , and marshes. The poet acknowledges that they have given a major part of their 6. to protect the nation. The poet says the wind chimes show their respect to the soldiers 7. . The poet concludes with prayers for their well-being and blessings. II Select the correct option for the following questions. 1. Thetheme ofthe poemis_ (i) patriotism and sacrifice (ii) heroism and awareness (iii) nature and hardship (iv) seasons and terrains 2. The tone of the poem is (i) admiring (ii) sad (iii) respectful (iv) grateful (v) prayerful A. Only (v) B. Gi) and (iii) C. (ii), Gi) and (v)__ D. (i), Gii), (iv) and (v) III Complete the following sentences by explaining why the poet has used the following poetic devices. 1. Imagery because . Simile because the soldiers are likened to . Metaphor because the poet uses wind chimes . Repetition of the words yow and we because an FF Ww NY . Alliteration such as season or snowy and to create Unit 5.indd 201 Poorvi Let us think and reflect I Read the extract given below and answer the questions that follow. When