III Complete the following sentences by explaining why the poet has used the following poetic devices. 1. Imagery because . Simile because the soldiers are likened to . Metaphor because the poet uses wind chimes . Repetition of the words yow and we because an FF Ww NY . Alliteration such as season or snowy and to create Unit 5.indd 201 Poorvi Let us think and reflect I Read the extract given below and answer the questions that follow. When we are all asleep You still hold on to your deed Windy season or snowy days Or scorching sun s sweltering rays You are there guarding all the time awake Treading the lonely expanses as yogis 1. Identify a set of opposite words from the extract. 2. Complete the sentence appropriately. The phrase still hold on to your deed refers to the soldier s attitude of 3. Identify whether the following statement is true or false. The soldiers walk across the deserted stretches of land. 4. Give evidence from the extract to show that soldiers face harsh weather conditions. 5. Which quality of the soldiers is highlighted in this extract? (i) modesty (ii) optimism (iii) simplicity (iv) dedication II Answer the following questions. 1. Who is the speaker of this poem? How can you Say so? 2. How is the theme of the poem conveyed through imagery? Support your answer with examples from the poem. 3. How does the poet highlight the commitment of the soldiers? Provide examples from the poem to support your answer. 4, What is the significance of the line Prime of your youth given to the nation!! with reference to sacrifice and service? 5. The poem ends with a prayer for the soldiers well-being and blessings. Why is it important for each one of us to pray for the wellbeing of soldiers? - Let us learn I The poem mentions a few terrains (physical features of land) valleys, deserts, and marshes. Identify the terrains from the box given below. There are two that you do not need. Te | Unit 5.indd 202 06-Mar-25 2:50:09 PM BRAVEHEARTS II Study the following phrases from the poem. treading the lonely expanses * climbing the heights * scorching sun Such phrases are word pairs that come together in combinations and are called collocations. Collocations are specific word pairings in English. They refer to the way certain words frequently appear together with others. Fill in the blanks by choosing the words given in the brackets that collocate appropriately. 1. The hikers reached the __ (summit/peak) of the mountain after several days of trekking through challenging conditions. 2. The (empty/barren) landscape of the desert made it nearly impossible to find any water sources. 3. In the rainforest, the (heavy/dense) forest provides a habitat for a diverse range of wildlife. 4. Chitra is a very (heroic/adventurous) person and enjoys mountain climbing. 5. [ll try to get back in time, but I'm not (doing/making) any promises. Let us listen I Think and complete the