granite tablets and National War Memorial The National War Memorial symbolizes the Nation's gratitude for the personnel of the Armed Forces who made the supreme sacrifice in the defence of.the country since independence. The National War Memorial was dedicated to the Armed Forces on behalf of the Nation by Prime Minister Narendra Modi Amar Chakra The obelisk with eternal flame symbolizes immortality of the spirit Circle of Immortality of a soldier with an assurance that the Nation will never forget their sacrifices Veerta Chakra A covered gallery that exhibits the valiant acts of our Armed Circle of Bravery Forces during operations represented through bronze murals Names of soldiers who made the supreme sacrifice, ins in golden letters on granite tablets arranged in a circular pattern which symbolizes the ancient war formation Chakravyuh Raksha Chakra : Row of dense trees in the Raksha Chakra is a reassurance to Circle of Protection the citizens of the country about their safety against any threat with each tree representing many soldiers who guard territorial integrity of the Nation round the clock Either Slain thou Shalt Go to Heaven; or Victorious thou Shalt Enjoy the Earth https://www.mygov.in 184 Rt Unit 5.indd 184 06-Mar-25 2:49:43 PM Unit 5.indd 185 individual tablet is solely dedicated to each fallen hero of postIndependent India. Their names are etched in golden letters. The outermost circle represents the Raksha Chakra, which is also known as the Circle of Protection . In this chakra the row of trees is a reassurance to the citizens of the country about their safety against any threat. Each tree represents the soldiers who ensure the territorial integrity of the nation. We spent the whole day, from morning to evening, at the National War Memorial and the surrounding areas, marked by majestic lawns and grand buildings of Kartavyapath. We were immersed in the ambience that was solemn and a reminder of what a free nation could achieve. The overall environment created an emotive experience that was visually inspiring. I felt as if I had developed a bond with the place. Ilearnt a lot, but I also have to admit that the various discourses during the day brought tears to my eyes. It was sad to think about the massive devastation and loss of life caused by wars. It motivated me to live a life worthy of the sacrifices of our heroes. After our visit, the class decided to make presentations on stories of valour of the bravehearts we came across at the National War Memorial. We divided ourselves into five groups. We decided to make presentations depicting the courageous. stories of the soldiers. Our teacher has also advised us to share our experience during the school assembly. I am delighted that all the students of our school will get to know about the National War Memorial and the soldiers it commemorates. I am_ going to give a presentation on the story of Major Padmapani Acharya, who fought for India in the 1999 Kargil War and was awarded