(i), (iii), and (v) D. Gi), (iv), and (v) II Answer the following questions. 1. Rani Abbakka spoke to her mother on her deathbed. How might these words have made her mother feel? 2. What does the support of the people of Ullal and the soldiers for Rani Abbakka suggest about their mindset? 3. How might the people of Ullal have felt when the mighty Portuguese were defeated? 4. Why do you think Rani Abbakka s victory against the Portuguese would have inspired other rulers to go against a foreign power? Let us learn I Study the following words from the text. seize, sovereign, their, soldiers The spelling of the given words have ei and ie in them. Spelling tip: 1 before e except after c For example: receive, deceive Now, fill in the blanks with ie or ei for the following words. 1. c_ling 2.bel_ve 3.th_f 4. ach__ve 5. perc__ve 6. prot_n 7.soc_ty 8.sh_ld 9.Ww__ght 10. fr__nd He \| VA y| matt 2:50:22 PM | Unit 5.indd 215 Poorvi II Study the highlighted word in the following sentence from the text. ...; and Bangadi too may have to face their wrath. Was the initial letter w pronounced? There are many words in the English language where certain letters are not pronounced but are spelt. They are called silent letters . For example : campaign, knowledge, pneumonia, honour, calm Now, find more words with silent letters. III Read the following expressions from the text. laughing stock, last laugh Use the dictionary page given below to find the meanings of the following. burst out laughing, don t make me laugh, laugh until you cry, have a good laugh. laugh / la:f; NAmE laef/ verb, noun verb 1 (I,T) to make the sounds and movements of your face that show you are happy or think sth is funny: to laugh loudly/ aloud/ out loud ~ (at/ about sth) You never laugh at my jokes! The show was hilarious I couldn t stop laughing. She always makes me laugh. He burst out laughing (= suddenly started laughing). She laughed to cover her nervousness. I told him I f was worried but he laughed scornfully. + speech You re crazy! she laughed. 2 (1) be laughing (informal) used to say that you are in a very good position, especially because you have done sth successfully: If we win the next game we'll be laughing. TDM don t make me laugh (informal) used to show that you think what sb has just said is impossible or stupid: Will your dad lend you the money? Don t make me laugh! he who laughs, last laughs longest (saying) used to tell sb not to be too proud of their present success; in the end another person may be more successful laugh all the way to the bank (informal) to make a lot of money easily and feel very pleased about it laugh in sb s face to show in a very obvious way that you have no