parents. I am inspired by your letter! Hope to hear from you soon about your new adventures and experiences. Best wishes, Ananda BRAVEHEARTS vuwuvvreuewvrveu wvrtvvuevvedypr ww2 https://postagestamps.gov.in/stamps_List.aspx Poorvi Let us discuss I Why was Ananda reminded of the poem Pushp ki Abhilasha ? II How does Soumya s letter help Ananda in pursuing her hobby? II Ananda is inspired to act after reading the letter from Soumya. What actions does she intend to take up? Fill in the table citing the sentences from the text. . sharing ideas Let us think and reflect I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow. 1. You can see the obelisk surrounded by wreaths that have been placed as amark of respect. The lighting design is planned in such a way that it transforms the monument s landscape as sunlight changes from dawn to dusk. It truly is a majestic site that filled me with pride for our nation. I was also overwhelmed by the interminable flame as a metaphor for eternal stories of courage and valour. (i) Complete the analogy with a word from the extract. flame: valour:: wreath: (ii) How does the lighting design make the monument visually appealing? (iii) State whether the following sentence is a fact or an opinion. It truly is a majestic site... (iv) What does the everlasting flame suggest? (v) Choose the correct option to complete the sentence. N a & | Unit 5.indd 192 06-Mar-25 2:49:52 PM Unit 5.indd 193 2. II Answer the following questions. 1. 2. . Explain how the National War Memorial and Museum . Whyisit our duty to pay homage to our brave soldiers? . What is the main idea of this text? How does it justify . Why were the students awestruck and humbled? The tone of the writer in this extract is A. modest B. light-hearted C. admiring D. nostalgic I was happy to hear that you got an opportunity to visit the National War Memorial. I have heard a lot about it. Some people might see a war memorial as just a monument, statue, an edifice to celebrate a war or victory and commemorate those who sacrificed their lives or got injured in the war. In my view, it is also an expression of deep gratitude for the supreme sacrifice made by our brave soldiers defending the sovereignty and integrity of the country. (ij) Choose a line from the extract which shows that Ananda was aware about the National War Memorial. (ii) What might be the most likely reason for people to consider a war memorial as a monument? (iii) Fill in the blank with a suitable word from the extract. We conduct special competitions at school to our Independence day. (iv) Select a phrase from the extract showing that Ananda is expressing an opinion. (v) Complete the sentence with a suitable reason. Ananda refers to the sacrifice of soldiers as supreme sacrifice because _ What is the significance of the National War Memorial? Lance