Unit 5 BRAVEHEARTS A HoMAGE To Our BRAVE SOLDIERS Let us do these activities before we read. 0773CHOS I Homage means something that is said or done to show respect publicly for someone . Whom should every Indian pay homage to? Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher. II Work in pairs to complete the table by writing any three ways in which we can celebrate the victories and honour the sacrifices of the soldiers. An example has been done for you. Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher. Unit 5.indd 179 06-Mar-25 2:49:36 PM | Poorvi 7 Let us read Two friends share their feelings about brave soldiers. One of them shares her experience of visiting the National War Memorial that has left a deep impact on her. They exchange letters and share their feelings of gratitude for the freedom they enjoy because of the sacrifices made by the bravehearts of the country. The memorial symbolises the patriotism of Indian soldiers. Which ts this memorial? House No... Jayanagar Bengaluru 14 April 20XX Dear Ananda, Hope you are all doing well! Do you remember our last conversation about war and the importance of peace? We talked about how India had to struggle for its Independence from the British for many centuries. Post-independence our country has had to fight territorial several wars to protect its borders, territorial integrity, and its integrity: people. This made me wonder, who were these brave Indian safeguarding people? They fought to protect our country and sacrificed their nation s borders tives so that we could lead our lives in peace. What were their names? Where did they come from? Does anyone remember anything about them? Last week I got the answers to some of my questions during an educational trip to New Delhi organised by our school. You may recall, I was looking forward to this trip and our visit to many places of historical and educational significance. I learnt several new and interesting things, and I am excited to share them with you. Let me begin by asking you to guess the name of the monument that I found most inspiring. Let s see if you can guess. The construction of this monument started in April 2018 and was completed in February 2019. It was envisioned and then inaugurated by India s Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi envisioned: visualised & | Unit 5.indd 180 06-Mar-25 2:49:37 PM Unit 5.indd 181 in February 2019. In terms of location and size, it is spread over 40 acres of land near the iconic India Gate. But more importantly, it is a tribute to some of the bravest Indians. I m sure you ve guessed! It s the National War Memorial . Won t you Say, a long-desired aspiration was fulfilled? Our visit to the National War Memorial began with our teacher explaining that even after Independence, India has had to fight many wars to protect herself, and the freedom and security we enjoy today