ourselves into five groups. We decided to make presentations depicting the courageous. stories of the soldiers. Our teacher has also advised us to share our experience during the school assembly. I am delighted that all the students of our school will get to know about the National War Memorial and the soldiers it commemorates. I am_ going to give a presentation on the story of Major Padmapani Acharya, who fought for India in the 1999 Kargil War and was awarded the Maha Vir Chakra. Major Padmapani Acharya (MVC) BRAVEHEARTS discourses: serious discussions on different topics MAJOR PADMAPANI ACHARYA Maha Vir Chakra (P) | OP Vijay | 2 Raj Rif Poorvi | Unit 5.indd 186 The citation for the Maha Vir Chakra reads as follows: GazettE NOTIFICATION: 17 Pres/2000,15.8.99 OPERATION: Op Vyay- KaroiL Date oF Awarb: 15 Auc 1999 CITATION Major Papmapani Acuarya (IC-55072) 2 RajpuTANA RIFLES (PosTHUMoUS) On 28 June 1999, Major Padmapani Acharya as a Company Commander, was assigned the formidable task of capturing an enemy position which was heavily fortified, strongly held and covered with mines and sweeping machine gun and artillery fire. Success of the battalion and brigade operation hinged on the early capture of this position. However, the company attack almost faltered at the very beginning when the enemy s artillery fire came down squarely on the leading platoon, inflicting large number of casualties. With utter disregard to his personal safety, Major Padmapani Acharya took the reserve platoon of his company and led it through raining artillery shells. Even as his men were falling to the murderous enemy fire, he continued to encourage his men and charged at the enemy up the steep rock face with his reserve platoon. Unmindful of the hail of bullets from the enemy s position, Major Padmapani Acharya crawled up to the enemy position and lobbed grenades. In this daring assault, Major Acharya was severely injured. Despite being seriously injured and unable to move, he ordered his men to leave him and charge at the enemy while he continued to fire at the enemy. The enemy position was finally over-run and the objective was captured. After completion of the mission, the officer however, succumbed to his injuries. Major Padmapani Acharya displayed exceptional courage, leadership and spirit of self-sacrifice in the face of the enemy. https://www.gallantryawards.gov.in/awards Before he went into battle, he wrote a letter to his father that he wasn t afraid or scared about losing his life while trying to protect the motherland. Quoting Shrimad Bhagavad Gita he went on to say: 06-Mar-25 2:49:44 PM eat a areata cept fatear ot tere Ter TATE HII Fat Ha TIF: 12.3711 Hato vad prapsyasi svargam_ jitva@ va bhoksyase mahim Tasmaduttistha kaunteya yuddhaya krtaniscayah If you fight, you will either be slain on the battlefield and go to the celestial abode, or you will gain victory and enjoy the kingdom on the earth. Therefore, arise O, son of Kunti! Be determined to fight. Here is the website link for National War Memorial https://www.mygov.in.