to revere the sacrifices of our soldiers. Earlier the Amar Jawan Jyoti, which also displayed a rifle and a helmet, was alighted under the of India Gate in January 1972 to commemorate India s he India-Pakistan War of 1971. he National War Memorial now includes Amar wan Jyoti in the obelisk, which is surrounded by r Chakras. During the inauguration, the Prime nister lit a new flame to commemorate the fallen eroes. Later, the old flame at India Gate was also merged with the new flame at the National War _ Memorial. Here is a picture of the new Amar Jawan / mee yotl if you haven t seen it. > et ~ You can see the obelisk surrounded by wreaths that have been placed as a mark of respect. The lighting design is planned in such a way that it transforms the monument s landscape as sunlight changes from dawn to dusk. It truly is a majestic site that filled me with pride for our nation. I was also overwhelmed by the interminable flame as a metaphor for eternal stories of courage and valour. https://nationalwarmemori he eS se Unit S.indd 183 BRAVEHEARTS commemorates: remember officially and show respect obelisk: tapering stone pillar wreaths: circular arrangement of flowers used as a respect and remembrance for a person who has died interminable: everlasting 06-Mar,25 2:49:42 PM Poorvi Our teacher also explained the significance of the Chakras to us. I found it interesting and hence I am sharing with you. The National War Memorial consists of four concentric circles, which are known as Amar Chakra, Veerta Chakra, Tyag Chakra, and Raksha Chakra around a 15-metre-tall central obelisk with the eternal flame the Amar Jawan Jyoti. It also houses murals: large bronze and stone murals and graphic panels. Isn t it amazing! 1. The innermost circle represents the Amar Chakra, also known as the Circle of Immortality . This has the Obelisk with Eternal Flame. The Amar Jawan Jyoti flame symbolises the immortality of the spirit of fallen soldiers with the assurance that the nation will never forget their sacrifice. The second circle is called the Veerta Chakra, which is also known as the Circle of Bravery . There is a covered gallery that exhibits six murals crafted in bronze, depicting valiant battle actions of our Armed Forces. The third circle represents the Tyag Chakra, also known as the Circle of Sacrifice . The circular concentric walls of honour symbolise the ancient war formation, which is called Chakravyuh. The walls are covered with granite tablets and National War Memorial The National War Memorial symbolizes the Nation's gratitude for the personnel of the Armed Forces who made the supreme sacrifice in the defence of.the country since independence. The National War Memorial was dedicated to the Armed Forces on behalf of the Nation by Prime Minister Narendra Modi Amar Chakra The obelisk with eternal flame symbolizes immortality of the spirit Circle of Immortality of a soldier with an assurance that the Nation will never forget