14. Column 1 vassal (n) coronation (n) successor (n) rash (adj.) sovereign country (n) league (n) wrath (n) seize (v) resolve (n) raged (v) decisive (adj.) apprehended (v) dauntless (adj) avenge (v) (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) (vii) (viil) (ix) (x) (xi) (xii) (xiii) (xiv) Column 2 extreme anger take hold of suddenly or forcibly happen in a violent way acting or doing something without thinking about the consequences association or partnership a ceremony at which a person is made king or queen fearless capture a country with a government having complete authority a country/ state that is controlled by a more powerful country and has to pay money when needed a person who succeeds another take revenge for showing the ability to make decisions effectively determination Poorvi II Complete the table given below based on your understanding of the story. An example has been done for you. Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher. Effect . Ullal had been captured by the Portuguese. . Veera Narsimha ordered the soldiers to stop Rani Abbakka when she said she would not be frightened by the Portuguese. . Rani Abbakka addresse meeting of rajas fo support, who felt the be no match for th oC? fp Let us think and reflect I Read the extract given below and answer the questions that follow. Portuguese envoy: Our Governor has sent me to remind you that the annual tribute from Ullal is long overdue and... Rani Abbakka: We are a sovereign country. We don t pay tribute to Portugal. And we don t take orders from the Portuguese! Portuguese envoy: Your Majesty, you will regret your stand. Abbakka ordered merchant ships to be built and in alliance with the Zamorin of Kozhikode, she defied the Portuguese and established a hugely profitable trading relation with Arabia. 1. What does the word tribute mean in this context? 2. Complete the sentence with a suitable reason. % | Unit 5.indd 214 06-Mar-25 2:50:21 PM a BRAVEHEARTS Rani Abbakka says, We are a sovereign country because 3. Identify whether the following statement is true or false. The Portuguese envoy threatened Rani Abbakka. 4. Choose a word given in brackets to replace the underlined word. ... She defied the Portuguese and established a hugely profitable trading relation with Arabia. (defeated/disobeyed) 5. Choose the option that lists the qualities of Rani Abbakka, based on this extract. Gi) bold (ii) thoughtful (iii) capable (iv) generous (v) determined A. @), Gi), and (v)_ iB. Gi), Gii), and Giv) C. (i), (iii), and (v) D. Gi), (iv), and (v) II Answer the following questions. 1. Rani Abbakka spoke to her mother on her deathbed. How might these words have made her mother feel? 2. What does the support of the people of Ullal and the soldiers for Rani Abbakka suggest about their mindset? 3. How might the people of Ullal have felt when the mighty Portuguese were defeated? 4. Why do you think Rani Abbakka s victory against the Portuguese