or stupid: Will your dad lend you the money? Don t make me laugh! he who laughs, last laughs longest (saying) used to tell sb not to be too proud of their present success; in the end another person may be more successful laugh all the way to the bank (informal) to make a lot of money easily and feel very pleased about it laugh in sb s face to show in a very obvious way that you have no respect for sb laugh like a drain (BrE) to laugh very loudly laugh on the other side of your face (BrE, informal) to be forced to change from feeling pleased or satisfied to feeling disappointed or annoyed laugh sb/sth out of court (BrE, informal) to completely reject an idea, a story, etc. that you think is not worth taking seriously at all laugh till/until you cry to laugh so long and hard that there are tears in your eyes laugh up 216 ae Unit 5.indd 216 06-Mar-25 2:50:23 PM BRAVEHEARTS your sleeve (at sb/sth) (informal) to be secretly amused about sth laugh your head off to laugh very loudly and for a long time not know whether to laugh or cry (informal) to be unable to decide how to react to a bad or unfortunate situation you have/you ve got to, laugh (informal) used to say that you think there is a funny side to a situation: Well, I m sorry you ve lost your shoes, but you ve got to laugh, haven t you? > more at KILL v., PISS v. PHR V laugh at sb/sth to make sb/sth seem stupid or not serious by making jokes about them/it SYN] ridicule: Everybody laughs at my accent. She is not afraid to laugh at herself (= is not too serious about herself). laugh sth# off (informal) to try to make people think that sth is not serious or important, especially by making a joke about it: He laughed off suggestions that he was going to resign. noun 1 [C] the sound you make when you are amused or happy: to give a laugh a short/nervous/hearty laugh His first joke got the biggest laugh of the night. > see also BELLY LAUGH 2a laugh [sing.] (informal) an enjoyable and amusing occasion or thing that happens: Come to the karaoke night it should be a good laugh. And he didn t realize it was you? What a laugh! 3 a laugh [sing.] a person who is amusing and fun to be with: Paula s a good laugh, isn t she? fil do sth for a laugh/for laughs to do sth for fun or as a joke: I just did it for a laugh, but it got out of hand. have a (good) laugh (about sth) to find sth amusing: I was angry at the time but we had a good laugh about it afterwards. more at BARREL n., LAST det. Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary Now, use these expressions in sentences of your