that 2. I enjoy reading historical novels, said Smitha. Smitha shared that 3. The captain said to the coach, Our team won the championship last year. The captain told the coach that 4. The class teacher said, Please turn off the lights when you leave. The class teacher requested 5. Finish the work before dinner, said mother to Ravi. Mother advised 6. The vet said to the pet owner, Take the dog for a walk. The vet instructed V Read the conversation between the Captain and the team. \ Unit 5.indd 219 d-mahdg 2:50:24 PM | Poorvi Captain: We need to focus on our strategy for the final match. Player : I have some ideas on how we can improve our strategy. Captain: Make sure to share those ideas with the team during practice. Complete the following paragraph by transforming the dialogue in the indirect form of speech. The Captain remarked that 1. To which one of the players replied that 2. The Captain advised the player to 3. Let us listen You will listen to the teacher speak about a braveheart. As you listen, complete the bio-table given below. (Transcript for the teacher on pg. 224) Full Name Rani Gaidinliu Date of Birth January 1. 1915 Place of Birth Tamenglong district, 2. [o,e} ce) S Tribe Rongmei (Kabui) 3 Age when joined the Hereka 3. 5 Movement > 5 Main aim of Movement Revival of Naga tribal religion and 3 self-rule (Naga Raj) Dp & Year of Arrest 4, co) i Z Age of Arrest 5. 7 Sentence Life imprisonment Years of Imprisonment 1932 1947 Title Given Daughter of the Hills , 6. , Award 7. Birsa Munda Award Year of Death 1993 Te | Unit 5.indd 220 06-Mar-25 2:50:26 PM BRAVEHEARTS Honour in Silchar, Assam Park and 8. Postal Stamp Issued 1996 Commemorative CoinIssued 9. Let us speak Some of the words from the story Rani Abbakka are given in the table below. Work in pairs and pronounce these words by referring to the notes given below. Emphasise the highlighted syllable. Remember, single syllable (monosyllabic) words do not have any stress. 1. vassal (n) va-sul The /a/ sound in va is similar to (two syllables) van. The word vassal rhymes with apple. 2. successor (n) | suhk-seh-:suh The /r/ sound in the end of the (three syllables) word is not pronounced. 3. rash (adj.) rash (monosyllabic) The /a/sound is similar to rat. | The /a/sound is similar to rat. | sound is similar to rat. 4. league (n) leeg (monosyllabic) | Use the long -ee sound, as in seed. 5. wrath (n) roth (monosyllabic) The-wissilent. = -w The-wissilent. = silent. seez (monosyllabic) | Not to be confused with size . 7. resolve (n) ri-zolv (two syllables) | The -s becomes the /z/ sound. Let us write India s past was heroic, and at present, the pace of her development is inspiring. Women play a significant role in it. These women are around us, ,4 2 inspiring us all