spread over 40 acres of land near the iconic India Gate. But more importantly, it is a tribute to some of the bravest Indians. I m sure you ve guessed! It s the National War Memorial . Won t you Say, a long-desired aspiration was fulfilled? Our visit to the National War Memorial began with our teacher explaining that even after Independence, India has had to fight many wars to protect herself, and the freedom and security we enjoy today is because of the many brave men and women who have served in the Indian Armed Forces over decades. Sadly, she said, war always takes its toll, and therefore, many brave soldiers have had to sacrifice their lives for the country even after our Independence in 1947. This is what makes monuments like the National War Memorial extremely important, so that we should never forget the cost of freedom. We are aware, always, of the pain and horrors of war. We learnt that each brick of the memorial is called a tablet, and it bears the names of soldiers who fought for India and made the supreme sacrifice in different wars from 1947 till date, including the Indo-China conflict of 1962, the IndoPak Wars in 1965 & 1971 and the Kargil War in 1999. There are 29,000 tablets on which more than 26,000 names of fallen soldiers have been etched. It was heartening to know that our government has recognised the sacrifice of brave soldiers. Our teacher told us about the 21 bravehearts who were awarded the Param Vir Chakra (PVC), India s highest wartime gallantry medal, for their service to the nation. She also told us about Maha Vir Chakra (MVC), Kirti Chakra (KC), Vir Chakra (VrC), and Shaurya Chakra (SC). Major Somnath Sharma was posthumously awarded India s first PVC in the Battle of Badgam in 1947. Later some more PVCs were awarded for exceptional gallantry during the IndiaChina Conflict of 1962, and the India-Pakistan War of 1965. Besides, a PVC was also awarded for service during the UN Peace Keeping Operations in Congo. In the 1971 war, some of the heroes who were awarded the PVC (posthumously) include Lance Naik Albert Ekka, Flying Officer Nirmal Jit Singh Sekhon, Second Lieutenant Arun Khetarpal, and Major Hoshiar Singh. Some Navy personnel BRAVEHEARTS iconic: celebrated tribute: showing respect, gratitude etched: engraved gallantry: exceptional courage especially in battle posthumously: after death | Unit 5.indd 182 & Poorvi citation: meritorious performance of duty awestruck: amazed including Captain Mahendra Nath Mulla were also awarded MVC for their exemplary courage and leadership. Then the teacher shared with us the citation of Param Vir Chakra awardee Lance Naik Albert Ekka. It touched my heart and also motivated me. We were awestruck and humbled by his bravery. I aspire to be courageous like him when I join the army! Lance Naik Albert Ekka (PVC) Lance Naik Albert Ekka, (No. 4239746), 14 Guards Lance Naik Albert Ekka was in the left forward company of a Battalion of