Paula s a good laugh, isn t she? fil do sth for a laugh/for laughs to do sth for fun or as a joke: I just did it for a laugh, but it got out of hand. have a (good) laugh (about sth) to find sth amusing: I was angry at the time but we had a good laugh about it afterwards. more at BARREL n., LAST det. Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary Now, use these expressions in sentences of your own. IV Read the following dialogues from the text. Rani Abbakka said, I will make them pay for this. The merchants said to the Arabians, Visit us again, brother. The given sentences are the direct words of the speaker; hence, they are in direct speech. The reported forms or indirect forms of speech for the given sentences are: Rani said that she would make them pay for that. The merchants told the Arabian brothers to visit them again. While reporting direct speech to indirect speech, we make certain modifications related to time, place, and person. Unit 5.indd 217 baal y 2:50:23 PM | Poorvi & | Unit 5.indd 218 cy Time (Tense): Verbs are typically shifted back from a present tense to a past form in reported speech to reflect the change in time. * Place (Adverbs of Place): Words indicating place are adjusted to fit the new context. * Person: Pronouns and subjects are modified to align with the perspective of the reporter. Changes made with reference to time (tense) Direct Speech Present Tense Past Tense Past Perfect Tense Present Progressive Tense Past Progressive Tense Past Perfect Progressive Tense Present Perfect Tense Present Modal Past Modal Changes made in pronouns Direct Speech I you (singular) you (plural) we my our your uS mine Indirect Speech Past Tense Past Perfect Tense No change Past Progressive Tense Past Perfect Progressive Tense No change Past Perfect Tense Past Modal No change Indirect Speech she, he she, he they they her, his their her, his, their her, him them hers, his 06-Mar-25 2:50:24 PM BRAVEHEARTS ours theirs yours hers, his, theirs Changes in time and place expressions Direct Speech Indirect Speech now then ago before today that day tomorrow the day after/the following day yesterday the day before/the previous day next week/month/year the following week/month/year here there this that these those Rewrite the following sentences in direct speech to indirect speech. Remember to make the necessary changes. 1. The teacher said, Women of valour have made significant contributions throughout history. The teacher remarked that 2. I enjoy reading historical novels, said Smitha. Smitha shared that 3. The captain said to the coach, Our team won the championship last year. The captain told the coach that 4. The class teacher said, Please turn off the lights when you leave. The class teacher requested 5. Finish the work before dinner, said mother to Ravi. Mother advised 6. The vet said to the pet owner, Take the dog for a walk. The vet instructed V Read