with pride? 3. How does the disciplined life of the Armed Forces impact the body and mind, according to Gunjan? 4, List any one aspect about a job in the Armed Forces that Gunjan feels helps someone grow. 5. State any two things that Gunjan feels life in the Armed Forces teaches. Let us speak 1. Work in pairs and identify the different professions displayed in the picture. 2. Imagine that you dream of or wish to pursue some of these professions and vocations. Take turns to express this along with a reason. Do not forget to include what preparation would be required to fulfill the dream. Speak about all the given professions and vocations. oh we Unit 5.indd 197 | aM 2:50:03 PM Poorvi Use the prompts given below. I would like to become... because... For this I would have to first... e Idream of working as a... as... This would involve... e To become a... has been a childhood dream. This is so because...In order to become a... I would have to... * One day, I hope to become... Then I would be able to... However, first I would need to... e It would be great if I could work as... as it would let me... For this I would have to... Let us write You have read about the sacrifices made by the Armed Forces during war. However, the Armed Forces also play a key role during peace time. Write a letter to your friend sharing how the Armed Forces contribute their services during the times of natural calamities (floods, earthquakes, etc.), infrastructure development (building bridges in remote areas, etc.) and for welfare initiatives (medical camps, establishment of libraries, etc.) Ww \ 7Z rd \ Let us explore sy o ~ I Every branch of the Armed Forces has a motto. Read the mottos ve! given below. II India has many other Forces that serve the nation. For example, Central Reserve Police Force (CRPF). Find out about such Forces and discuss with the teacher. III Create a collage capturing the lives and stories of people that inspire us. In groups of four, prepare a collage on a chart paper on any such person a and present it in the class. N _ IV Many women have joined the Armed Forces and are serving the nation. \ , Have a discussion in the class with examples. ra & . . ) / \o) 06-Mar-25 2:50:04 PM Unit 5.indd 199 My DEar SOLDIERS Let us do these activities before we read. I Look around and identify the people who contribute to your life selflessly with a risk to their own lives. Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher. II Work in pairs. Discuss at least three questions that you would like to ask the people identified in I. BRAVEHEARTS Let us read Oh! Defenders of borders You are great sons of my land (r~ When we are all asleep You still hold on to your deed Windy