entered the dark, == abandoned building alone. IV Read the following sentences from the text and divide them into two parts. An example has been done for you. 1. I aspire to be courageous like him when I join the army! 2. They exchange letters and share their feelings of gratitude for the freedom they enjoy because of the sacrifices made by the bravehearts of the country. 3. Though seriously wounded in this encounter, he continued to fight alongside his comrades. 4. The sacrifices of the soldiers make monuments like the National War Memorial extremely important so that we should never forget the cost of freedom. I aspire to be courageous like him Unit 5.indd 195 When the part of a sentence conveys complete meaning and is independent, it is called main clause. The part of the sentence which is dependent on the main clause to make complete sense is the subordinate clause. The words or phrases that connect the two parts of sentences such as, when, because, though, so that convey a specific meaning time, reason, contrast, purpose, respectively. Connecting words are called subordinating conjunctions. V Combine the following pairs of sentences using suitable subordinating X conjunctions given in the box below. we He HK Ke Ke Ke Ke HK MK HK eK eK Ke eK eK Ke Re Ke eM Ke Ke Re Ke eK ee eK eK eK eK ee eK KK . Wasi burst into tears. He heard the good news. . Himani was very nervous. She delivered a great presentation. 2 3. This is the place. I was born. 4. The students performed very well. They studied diligently. . Water the plants. They will die. VI Complete the following sentences with suitable main clause or subordinate clause. 1. Farheen was late to work because . The dog started barking when . i . She completed the marathon although while they were hiking in the mountains. before the deadline approached. . We waited in the car until 3 5. Abhishek received a promotion after 7 as the waves rushed to the shore. Let us listen You will listen to a girl speak about why she wishes to join the Armed Forces when she grows up. As you listen, answer the questions given below in two-three exact words you hear. (Transcript for the teacher on pg. 223) | Unit 5.indd 196 06-Mar-25 2:49:55 PM Ro BRAVEHEARTS 1. What type of job does Gunjan think the Armed Forces is? 2. What feature of the Armed Forces fills Gunjan with pride? 3. How does the disciplined life of the Armed Forces impact the body and mind, according to Gunjan? 4, List any one aspect about a job in the Armed Forces that Gunjan feels helps someone grow. 5. State any two things that Gunjan feels life in the Armed Forces teaches. Let us speak 1. Work in pairs and identify the different professions displayed in the picture. 2. Imagine that you dream of or wish to pursue some of