were to be associations of people who produced goods together and divided the profits according to the work done by members. Karl Marx (1818-1883) and Friedrich Engels (1820-1895) added other ideas to this body of arguments. Marx argued that industrial society was capitalist . Capitalists owned the capital invested in factories, and the profit of capitalists was produced by workers. The conditions of workers could not improve as long as this profit was accumulated by private capitalists. Workers had to overthrow capitalism and the rule of private property. Marx believed that to free themselves from capitalist exploitation, workers had to construct a radically socialist society where all property was socially controlled. This would be a communist society. He was convinced that workers would triumph in their conflict with capitalists. A communist society was the natural society of the future. 28 . Reprint 2025-26 List two differences between the capitalist and socialist ideas of private property. 1.4 Support for Socialist mmm By the 1870s, socialist ideas spread through Europe. To coordinate their efforts, socialists formed an international body namely, the Workers in England and Germany began forming associations to Imagine that a meeting has been called in fight for better living and working conditions. They set up funds to your area to discuss the socialist idea of help members in times of distress and demanded a reduction of working doing away with private property and hours and the right to vote. In Germany, these associations worked closely introducing collective ownership. Write the with the Social Democratic Party (SPD) and helped it win parliamentary speech you would make at the meeting if you seats. By 1905, socialists and trade unionists formed a Labour Party in are: Britain and a Socialist Party in France. However, till 1914, socialists never > a poor labourer working in the fields succeeded in forming a government in Europe. Represented by strong > a medium-level landowner fioures in parliament litics, their ideas did sh legislation, but eures in parliamentary politics, their ideas shape legislation, bu 5S a eM er governments continued to be run by conservatives, liberals and radicals. Fig.2 This is a painting of the Paris Commune of 18717 (From Illustrated London News, 1877). It portrays a scene from the popular uprising in Paris between March and May 1871. This was a period when the town council (commune) of Paris was taken over by a peoples government consisting of workers, ordinary people, professionals, political activists and others. The uprising emerged against a background of growing discontent against the policies of the French state. The Paris Commune was ultimately crushed by government troops but it was celebrated by Socialists the world over as a prelude to a socialist revolution. The Paris Commune is also popularly remembered for two important legacies: one, for its association with the workers red flag that was the flag adopted by the communards ( revolutionaries) in Paris; two, for the Marseillaise , originally written as a war song in 1792, it became a symbol