brief while during the revolution, there existed a large number of trade unions and factory committees made up of factory workers. After 1905, most committees and unions worked unofficially, since they were declared illegal. Severe restrictions were placed on political activity. The Tsar dismissed the first Duma within 75 days and the re-elected second Duma within three months. He did not want any questioning of his authority or any reduction in his power. He changed the voting laws and packed the third Duma with conservative politicians. Liberals and revolutionaries were kept out. 2.5 The First World War and the Russian Empire mann In 1914, war broke out between two European alliances Germany, Austria and Turkey (the Central powers) and France, Britain and Russia (later Italy and Romania). Each country had a global empire Reprint 2025-26 Why were there revolutionary disturbances in Russia in 1905? What were the demands of revolutionaries? New words Jadidists Muslim reformers within the Russian empire Real wage Reflects the quantities of goods which the wages will actually buy. c S 1S) = 3S > u a4 c sy n a) > fe CP) = = ao) c oO CP) = > jaa) i S YY av To = s i pos f=) = iS vu ~ = O cP) s To = a] & ao} = and the war was fought outside Europe as well as in Europe. This was the First World War. In Russia, the war was initially popular and people rallied around Tsar Nicholas I]. As the war continued, though, the Tsar refused to consult the main parties in the Duma. Support wore thin. AntiGerman sentiments ran high, as can be seen in the renaming of St Petersburg a German name as Petrograd. The Tsarina Alexandra s German origins and poor advisers, especially a monk called Rasputin, made the autocracy unpopular. The First World War on the eastern front differed from that on the western front . In the west, armies fought from trenches stretched along eastern France. In the east, armies moved a good deal and fought battles leaving large casualties. Defeats were shocking and demoralising. Russia s armies lost badly in Germany and Austria between 1914 and 1916. There were over 7 million casualties by 1917. As they retreated, the Russian army destroyed crops and buildings to prevent the enemy from being able to live off the land. The destruction of crops and buildings led to over 3 million refugees in Russia. The situation discredited the government and the Tsar. Soldiers did not wish to fight such a war. The war also had a severe impact on industry. Russia s own industries were few in number and the country was cut off from other suppliers of industrial goods by German control of the Baltic Sea. Industrial equipment disintegrated more rapidly in Russia than elsewhere in Europe. By 1916, railway lines began to break down. Able-bodied men were called up to the war. As a result, there were labour shortages and small