Nomadism Lifestyle of those who do government represented. not live in one place but move from area . ; ; . ; to area to earn their living Partly to remedy this, most non-Russian nationalities were given political autonomy in the Soviet Union (USSR) the state the Bolsheviks created from the Russian empire in December 1922. But since this was combined with unpopular policies that the Bolsheviks forced the local government to follow like the harsh discouragement of nomadism attempts to win over different nationalities were only partly successful. Why did people in Central Asia respond to the Russian Revolution in different ways? Source B Central Asia of the October Revolution: Two Views M.N.Roy was an Indian revolutionary, a founder of the Mexican Communist Party and prominent Comintern leader in India, China and Europe. He was in Central Asia at the time of the civil war in the 1920s. He wrote: The chieftain was a benevolent old man; his attendant ... a youth who ... spoke Russian ... He had heard of the Revolution, which had overthrown the Tsar and driven away the Generals who conquered the homeland of the Kirgiz. So, the Revolution meant that the Kirgiz were masters of their home again. Long Live the Revolution shouted the Kirgiz youth who seemed to be a born Bolshevik. The whole tribe joined. M.N.Roy, Memoirs (1964). The Kirghiz welcomed the first revolution (ie February Revolution) with joy and the second revolution with consternation and terror ... [This] first revolution freed them from the oppression of the Tsarist regime and strengthened their hope that ... autonomy would be realised. The second revolution (October Revolution) was accompanied by violence, pillage, taxes and the establishment of dictatorial power ... Once a small group of Tsarist bureaucrats oppressed the Kirghiz. Now the same group of people ... perpetuate the same regime ... Kazakh leader in 1919, quoted in Alexander Bennigsen and Chantal Quelquejay, Les Mouvements Nationaux chez les Musulmans de Russie, (1960). < oS = S) > u [a4 < ae wn nan [a4 cP) = = so) < oO Vu iS) = aa = Be iS a ) n . 4 Reprint 2025-26 4.2 Making a Socialist Society === During the civil war, the Bolsheviks kept industries and banks nationalised. They permitted peasants to cultivate the land that had been socialised. Bolsheviks used confiscated land to demonstrate what collective work could be. A process of centralised planning was introduced. Officials assessed how the economy could work and set targets for a five-year period. On this basis they made the Five Year Plans. The government fixed all prices to promote industrial growth during the first two Plans Socialist Cultivation in a Village in the Ukraine A commune was set up using two [confiscated] farms as a base. The commune consisted of thirteen families with a total of seventy persons ... The farm tools taken from the ... farms were turned over to the commune ... The members ate in a communal dining hall and