he died, fighting for the worker s cause, and my mother ... is ailing ... 1 want to study very much, but I cannot go to school. I had some old boots, but they are completely torn and no one can mend them. My mother is sick, we have no money and no bread, but I want to study very much. ...there stands before us the task of studying, studying and studying. That is what Vladimir Ilich Lenin said. But I have to stop going to school. We have no relatives and there is no one to help us, so I have to go to work in a factory, to prevent the family from starving. Dear grandfather, I am 13, I study well and have no bad reports. I am in Class 5 ... Letter of 1933 from a 13-year-old worker to Kalinin, Soviet President From: V. Sokolov (ed), Obshchestvo I Viast, v 1930-ye gody (Moscow, 1997). c S 1S) = 3S > u a4 c sy n a) > fe CP) = = ao) c oO CP) = > jaa) i S YY av F 43 Reprint 2025-26 To = S & pos f=) a vu ~ = oO cP) fs ras] To = & ay ao} = 4.3 Stalinism and Collectivisation =D _ The period of the early Planned Economy was linked to the disasters of the collectivisation of agriculture. By 1927 1928, the towns in Soviet Russia were facing an acute problem of grain supplies. The government fixed prices at which grain must be sold, but the peasants refused to sell their grain to government buyers at these prices. Stalin, who headed the party after the death of Lenin, introduced firm emergency measures. He believed that rich peasants and traders in the countryside were holding stocks in the hope of higher prices. Speculation had to be stopped and supplies confiscated. In 1928, Party members toured the grain-producing areas, supervising enforced grain collections, and raiding kulaks the name for wellto-do peasants. As shortages continued, the decision was taken to collectivise farms. It was argued that grain shortages were partly due to the small size of holdings. After 1917, land had been given over to peasants. These small-sized peasant farms could not be modernised. To develop modern farms, and run them along industrial lines with machinery, it was necessary to eliminate kulaks , take away land from peasants, and establish state-controlled large farms. What followed was Stalin s collectivisation programme. From 1929, the Party forced all peasants to cultivate in collective farms (Ko/khoz). The bulk of land and implements were transferred to the ownership of collective farms. Peasants worked on the land, and the ko/khox profit was shared. Enraged peasants resisted the authorities and destroyed their livestock. Between 1929 and 1931, the number of cattle fell by one-third. Those who resisted collectivisation were severely punished. Many were deported and exiled. As they resisted collectivisation, peasants argued that they were not rich and they were not against socialism. They merely