the Soviet Union. A backward country had become a great power. Its industries and agriculture had developed and the poor were being fed. But it had denied the essential freedoms to its citizens and carried out its developmental projects through repressive policies. By the end of the twentieth century, the international reputation of the USSR as a socialist country had declined though it was recognised that socialist ideals still enjoyed respect among its people. But in each country the ideas tas sunne of socialism were rethought in a variety of different ways. INDOSOVIET JOURNAL FORTNIGHTLY ORGAN OF THE Writing about the Russian Revolution in India Among those the Russian Revolution inspired were many Indians. Several attended the Communist University. By the mid-1920s the Communist Party was formed in India. Its members kept in touch with the Soviet Communist Party. Important Indian political and cultural figures took an interest in the Soviet experiment and visited Russia, among them Jawaharlal Nehru and Rabindranath To = S & pos f=) a vu ~ = oO cP) s To = & ay ao} = Tagore, who wrote about Soviet Socialism. In India, writings gave impressions of Fig.20 Special Issue on Soviet Russia. In Hindi, R.S. Avasthi wrote in 1920-21 Russian Revolution, Lenin, Lenin of the \Indo-Soviet His Life and His Thoughts, and later The Red Revolution . S.D. Vidyalankar Journal. ; . . . Indian communists wrote The Rebirth of Russia and The Soviet State of Russia. There was much mobilised support for the that was written in Bengali, Marathi, Malayalam, Tamil and Telugu. USSR during the Second World War. 46 . Reprint 2025-26 Source F An Indian arrives in Soviet Russia in 1920 For the first time in our lives, we were seeing Europeans mixing freely with Asians. On seeing the Russians mingling freely with the rest of the people of the country we were convinced that we had come to a land of real equality. We saw freedom in its true light. In spite of their poverty, imposed by the counter-revolutionaries and the imperialists, the people were more jovial and satisfied than ever before. The revolution had instilled confidence and fearlessness in them. The real brotherhood of mankind would be seen here among these people of fifty different nationalities. No barriers of caste or religion hindered them from mixing freely with one another. Every soul was transformed into an orator. One could see a worker, a peasant or a soldier haranguing like a professional lecturer. Shaukat Usmani, Historic Trips of a Revolutionary. Source G Rabindranath Tagore wrote from Russia in 1930 Moscow appears much less clean than the other European capitals. None of those hurrying along the streets look smart. The whole place belongs to the workers ... Here the masses have not in the least been put in the shade by the gentlemen ... those who lived in Activity | the background for ages have come forward in the open today ... I thought of the peasants and workers in my