the policies of the French state. The Paris Commune was ultimately crushed by government troops but it was celebrated by Socialists the world over as a prelude to a socialist revolution. The Paris Commune is also popularly remembered for two important legacies: one, for its association with the workers red flag that was the flag adopted by the communards ( revolutionaries) in Paris; two, for the Marseillaise , originally written as a war song in 1792, it became a symbol of the Commune and of the struggle for liberty. i= aS) ig) i > u [a4 i= a wn nan > [a4 cP) = ~ To i= a] Vu lok (2) = > jaa} = S Be iS yy (=) N F 29 Reprint 2025-26 To = S & pos f=) a vu ~ = oO cP) fs ras] To = & oe ao} = Ya ihe Russian Revolution In one of the least industrialised of European states this situation was reversed. Socialists took over the government in Russia through the October Revolution of 1917. The fall of monarchy in February 1917 and the events of October are normally called the Russian Revolution. How did this come about? What were the social and political conditions in Russia when the revolution occurred? To answer these questions, let us look at Russia a few years before the revolution. 2.1 The RUSSiaN Empire ir 1914 mn In 1914, Tsar Nicholas II ruled Russia and its empire. Besides the territory around Moscow, the Russian empire included current-day Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, parts of Poland, Ukraine and Belarus. It stretched to the Pacific and comprised today s Central Asian states, as well as Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan. The majority religion was Russian Orthodox Christianity which had grown out of the Greek Orthodox Church but the empire also included Catholics, Protestants, Muslims and Buddhists. Atlantic Ocean Mediterranean Sea << Central Powers Entente (Allied) Powers Neutral States Neutral states that later joined Central Powers Neutral states that later joined Entente Powers == Fig.3 Tsar Nicholas II in the White Hall of the Winter Palace, St Petersburg, 1900. Painted by Earnest Lipgart (1847-1932) Fig.4 Europe in 1914. World War. The map shows the Russian empire and the European countries at war during the First 30 Reprint 2025-26 2.2 Economy and Society sununnnnssee At the beginning of the twentieth century, the vast majority of Russia s people were agriculturists. About 85 per cent of the Russian empire s population earned their living from agriculture. This proportion was higher than in most European countries. For instance, in France and Germany the proportion was between 40 per cent and 50 per cent. In the empire, cultivators produced for the market as well as for their own needs and Russia was a major exporter of grain. Industry was found in pockets. Prominent industrial areas were St Petersburg and Moscow. Craftsmen undertook much of the production, but large factories existed alongside craft workshops. Many factories were set up in the 1890s, when Russia