Farm A member of a landowning family wrote to a relative about what happened at the estate: The coup happened quite painlessly, quietly and peacefully. ... The first days were unbearable.. Mikhail Mikhailovich [the estate owner] was calm...The girls also...1 must say the chairman behaves correctly and even politely. We were left two cows and two horses. The servants tell them all the time not to bother us. Let them live. We vouch for their safety and property. We want them treated as humanely as possible. ... ... here are rumours that several villages are trying to evict the committees and return the estate to Mikhail Mikhailovich. | don t know if this will happen, or if it s good for us. But we rejoice that there is a conscience in our people... From: Serge Schmemann, Echoes of a Native Land. Two Centuries of a Russian Village (1997). Read the two views on the revolution in the 4.1 The Civil War When the Bolsheviks ordered land redistribution, the Russian army countryside. Imagine yourself to be a witness began to break up. Soldiers, mostly peasants, wished to go home for to the events. Write a short account from the the redistribution and deserted. Non-Bolshevik socialists, liberals and standpoint of: supporters of autocracy condemned the Bolshevik uprising. Their > an owner of an estate leaders moved to south Russia and organised troops to fight the Bolsheviks (the reds ). During 1918 and 1919, the greens (Socialist Revolutionaries) and whites (pro-Tsarists) controlled most of the > asmall peasant > a journalist Russian empire. They were backed by French, American, British and Japanese troops all those forces who were worried at the growth of socialism in Russia. As these troops and the Bolsheviks fought a civil war, looting, banditry and famine became common. Supporters of private property among whites took harsh steps with To = S & pos f=) a vu ~ = oO cP) S To = & oe ao} = peasants who had seized land. Such actions led to the loss of popular support for the non-Bolsheviks. By January 1920, the Bolsheviks controlled most of the former Russian empire. They succeeded due Reprint 2025-26 to cooperation with non-Russian nationalities and Muslim jadidists. ; : ; ; New words Cooperation did not work where Russian colonists themselves turned Bolshevik. In Khiva, in Central Asia, Bolshevik colonists brutally Autonomy The right to govern massacred local nationalists in the name of defending socialism. In themselves this situation, many were confused about what the Bolshevik | Nomadism Lifestyle of those who do government represented. not live in one place but move from area . ; ; . ; to area to earn their living Partly to remedy this, most non-Russian nationalities were given political autonomy in the Soviet Union (USSR) the state the Bolsheviks created from the Russian empire in December 1922. But since this was combined with unpopular policies that the Bolsheviks forced the local government to follow like the harsh discouragement of nomadism attempts