On this basis they made the Five Year Plans. The government fixed all prices to promote industrial growth during the first two Plans Socialist Cultivation in a Village in the Ukraine A commune was set up using two [confiscated] farms as a base. The commune consisted of thirteen families with a total of seventy persons ... The farm tools taken from the ... farms were turned over to the commune ... The members ate in a communal dining hall and income was divided in accordance with the principles of cooperative communism . The entire proceeds of the members labor, as well as all dwellings and facilities belonging to the commune were shared by the commune members. Fedor Belov, The History of a Soviet Collective Farm (1955). (1927-1932 and 1933-1938). Centralised planning led to economic growth. Industrial production increased (between 1929 and 1933 by 100 per cent in the case of oil, coal and steel). New factory cities came into being. However, rapid construction led to poor working conditions. In the city of Magnitogorsk, the construction of a steel plant was achieved in three years. Workers lived hard lives and the result was 550 stoppages of work in the first year alone. In living quarters, in the wintertime, at 40 degrees below, people had to climb down from the fourth floor and dash across the street in order to go to the toilet . An extended schooling system developed, and arrangements were made for factory workers and peasants to enter universities. Cr ches were established in factories for the children of women workers. To = s & pos f=) a = vu ~ = O cP) < ras] To = & oe ao} = Cheap public health care was provided. Model living quarters were Fig. 14 Factories came to be seen as a set up for workers. The effect of all this was uneven, though, since | symbol of socialism. This poster states: The smoke from the overnment resources were limited. . . . _, 8 chimneys is the breathing of Soviet Russia. Reprint 2025-26 Fig.15 Children at school in Soviet Russia in the Fig.16 A child in Magnitogorsk during the 7930s. First Five Year Plan. They are studying the Soviet economy. He is working for Soviet Russia. rl is iW LS i * t Fig.77 Factory dining hall in the 1930s. Source C Dreams and Realities of a Soviet Childhood in 1933 Dear grandfather Kalinin ... My family is large, there are four children. We don t have a father he died, fighting for the worker s cause, and my mother ... is ailing ... 1 want to study very much, but I cannot go to school. I had some old boots, but they are completely torn and no one can mend them. My mother is sick, we have no money and no bread, but I want to study very much. ...there stands before us the task of studying, studying and studying. That is what Vladimir Ilich Lenin said. But