[a4 cP) = = so) < oO Vu iS) = aa = S Be iS a ) n Nee A ai . ate ~ y 3 Sr 2 Fig.70 - The July Days. A pro-Bolshevik demonstration on 17 July 1917 being fired upon by the army. Reprint 2025-26 8 To = S & pos f=) a vu ~ = oO cP) S To = & oe ao} = 3.2 The Revolution of October 1917 mn Box2 As the conflict between the Provisional Government and the Bolsheviks grew, Lenin feared the Provisional Government would set up a dictatorship. In September, he began discussions for an uprising against the government. Bolshevik supporters in the army, soviets and factories were brought together. On 16 October 1917, Lenin persuaded the Petrograd Soviet and the Bolshevik Party to agree to a socialist seizure of power. A Military Revolutionary Committee was appointed by the Soviet under Leon Trotskii to organise the seizure. The date of the event was kept a secret. The uprising began on 24 October. Sensing trouble, Prime Minister Kerenskii had left the city to summon troops. At dawn, military men loyal to the government seized the buildings of two Bolshevik newspapers. Pro-government troops were sent to take over telephone and telegraph offices and protect the Winter Palace. In a swift response, the Military Revolutionary Committee ordered its supporters to seize government offices and arrest ministers. Late in the day, the ship Awrora shelled the Winter Palace. Other vessels sailed down the Neva and took over various military points. By nightfall, the city was under the committee s control and the ministers had surrendered. At a meeting of the All Russian Congress of Soviets in Petrograd, the majority approved the Bolshevik action. Uprisings took place in other cities. There was heavy fighting especially in Moscow but by December, the Bolsheviks controlled the Moscow-Petrograd area. Reprint 2025-26 Date of the Russian Revolution Russia followed the Julian calendar until 1 February 1918. The country then changed to the Gregorian calendar, which is followed everywhere today. The Gregorian dates are 13 days ahead of the Julian dates. So by our calendar, the February Revolution took place on 12th March and the October Revolution took place on 7th November. Some important dates 1850s -1880s Debates over socialism in Russsia. Formation of the Russian Social Democratic Workers Party. The Bloody Sunday and the Revolution of 1905. 2nd March - Abdication of the Tsar. 24th October - Bolshevik unprising in Petrograd. 1918-20 The Civil War. Formation of Comintern. Beginning of Collectivisation. Fig.11 Lenin (left) and Trotskii (right) with workers at Petrograd. What Changed after October? The Bolsheviks were totally opposed to private property. Most industry and banks were nationalised in November 1917. This meant that the government took over ownership and management. Land was declared social property and peasants were allowed to seize the land of the nobility. In cities, Bolsheviks enforced the partition of large houses according to family requirements. They banned the use of the old titles of