Collectivisation. Fig.11 Lenin (left) and Trotskii (right) with workers at Petrograd. What Changed after October? The Bolsheviks were totally opposed to private property. Most industry and banks were nationalised in November 1917. This meant that the government took over ownership and management. Land was declared social property and peasants were allowed to seize the land of the nobility. In cities, Bolsheviks enforced the partition of large houses according to family requirements. They banned the use of the old titles of aristocracy. To assert the change, new uniforms were designed for the army and officials, following a clothing competition organised in 1918 when the Soviet hat (budeonovka) was chosen. The Bolshevik Party was renamed the Russian Communist Party (Bolshevik). In November 1917, the Bolsheviks conducted the elections to the Constituent Assembly, but they failed to gain majority support. In January 1918, the Assembly rejected Bolshevik measures and Lenin dismissed the Assembly. He thought the All Russian Congress of Soviets was more democratic than an assembly elected in uncertain conditions. In March 1918, despite opposition by their political allies, the Bolsheviks made peace with Germany at Brest Litovsk. In the years that followed, the Bolsheviks became the only party to participate in the elections to the All Russian Congress of Soviets, which became the Parliament of the country. Russia became a one-party state. Trade unions were kept under party control. The secret police (called the Cheka first, and later OGPU and NKVD) punished those who criticised the Bolsheviks. Many young writers and artists rallied to the Party because it stood for socialism and for change. After October 1917, this led to experiments in the arts and architecture. But many became disillusioned because of the Fig.72 A soldier wearing the Soviet hat (budeonovka). censorship the Party encouraged. Fig. 13 - May Day demonstration in Moscow in 1918. Reprint 2025-26 Box 3 The October Revolution and the Russian Countryside: Two Views News of the revolutionary uprising of October 25, 1917, reached the village the following day and was greeted with enthusiasm; to the peasants it meant free land and an end to the war. ... The day the news arrived, the landowner s manor house was looted, his stock farms were requisitioned and his vast orchard was cut down and sold to the peasants for wood; all his far buildings were torn down and left in ruins while the land was distributed among the peasants who were prepared to live the new Soviet life . From: Fedor Belov, The History of a Soviet Collective Farm A member of a landowning family wrote to a relative about what happened at the estate: The coup happened quite painlessly, quietly and peacefully. ... The first days were unbearable.. Mikhail Mikhailovich [the estate owner] was calm...The girls also...1 must say the chairman behaves correctly and even politely. We were left two cows and two horses. The servants tell them all the time not to bother us. Let them live. We vouch for their safety and property. We want