1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below. (i) In which of the following states is the Wular lake located? (a) Rajasthan (b) Uttar Pradesh DRAINAGE (c) Punjab (d) Jammu and Kashmir Reprint 2025-26 (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) The river Narmada has its source at (a) Satpura (c) Amarkantak (b) Brahmagiri (d) Slopes of the Western Ghats Which one of the following lakes is a salt water lake? (a) Sambhar (c) Wular (b) Dal (d) Gobind Sagar Which one of the following is the longest river of the Peninsular India? (a) Narmada (c) Godavari (b) Krishna (d) Mahanadi Which one amongst the following rivers flows through a rift valley? (a) Mahanadi (c) Krishna (b) Tungabhadra (d) Tapi 2. Answer the following questions briefly. (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) (vii) What is meant by a water divide? Give an example. Which is the largest river basin in India? Where do the rivers Indus and Ganga have their origin? Name the two headstreams of the Ganga. Where do they meet to form the Ganga? Why does the Brahmaputra in its Tibetan part have less silt, despite a longer course? Which two Peninsular rivers flow through trough? State some economic benefits of rivers and lakes. 3. Below are given names of a few lakes of India. Group them under two categories natural and created by human beings. (a) Wular (b) Dal (c) Nainital (d) Bhimtal (e) Gobind Sagar () Loktak (g) Barapani (h) Chilika (i) Sambhar (j) Rana Pratap Sagar (k) Nizam Sagar (J) Pulicat (m) Nagarjuna Sagar (n) Hirakund 4. Discuss the significant difference between the Himalayan and the Peninsular rivers. Compare the east flowing and the west flowing rivers of the Peninsular plateau. 6. Why are rivers important for the country s economy? Map Skills (i) (ii) On an outline map of India mark and label the following rivers: Ganga, Satluj, Damodar, Krishna, Narmada, Tapi, Mahanadi, and Brahmaputra. On an outline map of India mark and label the following lakes: Chilika, Sambhar, Wular, Pulicat, Kolleru. CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I Reprint 2025-26 Project /Activity Solve this crossword puzzle with the help of given clues. Across 1. Nagarjuna Sagar is a river valley project. Name the river? 2. The longest river of India. 3. The river which originates from a place known as Beas Kund. 4. The river which rises in the Betul district of MP and flows westwards. 5. The river which was known as the Sorrow of West Bengal. 6. The river on which the reservoir for Indira Gandhi Canal has been built. 7. The river whose source lies near Rohtang Pass. 8. The longest river of Peninsular India? Down 9. A tributary of Indus originating from Himachal Pradesh. 10. The river flowing through fault, drains into the Arabian Sea. 11. A river of south India, which receives rainwater both in summer and winter. 12. A river which flows through Ladakh, Gilgit and Pakistan. 13. An important river of the Indian desert. 14. The river which joins Chenab in