Ghats and flow towards the Bay of Bengal. The Himalayan Rivers The major Himalayan rivers are the Indus, the Ganga and the Brahmaputra. These rivers are long, and are joined by many large and important tributaries. A river alongwith its tributaries may be called a river system. The Indus River System The river Indus rises in Tibet, near Lake Mansarowear. Flowing west, it enters India in the Ladakh. It forms a picturesque gorge in this part. Several tributaries, the Zaskar, the Nubra, the Shyok and the Hunza, join it in the Kashmir region. The Indus flows through Baltistan and Gilgit and emerges from the mountains at Attock. The Satluj, the Beas, the Ravi, the Chenab and the Jhelum join together to enter the Indus near Mithankot in Pakistan. Beyond this, the Indus flows southwards eventually reaching the Arabian Sea, east of Karachi. The Indus plain has a very gentle slope. With a total length of 2900 km, the Indus is one of the longest rivers of the world. A little over a third of the Indus basin is located in India Ladakh, Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Punjab and the rest is in Pakistan. Do You Kno ? According to the regulations of the Indus Water Treaty (1960), India can use only 20 per cent of the total water carried by the Indus river system. This water is used for irrigation in Punjab, Haryana and the southern and the western parts of Rajasthan. The Ganga River System The headwaters of the Ganga, called the Bhagirathi is fed by the Gangotri Glacier and joined by the Alaknanda at Devaprayag in Uttarakhand. At Haridwar, the Ganga emerges from the mountains on to the plains. CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I Reprint 2025-26 T2 AFGHANISTAN RanaPra ap Sagar Gandhi Sagar Narmada R. p7% Son, Sou, Feng, ae, 2 py ., Nizam agar ARABIAN Nagarjuna Sagar. ) Krishnaraja Sagar Reservoir LAKSHADWEEP (INDIA) INDIAN 72 E INDIA MAJOR RIVERS AND LAKES CHINA (TIBET) Tsangpo R. ee 4 . Pwo BHUTAN RLADESH J 4% MYANMAR BAY OF BENGAL ) Pulicat Lake ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS (INDIA) 600 km Figure 3.4 : Major Rivers and Lakes DRAINAGE Reprint 2025-26 Figure 3.5 : Confluence of Bhagirathi and Alaknanda at Devaprayag The Ganga is joined by many tributaries from the Himalayas, a few of them being major rivers, such as the Yamuna, the Ghaghara, the Gandak and the Kosi. The river Yamuna rises from the Yamunotri Glacier in the Himalayas. It flows parallel to the Ganga and as a right bank tributary meets the Ganga at Allahabad. The Ghaghara, the Gandak and the Kosi rise in the Nepal Himalaya. They are the rivers, which flood parts of the northern plains every year, causing widespread damage to life and property, whereas, they enrich the soil for agricultural use. The main tributaries, which come from the peninsular uplands, are the Chambal, the Betwa and the Son. These rise from semi-arid areas, have shorter courses and do not carry much water in them. Find out