the help of the atlas. Lakes are of great value to human beings. A lake helps to regulate the flow of a river. During heavy rains, it prevents flooding and during the dry season, it helps to maintain an even flow of water. Lakes can also be used for developing hydel power. They moderate the climate of the surroundings; maintain the aquatic ecosystem, enhance natural beauty, help develop tourism and provide recreation. Ro_LeE oF RIVERS IN THE ECONOMY Rivers have been of fundamental importance throughout the human history. Water from rivers is a basic natural resource, essential for various human activities. Therefore, riverbanks have attracted settlers from ancient times. These settlements have now become big cities. Make a list of cities in your state which are located on the bank ofa river. Using rivers for irrigation, navigation, hydro-power generation is of special significance particularly to a country like India, where agriculture is the major source of livelihood of the majority of its population. RIVER POLLUTION The growing domestic, municipal, industrial and agricultural demand for water from rivers naturally affects the quality of water. As a ca < National River Conservation Plan (NRCP) The river cleaning programme in the country was initiated with the launching of the Ganga Action Plan (GAP) in 1985. The Ganga Action Plan was expanded to cover other rivers under the National River Conservation Plan (NRCP) in the year 1995. The objective _of the NRCP is to improve the water quality of the rivers, which are major - water sources in the country, through the implementation of pollultion Fe abatement work. i Source: http: //nrced.nic.in/nrep.pd as on result, more and more water is being drained out of the rivers reducing their volume. On the other hand, a heavy load of untreated sewage and industrial effluents are emptied into the rivers. This affects not only the quality of water but also the self-cleansing capacity of the river. For example, given the adequate streamflow, the Ganga water is able to dilute and assimilate pollution loads within 20 km of large cities. But the increasing urbanisation and industrialisation do not allow it to happen and the pollution level of many rivers has been rising. Concern over rising pollution in our rivers led to the launching of various action plans to clean the rivers. Have you heard about such action plans? How does our health get affected by polluted river water? Think about life of human beings without fresh water . Arrange a debate on this topic in the class. EXERCISE 1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below. (i) In which of the following states is the Wular lake located? (a) Rajasthan (b) Uttar Pradesh DRAINAGE (c) Punjab (d) Jammu and Kashmir Reprint 2025-26 (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) The river Narmada has its source at (a) Satpura (c) Amarkantak (b) Brahmagiri (d) Slopes of the Western Ghats Which one of the following lakes is a salt water lake? (a) Sambhar (c) Wular (b) Dal (d) Gobind Sagar