ended and Mary s impact on the situation. Let us explore I Work in groups. Enact your favourite part of the play. Points to remember: Allot a specific role to each member in the group. For example: director, narrator, and characters Unit 2.indd 86 06-Mar-25 2:51:36 PM Unit 2.indd 87 II Il Include the actions and expressions as indicated in brackets in the play. Find out how people greet guests who visit their TAR 2023 INDIA homes in different languages. Share it with your classmates and the teacher. Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam (aaa @erren) is a Sanskrit phrase which means the world is one family. Vasudha (aeen) means Earth; eva (wa) translates to is thus and Kutumbakam (@errenn) means family . The phrase originates from ancient Indian texts like the Maha Upanishad and the Hitopadesha. This saying highlights the interconnectedness of all people, suggesting that humanity is part of a single global family. It encourages unity, cooperation, and treating others with kindness and empathy, regardless of differences in nationality, race, or religion. The message is often used to promote global peace and mutual understanding among diverse cultures and nations. Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam was chosen as the theme for the G20 Summit which captured the essence of global unity, common bonds, and shared aspirations for a better future. ~- Lk _ --. _~. ONE EARTH ONE FAMILY * ONE FUTURE TRANSCRIPTS Let us listen (refer to page 55) I You will listen to an announcement. As you listen, state whether the following statement is true or false. Greetings and attention everyone! We are excited to announce the opening of Dr. John Dolittle s new clinic in the town of Woodstock. The clinic is located at 12, Rose Lane. It will be open Monday to Friday from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. Special timings for birds are on Saturdays from 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. Dr. Dolittle is renowned for his ability to communicate with animals and shall ensure that they receive the best care possible. All animals are welcome, from horses and cows to pets and wild animals. For the best veterinary care, visit Dr. John Dolittle s new clinic in Woodstock. Thank you. II You will listen to the announcement again. As you listen, complete the details given below with one or two exact words you hear. Let us listen (refer to page 65) I You will listen to a girl narrate a personal incident. As you listen, select the picture related to the narration. Hello. This is quite a funny incident. One day, I was so preoccupied with preparing for my presentation. After a long day of studying at a friend s place, I finally came home. Exhausted, I removed my shoes at the door and headed straight to the kitchen for some 06-Mar-25 2:51:37 PM Wirt ano Hu lunch. I served myself dal-chawal and ate it, still thinking about all the topics I needed to cover. Once I finished my lunch, I got up to put my shoes away in my