said the Doctor. When will my glasses be ready? Wirt anp Humour yi 2:50:39 PM | Poorvi Tl have them for you next week, said the Doctor. Come in again Tuesday Good morning! Then John Dolittle got a fine, big pair of green spectacles; and the plough horse stopped going blind in one eye and could see as well as ever. And soon it became a common sight to see farm animals countryside: wearing glasses in the countryside, round Puddleby; and a rural area blind horse was a thing unknown. And so it was with all the other animals that were brought to him. As soon as they found that he could talk their language, they told him where the pain was and how they felt, and of course it was easy for him to cure them. Now all these animals went back and told their brothers and friends that there was a doctor in the little house with the big garden who really was a doctor. And whenever any creatures got sick not only horses and cows and dogs but all the little things of the fields, like harvest mice, badgers, and bats, all came at once to his house on the edge of the town, so that his big garden was nearly always crowded with animals trying to get in to see him. There were so many that came that he had to have special doors made for the different kinds. He wrote HORSES over N & | Unit 2.indd 48 06-Mar-25 2:50:40 PM Unit 2.indd 49 the front door, COWS over the side door, and SHEEP on the kitchen door. Each kind of animal had a separate door even the mice had a tiny tunnel made for them into the cellar, where they waited patiently in rows for the Doctor to come round to them. And so, in a few years time, every living thing for miles and miles got to know about John Dolittle, M.D. And the birds who flew to other countries in the winter told the animals in foreign lands about Dolittle who could understand their talk and help them in their troubles. In this way he became famous among the animals all over the world. He was happy and liked his life very much. Hucu LoftinGc Let us discuss I What became a common sight in Puddleby after Doctor Dolittle started treating animals? 1. Humans talking to farm animals 2. Farm animals wearing glasses 3. Farm animals learning bird language 4. Birds riding atop farm animals II What challenges do you think Doctor Dolittle might face if more and more animals come to him for help? 1. How might he overcome these challenges to ensure that he provides good treatment? Wirt anp Humour O below ground level often used for storage Poorvi III Arrange the following events in correct order according to the story. Two have been done for you. Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher. 2. Animals from near