can talk. 06-Mar-25 2:51:23 PM Unit 2.indd 73 Mrs. SHAW: Mary Mrs. SHAW: Mary Mrs. SHAW: Mary Mrs. SHAW: Mary Mrs. SHAW: Mary : Tell me what to say. You may stay if you like. But take care. I want to know Mrs. Harding well. I want her to ask me to go to their house. There isn t much to do here in Lanfield, and I want to know some more people. I want some more friends here. So take care when you say anything. I can t tell you everything, but you'll always be right if you re kind to people. Say things that will please them. Then they'll like you. Laugh a lot, and try to make them laugh too. And if everyone stops talking, say something to make them talk again. They don t want to sit here and look at the floor without speaking. Think of something to say. : Ican do that. There s always something to say. Must I do anything else? When they are ready to leave, don t jump out of your chair and look gladly at the door. You must look sorry when they want to leave. : What shall Ido when they want to go? Ask them to stay a little while longer. Just say, Must you go? Can t you stay? or something like that. You like them and you want them to stay, and you must let them understand that. : That s not very hard, is it? Pll remember that. Must you go? Can t you stay? Must you go? Can t you stay? That s right. Now take your coat to your room and change into a clean dress. You must look nice when they come. And if everyone stops talking, say something kind to make them talk again. And don t say anything that will make them angry. : Iwill remember. I ve often done harder things than this. Wirt anp Humour Poorvi Let us discuss I Complete the table given below based on Scene I of the play. An example has been done for you. Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher. Words of the Speaker Mrs. Shaw __| The room looks cleaner To instruct Mary to keep now. Put that coat away in | the room tidy your bedroom. Mary Youw re always telling me to put things away. I m not a child! Mrs. Shaw To highlight the importance of being kind as a way to ensure Mary says the appropriate things when guests arrive II Do you think Mary will be able to follow her mother s advice successfully when Mrs. Harding and Mrs. Lee visit? Why or why not? Scene II Te | Unit 2.indd 74 06-Mar-25 2:51:30 PM Unit 2.indd 75 Mrs. SHAW Mrs. HarpDING: Mary Mrs. HarpDING: Mary Mrs. HARDING: : Oh! : (quietly) They must be someone else s children. Mary Mrs. SHAW Mary Mrs. LEE Mary Mrs. SHAW Mary : So you like