. vis j * i ANIMALS, BirDs, AND Dr. DOLITTLE Let us do these activities before we read. 0773CHO2 I Do you have a pet or a domestic animal? If yes, why? If not, why not? How do people usually spend time with a pet or domestic animal? Share your thoughts with your classmates and the teacher. I -_ You must have read stories where animals and birds talk. If you hada chance to communicate with an animal or a bird, who would you like to speak to and why? Share your thoughts with your classmates and the teacher. II -_ If we closely observe the body language of animals and birds, we can understand what they want to tell us. Work in pairs and study the pictures given below. Find out what emotions these animals and birds are trying to convey. Share your observations with your classmates and the teacher. Unit 2.indd 43 06-Mar-25 2:50:35 PM Poorvi Doctor Dolittle was sitting in his kitchen talking with the Cat sfood-Man who had come to see him with a stomach-ache. Why don t you give up being a people s doctor, and be an animal doctor? asked the Cat s-food-Man. The parrot, Polynesia, was sitting in the window looking out at the rain and singing a sailor song to herself. She stopped singing and started to listen. You see, Doctor, the Cat s-food-Man went on, you know all about animals much more than what these vets here do. That book you wrote about cats, why, it s wonderful! I can t read or write myself my wife, Theodosia, is a scholar, and she read your book to me. You might have been a cat yourself. You know the way they think. When the Cat s-food-Man had gone the parrot flew off the window on to the Doctor s table and said, That man s got sense. That s what you ought to do. Be an animal doctor. Give the silly people up if they haven t brains enough to see you re the best doctor in the world. Take care of animals instead they ll soon find it out. Be an animal doctor. Oh, there are plenty of animal doctors, said John Dolittle, putting the flowerpots outside on the windowsill to get the rain. Yes, there are plenty, said Polynesia. But none of them are | Unit 2.indd 44 06-Mar-25 2:50:36 PM Wirt anp Humour any good at all. Now listen, Doctor, and I ll tell you something. Did you know that animals can talk? I knew that parrots can talk, said the Doctor. Oh, we parrots can talk in two languages people s language racker: a thin, and bird language, said Polynesia proudly. If I say, Polly "Y Piscutt ; . : usually eaten wants a cracker , you understand me. But hear this: Ka-ka oi- with cheese ee, fee-fee? Good Gracious! cried the Doctor. What does that mean? That means, Is the porridge hot yet? in bird language. My!