to increase energy levels. Cue Cards Doctor _ | Patient | Greet the patient Respond to the greeting Enquire about the problem Tell your problem Ask about symptoms Describe the symptoms Make a diagnosis Ask for clarification and give solution Acknowledge the information and ask about the next appointment Provide additional advice Share details of next appointment Express agreement and thank the doctor 06-Mar-25 2:50:47 PM Wirt anp Humour MD. Let us write A notice is a means of formal communication for a particular group of persons. It informs them about some important event, such as an invitation to a meeting, an announcement, to give instructions, make appeals, etc. Write a notice in about 50 words about the Annual Health Check-up for students of Grades 6-8. Remind students to collect their health check-up cards from the class teacher. Include all other necessary details about date, time, and venue. Complete the draft of the notice by using the words and phrases given in the box below. inform queries health card health check-up assembly hall Grades 6-8 please contact Thursday and Friday Name of the School NOTICE 12 July 20XX Mention Heading This is to all the students of Grades 6-8 about the Annual Health Check-up. Date: ,27 and 28 July 20XX Time: 9:00 a.m. to 12:15 p.m. Venue: All students are requested to bring their for the check-up. For __ or further details the undersigned. Asma Asma In-charge Unit 2.indd 57 Poorvi | Unit 2.indd 58 I II I The word goshala translates to cowshed in English. It is a Sanskrit word that is made up of the words go , which means cow , and Sala, I _ which means shed or hall . Plan a visit with the teacher to a goshala and find out how the cows are looked after. Ayurveda is the oldest existing medical system in India. Animals received good medicinal care in ancient India. Indian medical treatises like Charaka Samhita, Sushruta Samhita, and Harita Samhita contain references of care of animals. Find out names of different organisations that work for the welfare of animals with the help of the teacher. What is the best way to take care of stray and abandoned animals? 1. Provide food and water for the animal 2. Take them to an animal shelter 3. Adopt them by taking them home ( &) ANIMAL Give reasons for your responses. ADOPTION & CARE 06-Mar-25 2:50:51 PM Wirt anp Humour A Funny MAN Let us do these activities before we read. Look around you for things or people that make you laugh. Write them in the bubbles given below. Share the reasons for your answers with your classmates and the teacher. Unit 2.indd 59 06-Mar-25 2:50:52 PM Poorvi Let us read One day a funny kind of man Came walking down this street He wore a shoe upon his head And hats upon his feet. He raised the shoe and smiled at me, His manners were polite; But never had I seen before