day, I was so preoccupied with preparing for my presentation. After a long day of studying at a friend s place, I finally came home. Exhausted, I removed my shoes at the door and headed straight to the kitchen for some 06-Mar-25 2:51:37 PM Wirt ano Hu lunch. I served myself dal-chawal and ate it, still thinking about all the topics I needed to cover. Once I finished my lunch, I got up to put my shoes away in my room and placed my plate in the kitchen. However, being so preoccupied, I ended up doing the opposite! I walked to my room with my plate in hand and left it on my desk. Then, I took my shoes and placed them in the kitchen! As I stood there, confused, I realised what I had done. I couldn t help but laugh at myself. I shook my head, recovered my shoes from the kitchen and kept the plate in the kitchen. II You will once again listen to the girl narrate a personal incident. As you listen, arrange the events in order of occurrence. Let us listen (refer to page 84) 1 @ I Mrs. Shaw wanted Mary to learn to say the right thing. You will listen to a conversation between a mother and ason about basic manners. As you listen, fill in the blanks given below by selecting the correct option. Mortuer : Why were you getting impatient in the grocery store? Son : Was I really? I just didn t like waiting so long. Mortuer :I know waiting can be boring, but remember, we always stand in queues and wait for our turn. It s fair for everyone, right? Son : Hmm, I guess. Even if it takes a lot of time? Motuer : Well, that s when we practise patience. And when it s our turn, what do we say to the shopkeeper? Son : Wesay, Thank you . And Please ifwe ask for something, right? Motuer : Yes! Those are polite words. Why do you think they re important? Unit 2.indd 89 Son : Maybe because they make people feel respected? Motuer : Exactly! It shows gratitude and kindness. And what about yesterday when you bumped into that lady with the blue sari? Son : Oh, I said sorry right away. You always tell me it s important to apologise. Motuer : That s true. Why do you think it s important to apologise? Son : Um... so people know I didn t mean to do it and that I care? Motuer : Yes, it shows you re responsible. And how about when we're in places like the library? What kind of voice should we use? Son : Oh, I know this! We speak softly so we don t bother others. Motuer : Right again! It s called using an inside voice . Son : I know. I also know that we should cover our mouth when we yawn, sneeze or cough in a gathering