a funny sounding sight. Sometimes, the poets change the word order (inversion) in a line in order to maintain a rhythm. \ 2:50:55 PM | Poorvi 2. Why has the poet used phrases like funny sounding sight and funny feeling sound with reference to the funny man? VI Can you think of any real-world situations where people do similar things for fun, entertainment, or performance? Share with your classmates and the teacher. Let us think and reflect I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow. 1. He said, Allow me _ to_ present Your Highness with a_ rose. And taking out a currant bun He held it to my nose. I staggered back against the wall And then I answered, Well! (i) Why does the funny man address the poet as Your Highness ? (ii) Choose a phrase from the extract which indicates a polite request. (iii) Choose the option which shows a currant bun . Cw O@ A. Image 1 B. Image 2 C. Image 3 D. Image 4 (iv) Complete the sentence with an appropriate reason. When the poet says, Well! , it expresses surprise. This was so because 2. You never heard in all your life Such a funny feeling sound. My friend, why do you wear two hats Upon your feet? I said. He turned the other way about, And hopped home on his head. | Unit 2.indd 62 06-Mar-25 2:50:57 PM RY Unit 2.indd 63 Wirt anp Humour (i) Choose the line from the extract which tells us that the sound was unique. (ii) Complete the sentence with an appropriate reason. The poet calls the funny man my friend because (iii) What does the reaction of the funny man to the poet s question tell us about him? lca (iv) Choose the correct option to complete the sentence. The last line of the extract makes the readers feel A. dreamy B. impatient C. worried D. cheerful II Answer the following questions. 1. Which character trait of the funny man was most appealing to you? Why? 2. The funny man does unusual things in the poem. How does it affect the overall mood of the poem? 3. What alternative title would you suggest for the poem? Give reason(s) for your choice. 4, Why do you think the poet has included dialogues in the poem? 5. What does the poet wish to convey by highlighting the unusual behaviour of the funny man? Let us learn Read the following phrases from the poem. walking down taking out e sat down These are phrasal verbs. Phrasal verbs are combinations of a verb with a preposition or adverb that together function as a single unit. They often have meanings that are different from the individual words used alone. The same verb followed by different prepositions or adverbs conveys different meanings. g I Match the phrasal verbs in Column 1 with their correct meaning in Column 2. (i) to understand or comprehend 1. take u . something