animals just because the animals don t complain. As a matter of fact, it takes a much cleverer man to be a really good animal doctor than it does to be a good people s doctor. (i) Choose a word from the extract to complete the analogy. digging: flower bed:: __: field (ii) Choose the correct word to complete the sentence. Doctor Dolittle s attitude in the extract is A. respectful B. sentimental C. understanding D. careful (iii) Complete the sentence with an appropriate reason. Based on the extract, we can conclude that doctors take animals for granted because (iv) Do you agree with the concluding sentence of the extract? Why/why not? II Answer the following questions. 1. How can we say that Polynesia was a good trainer of animal la ? 2. Explain how Doctor Dolittle gave equal and individual atte tion each animal who came to him for treatment. yi iy ; 06-Mar\2 5 2:50:42 PM Unit 2.indd 51 143 Poorvi 3. How does Doctor Dolittle s readiness to follow the parrot s advice highlight the importance of listening to different viewpoints? 4. Which qualities of Doctor Dolittle made him famous among the animals? Explain with evidence from the text. 5. What changes do you think would happen in the world if people suddenly gained the ability like Doctor Dolittle, to understand and communicate with animals? ' whe Dye ~ oe p Ld Let us learn I Read the following words from the text. Cat s-food-Man, bird language, flowerpots Are all the words that are combined to form another word written the same way? Compound words are formed by combining two words of different parts of speech to create a new word that has an entirely new meaning. They are of three types hyphenated (Cat s-food-Man), open compound words (bird language) and closed compound words (flowerpots). Complete the following table correctly by choosing words from the box given below. An example has been done for you. sailor song teatime check-in plough horse { I harvest mice windowsill well-bred Open Closed Compound Words Compound Words Hyphenated Words check-in | Unit 2.indd 52 06-Mar-25 2:50:43 PM g II Create compound words from the table given below. 1. fun (i) head 2. high (ii) birds 3. never (iii) flying 4. early (iv) loving 5. song (v) risers 6. over (vi) tops 7. tree (vii) ending Now, complete the paragraph with suitable compound words from the table. An example has been done for you. After being treated by Doctor Dolittle, the A. fun-loving dolphins danced playfully in his sanctuary. The B. chatter of monkeys echoed through the C. , their ailments cured. Dz. eagles soared gracefully E. their health restored. F. among the G. chirped joyfully from the branches. All creatures were happy with Doctor Dolittle s care. III Underline the names of animals that are hidden in the sentences given below. Clues are given within the brackets. An example has been done for you. 1. Dr. Dolittle was eating oatmeal for