of the play. An example has been done for you. Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher. 1. Mrs. Harding states that they do not like London as it is not the same as Lanfield. Rectification: Mrs. Harding states that they like Lanfield very much even though it is not the same as London. 2. Mrs. Harding was pleased to know that Mary was familiar with her children. 3. Mrs. Shaw shared that she liked Mrs. Best as she read a lot of newspapers. 4. Mrs. Harding and Mrs. Shaw agree that wearing a blue dress with a red coat is unfashionable. 5. Mary shares that she finds the dog outside the window cute. \ Unit 2.indd 77 d-mahdg 2:51:32 PM | Poorvi Let us think and reflect I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow. 1. Mary : What are you going to talk about? Mrs. SHaw: I don t know. All kinds of things. One day you'll have to go to some of these houses yourself and talk to the people there. Mary : Ican talk now. I ve been able to talk for a long time. Mrs. SHaw: Yes, that s true. You always talk too much. But does anyone want to hear the things that you say? Mary : Ican talk very well when I like. I'll stay with you today and talk to them when they come. Mrs. SHaw: Oh, I don t think so. You can go out for a walk. It will be better if you do that. (i) What does Mrs. Shaw imply when she says, One day you'll have to go to some of these houses yourself and talk to the people there ? A. She believes Mary should start learning about hosting guests then. B. She thinks Mary is ready to visit these houses independently. C. She wants Mary to develop social skills for the future. D. She hopes Mary will avoid these social interactions entirely. (ii) Complete the following sentence with the correct option from the brackets. Mrs. Shaw and Mary are discussing how to (have a polite conversation/ get to know people better) (iii) Why did Mary insist on staying with her mother when the guests arrived? (iv) Match the following character traits to the characters in the extract: A. eager B. inexperienced C. cautious Mary Mrs. Shaw & | Unit 2.indd 78 06-Mar-25 2:51:33 PM 2. Mary : Isaw Mrs. Cotter this afternoon. I met her in the street. No one sees her in the morning because she always stays in bed then. And she s always asking the doctor to go to see her. I can t understand women who stay in bed in the morning. And why must she always ask for the doctor? I ve never been to a doctor in my life. Mrs. Harpine : I stay in bed in the morning myself: (i) Complete the following sentence suitably. Mary could spot Mrs. Cotter in the street