fun-loving dolphins danced playfully in his sanctuary. The B. chatter of monkeys echoed through the C. , their ailments cured. Dz. eagles soared gracefully E. their health restored. F. among the G. chirped joyfully from the branches. All creatures were happy with Doctor Dolittle s care. III Underline the names of animals that are hidden in the sentences given below. Clues are given within the brackets. An example has been done for you. 1. Dr. Dolittle was eating oatmeal for his breakfast. (a farm animal) 2. Old ladies began to bring him their pets. (an insect) 3. The author sees the connection between humans and animals. (a farm animal) gp 4. The three baby dinosaurs are from ice age. (field animal) 5. The patients who came late didn t know where to go. (ship of the desert) IV Read the following sentence from the text. Study the highlighted words. But that stupid man over the hill never even looked at my eyes. The highlighted words spell and read the same backwards too. A word, phrase, or sequence that reads the same backwards as forwards is a palindrome. Unit 2.indd 53 S Some of the common palindromes include Was it a car or a cat I saw? , Madam, I m Adam and A man, a plan, a canal Panama . Read the sentences below and identify the palindrome words and sentences. 1. Step on no pets. . Naman saw a race car at the show. . Nitin speaks in Malayalam. . The engineer used a rotator to check the surface level. . The pilot relied on the radar to navigate safely. anna F&F WwW WD . Eva can I see bees in a cave? = Now, create your own palindrome and share it with your classmates and the teacher. _ ne verbs in 1. and are in present 1. He is asking you a question. continuous form. The verbs in 2. and 4. are in 3. Iam going blind in one eye. simple present. V Underline the verbs and identify the tense form in the following sentences from the text. 2. Oh, there are plenty of animal doctors. 4. ... the trouble is that anybody thinks he can doctor animals. VI Read the following sentences from the text. That man s (man has) got We use present perfect tense to sense. indicate: e arecently completed action * an action that started in the past and is relevant even at the In the first sentence the verbs, moment of speaking has got denote an action that is | * 4% action in the past where the focus is on the action and not on the time of occurrence (but In the second sentence, the verbs relevant at the time of speaking) has stopped denote an action | structure of Present Perfect Tense: that is recently completed. has/ have + V3 (past participle) * Can t you see that it has stopped raining? relevant at the time of speaking. A 06-Mar-25 2:50:44