got denote an action that is | * 4% action in the past where the focus is on the action and not on the time of occurrence (but In the second sentence, the verbs relevant at the time of speaking) has stopped denote an action | structure of Present Perfect Tense: that is recently completed. has/ have + V3 (past participle) * Can t you see that it has stopped raining? relevant at the time of speaking. A 06-Mar-25 2:50:44 PM Wirt anp Humour Fill in the blanks using the correct form of verbs (present perfect) given within brackets. Since becoming an animal doctor, Doctor Dolittle 1. (learn) to communicate with all animals and birds. He 2. (treat) countless farm animals and pets with care. The parrot, Polynesia, 3. (teach) him bird-language, and he 4. (write) books about his adventures. Many people 5. __ (bring) their sick animals to his door. Over the years, Dolittle 6. _ (become) renowned worldwide for his unique abilities. Let us listen I You will listen to an announcement. As you listen, state whether the following statement is true or false. (Transcript for the teacher on pg. 88) Dr. Dolittle s new clinic presents an offer of free medicines. II You will listen to the announcement again. As you listen, complete the details given below with one or two exact words you hear. 1. The new clinic is located in the town of . The address is 12, Lane. . The clinic is open Monday to Friday from a.m. to 5 p.m. . Special timings for are on Saturdays from 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. . Dr. Dolittle will ensure that animals get the rn oO FP W WH . All animals horses, cows, , wild animals, and others are welcome. Let us speak Conversation between a doctor and a patient e Read the information about the problems 1-4. e Use the cue cards provided to guide your conversation. e Take turns to play parts of doctor and patient. Problem 1:Cough and cold Solution: Ginger and honey mix e Additional Advice: Drink warm fluids and rest. Unit 2.indd 55 im ip 2:50:45 PM | Poorvi & | Unit 2.indd 56 N oy Problem 2: Dry lips Solution: Apply ghee Additional Advice: Stay hydrated and avoid wetting your lips. Problem 3:Sore throat Solution: Gargle with warm salt water. e Additional Advice: Drink herbal teas and avoid cold drinks. > \ Problem 4: Fatigue Solution: Ensure adequate sleep anda balanced diet. e Additional Advice: Take short walks to increase energy levels. Cue Cards Doctor _ | Patient | Greet the patient Respond to the greeting Enquire about the problem Tell your problem Ask about symptoms Describe the symptoms Make a diagnosis Ask for clarification and give solution Acknowledge the information and ask about the next appointment Provide additional advice Share details of next appointment Express agreement and thank the doctor 06-Mar-25 2:50:47 PM Wirt anp Humour MD. Let us write A notice is a means of formal