e Stress the words Mrs. Cotter . Remember, stress does not mean to say the word louder than others. It means to say a word with more emphasis than others. II Speak the following declarative sentences with falling intonation and stress the highlighted words. 1. The room looks cleaner now. 2. You always talk too much. 3. You leave your clothes all over the house. III Work in pairs and speak the following sentences 1-5 aloud, as Mary. Apply stress and falling intonation. Match each of the sentences to the meaning they convey in (i)-(v). Sentences 1. I didn t hurt anyone today. 2. I didn t hurt anyone today. 3. Ididn t hurt anyone today. 4. I didn t hurt anyone today. 5. Ididn t hurt anyone today. Meaning conveyed (i) I might have done other things but did not hurt anyone. (ii) I might cause hurt usually, but not anyone on this day. (iii) The action of hurting anyone did not occur. (iv) I, specifically, did not hurt anyone, possibly implying someone else might have. (v) I may have spoken a lot many things but not a single person was hurt. \ Unit 2.indd 85 d-mahdg 2:51:36 PM | Poorvi IV Now, speak the given declarative sentence with rising intonation towards the end of sentence and stress the highlighted words. I saw Mrs. Cotter this afternoon. The rising intonation makes it sound like a question. It asks whether I was the person who actually saw Mrs. Cotter: Did I see Mrs. Cotter this afternoon? Remember The way we use stress and intonation in a sentence can change the meaning of what we wish to say if we are not careful. Let us write Rewrite the play Say the Right Thing as a short story, focusing on Mary s interactions with her mother and the guests. Ensure the story captures the main events, character emotions, and humorous moments effectively. Use paragraphs to organise your story and include descriptive language to bring the characters and events to life. You may refer to the following hints: Begin with an introduction: describe Mary and Mrs. Shaw, their relationship and the setting of the story. Explain Mrs. Shaw s instructions to Mary before the guests arrive and Mary s confidence in handling the situation. Narrate the events when Mrs. Harding and Mrs. Lee visit, highlighting Mary s remarks and the guests reactions. Include key moments of humour and awkwardness to maintain the tone of the play. Conclude by commenting on how the visit ended and Mary s impact on the situation. Let us explore I Work in groups. Enact your favourite part of the play. Points to remember: Allot a specific role to each member in the group. For example: director, narrator, and characters Unit 2.indd 86 06-Mar-25 2:51:36 PM Unit 2.indd 87 II Il Include the actions and expressions as indicated in brackets in the play. Find out how people greet guests who visit their TAR 2023 INDIA homes in different languages.