you for things or people that make you laugh. Write them in the bubbles given below. Share the reasons for your answers with your classmates and the teacher. Unit 2.indd 59 06-Mar-25 2:50:52 PM Poorvi Let us read One day a funny kind of man Came walking down this street He wore a shoe upon his head And hats upon his feet. He raised the shoe and smiled at me, His manners were polite; But never had I seen before Such a funny sounding sight. He said, Allow me to present Your Highness with a rose. And taking out a currant bun He held it to my nose. I staggered back against the wall And then I answered, Well! I never saw a rose with such A funny looking smell. He then began to sing a song, And sat down on the ground; You never heard in all your life Such a funny feeling sound. My friend, why do you wear two hats Upon your feet? I said. He turned the other way about, And hopped home on his head. NATALIE JOAN | Unit 2.indd 60 06-Mar-25 2:50:55 PM Unit 2.indd 61 Wirt anp Humour Let us discuss I Work in pairs. Identify the true statements. Check your answers with the teacher. 1. The poet says that she had never heard such an amusing song. . The funny man was quite ill-mannered. . The funny man wore two hats on his feet. . The funny man hopped on his head to reach home. . The funny man gave a rose to the poet. rn a FPF WwW ND . The funny man smiled at the poet. II Identify the words from the poem based on the meanings given. Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher. 1. asmallseedlessraisin - C RT 2. moved unsteadily - S GG D III Complete the following sentences with a reason. 1. The tone of the poem is __ because 2. Therhymescheme ofthe poemis___ ;andit givesa quality to the poem. 3. The poet has frequently repeated the word funny in order to IV Choose the correct answer from the options given in the brackets. 1. The poem uses vivid imagery to create a (humorous and nonsensical/ confusing but thought-provoking) scene. 2. The structure of the poem is in (monologue/ dialogue) form. 3. The phrases sounding sight and hopped home are examples of . (alliteration/simile) V_ Rewrite the following line from the poem in the correct order. 1. But never had I seen before Such a funny sounding sight. Sometimes, the poets change the word order (inversion) in a line in order to maintain a rhythm. \ 2:50:55 PM | Poorvi 2. Why has the poet used phrases like funny sounding sight and funny feeling sound with reference to the funny man? VI Can you think of any real-world situations where people do similar things for fun, entertainment, or performance? Share with your classmates and the teacher. Let us think and reflect I Read the