sees her in the morning because she always stays in bed then. And she s always asking the doctor to go to see her. I can t understand women who stay in bed in the morning. And why must she always ask for the doctor? I ve never been to a doctor in my life. Mrs. Harpine : I stay in bed in the morning myself: (i) Complete the following sentence suitably. Mary could spot Mrs. Cotter in the street because (ii) What does Mary s comment about Mrs. Cotter staying in bed and calling the doctor suggest about her understanding? A. She is worried about why Mrs. Cotter stays in bed all morning. B. She is unable to understand why people need medical help. C. She thinks Mrs. Cotter is scared and lonely for staying in bed. D. She believes Mrs. Cotter is right to rest and take care of herself. (iii) How can we say that Mary enjoyed good health? (iv) Identify whether the following statement is true or false. Mary might have unintentionally offended Mrs. Harding. II Answer the following questions. 1. Unit 2.indd 79 What does Mary s comment about Mr. Best s routine and profession reveal about her viewpoint on bankers and their way of life? . What can we infer about Mary s understanding of polite conversation based on her interactions with the guests? . What do you think the repeated stage direction no one speaks indicates about the atmosphere in the room when Mary speaks? . How does Mary s attitude towards the guests change throughout the play? . What do Mrs. Harding s and Mrs. Lee s responses to Mary s blunders during their visit reveal about their characters? . In what way does the play show the importance of knowing how to engage in polite conversation? Wirt anp Humour \ d-mahdg 2:51:33 PM | <I Let us learn I Study the following words taken from the text. humorous, hilariously, coming, beautiful The given words are made by adding word endings like -ous, -ly, -ing, and -ful to the root words humour, hilarious, come, and beauty. Such word endings are called suffixes. e humour + -ous qu. . . . 1 * hilarious + -ly | the spelling variant when the ! | 9 9 ! * come + -ing ; word ends in e as in come I ( A and y as in beauty . ee - = * beauty + -ful Now, divide the following words from the text as root words and suffixes. Check your answer with the teacher. 1. Study the words in Column 1. Match the suffixes in Column 2 with their meanings or purpose in Column 3. Write a few examples for each in Column 4. Share your answers with the teacher. Biology (i) -logy, A. change to adverb Sociology \ stopped (iii) -ed C. a study of backward (iv) -ward__|D. change to superlative quietly (vi) -ly F. change to anoun oe toughest G. ina