down taking out e sat down These are phrasal verbs. Phrasal verbs are combinations of a verb with a preposition or adverb that together function as a single unit. They often have meanings that are different from the individual words used alone. The same verb followed by different prepositions or adverbs conveys different meanings. g I Match the phrasal verbs in Column 1 with their correct meaning in Column 2. (i) to understand or comprehend 1. take u . something ii) to assume control or 2. take after (a) vy age . responsibility for something iii) to begin to study, practice, or 3. take in (iu) 6 . oP do something iv) to become successful 4. take over (iv) popular quickly 5. take off (v) to resembl similar to A (usually a fami member) Now, fill in the blanks with suitable phrasal verbs from the table given in I. You may change the tense of the verb, if required. 1. The new technology is set to traditional methods of communication. 2. I tried hard to what the writer wanted to say but was unsuccessful. 3. Arjun decided to painting as a hobby. , 4. The smartphone quickly the sales in the market. 5. Sheela her father; they have the same smile. II Match the verbs in Column 1 with any suitable adverbs or prepositions in Column 2. Write their meanings in Column 3. An example has been done for you. look after: take care of, after, away, up, for, in, on, into, down, off, out 06-Mar-25 2:51:01 PM A Wirt ano Hu Now, frame sentences of your own using any five phrasal verbs. III Read the following words from the poem. walking, staggered, hopped The given words denote the different ways of walking. Arrange the words given in the box in increasing order of pace. Let us listen 2 I You will listen to a girl narrate a personal incident. As you listen, select the picture related to the narration. (Transcript for the teacher on pg. 88) Unit 2.indd 65 Poorvi II You will once again listen to the girl narrate a personal incident. As you listen, arrange the events in order of occurrence. 1. Ate lunch 2. Took off shoes 3. Put shoes in the room 4. Laughed at the mistake 5. Placed the plate in the room 6. Prepared for the presentation 7. Put the plate in the kitchen Let us speak Read the joke given below. A man is talking to God. The man says, God, how long is a million years? God replies, For me, it s about a minute. The man asks, How much is a million rupees? God smiles and replies, It s less than a rupee for me. The man quickly requests, God, may I have a rupee? God promptly says, Wait a minute. Work in pairs and take turns to tell the joke. Remember: e Narrator s voice your own voice (speak in a matter-of-fact manner) e Man s voice - change