to new concepts along the way. (iv) Ican the music from my neighbour s house, but I need to to it carefully to understand the lyrics. (v) Could I to Mrs. Kalpana, who is going to to us about gardening, said Ritu. (vi) I in asmall town, but I often with my relatives in the city. III Read the following sentences from the text and underline the verbs. They lived in London before. ITmet her ina shop and asked her to come. SSN As you know, the verbs you have underlined are in simple past tense. (actions that happened in the past or distant past) Read the following sentence from the text and underline the verb. She has been staying with them for a while. The verb you have underlined is in present perfect continuous tense. Cy continuous (has/have + been + verb + -ing) to indicate: The auration Mag) action that started in the past and continues up to the ey, moment. . has been preparing the room since the morning for Mrs. Harding and Mrs. Lee s visit. tion that was ongoing in the recent past, with its results evident now. The focus is on the ongoing activity rather than its ompletion. * Mrs. Shaw has been cleaning the room since the morning. (The room looks spotless now.) * The students have been practising a play about the story. (They are rehearsed and ready.) 06-Mar-25 2:51:35 PM Unit 2.indd 83 Wirt anp Humour 1. Fill in the blanks using the verbs given in brackets in present continuous or present perfect continuous tense. The students (i) stage. They (ii) perfect. The performers (iii) their excitement (iv) Everyone (vi) below. Kinds of Sentences Declarative sentences Interrogative sentences Exclamatory sentences Imperative sentences Function to state or convey information to ask questions to express strong feelings or emotions to give order, command or request (organise) a play and setting up the (prepare) for weeks to make everything (rehearse) every day, and (grow). The sound in-charge (v) (test) the microphones to check the sound quality. __ (work) hard, and now the place (vii) Punctuation end with a full stop (.) end witha question mark (?) end with an exclamatory mark (!) end with a full stop (.) (buzz) with energy and excitement. IV Read the explanation about the kinds of sentences given in the table Examples from the text There s always something to say. What shall I do when they want to 0? What beautiful children you have, Mrs. Harding! Put that coat away in your bedroom. 1. Identify the kinds of sentences and punctuate them appropriately. (i) the meeting starts at 10.00 a.m. in the conference room (ii) what an exciting adventure it was (iii) how did you solve the problem so quickly (iv) what is the weather forecast today (v) how beautiful is the rainbow (vi) clean up your room before dinner (vii) the children are planning a surprise party for their mom (viii) turn off the music do-mtahse 2:51:35