as root words and suffixes. Check your answer with the teacher. 1. Study the words in Column 1. Match the suffixes in Column 2 with their meanings or purpose in Column 3. Write a few examples for each in Column 4. Share your answers with the teacher. Biology (i) -logy, A. change to adverb Sociology \ stopped (iii) -ed C. a study of backward (iv) -ward__|D. change to superlative quietly (vi) -ly F. change to anoun oe toughest G. ina certain direction oe 06-Mar-25 2:51:34 PM Wirt anp Humour 2. Fillin the blanks using words given in the brackets by adding suitable suffixes. To communicate (i) (effective), choose your words and topics (ii) (wise). Avoid (iii) (discuss) things you don t know much about or that could upset someone. Remember to be (iv) (respect) towards others, including yourself, and express your (v) (appreciate). Finally, always be (vi) (response) by replying promptly to communicate. II Read the highlighted words in the following sentences from the text. But does anyone want to hear the things that you say? Ican t tell you everything. Select the correct answer. Is there a difference in the meanings of say and tell ? (Yes/ No) * Say focuses on the message and does not always require a listener. Tell focuses on who receives the message and always needs a listener. 1. Fill in the blanks with suitable words from the sets of words given in the box below. Make changes in the verb forms (tense), if necessary. * fetch : go somewhere to get something and bring it back bring : take something with you to the place you are going *see : something that we view, whether or not we pay attention look : focus your eyes ina certain direction by paying attention * live : permanent place of residence stay : temporary presence in a location as a guest or visitor study : spend time learning something as part of formal education learn : gain knowledge or skill through study or experience * speak: express thoughts or ideas aloud, often in formal situations talk : engage in informal conversation with someone e hear : perceive sounds unintentionally through the ears listen : pay attention to sounds or speech intentionally Unit 2.indd 81 do-mtahse 2:51:34 PM | @) I at the photo, but I didn t anyone familiar. (ii) 'd better go and my mother from the station, and then her home. (iii) I need to for my mathematics exam this weekend, so I hope to new concepts along the way. (iv) Ican the music from my neighbour s house, but I need to to it carefully to understand the lyrics. (v) Could I to Mrs. Kalpana, who is going to to us about gardening, said Ritu. (vi) I in asmall town, but I often with my relatives in the city. III Read the following sentences from the text and underline the verbs. They lived in London before. ITmet her ina shop and asked her