following sentence by selecting a suitable reason. The Cat s-food-Man suggests to Doctor Dolittle that he should become an animal doctor because he _ believes that Dolittle 1. earns less fee by treating human patients 2. enjoys the company of animals as they speak less 3. dislikes spending time with human patients 4. knows more about animals than the local veterinarians II Fill in the blanks by choosing the suitable option given in the brackets. Doctor Dolittle reacts to Polynesia s information about animal languages with both excitement and (certainty/curiosity). He rushes to (write/memorise) the bird words she provides and is interested in learning more. III Do you think Doctor Dolittle would be famous as an animal doctor? If yes, why? If not, why not? I As soon as the Cat s-food-Man had told everyone that John Dolittle was going to become an animal doctor, old ladies began to bring him their pet pugs and poodles who had eaten too much cake; and farmers came many miles to show him sick cows and sheep. | Unit 2.indd 46 06-Mar-25 2:50:38 PM Unit 2.indd 47 One day a plough horse was brought to him; and the poor thing was terribly glad to find a man who could talk in horse language. You know, Doctor, said the horse, that vet over the hill knows nothing at all. He has been treating me six weeks now for something or the other. What I need is spectacles. I am going blind in one eye. There s no reason why horses shouldn t wear glasses, the same as people. But that stupid man over the hill never even looked at my eyes. He kept on giving me big pills. I tried to tell him, but he couldn t understand a word of horse language. What I need is spectacles. Of course of course, said the Doctor. I ll get you some at once. I would like a pair like yours, said the horse only green. They ll keep the Sun out of my eyes while I m ploughing the field. Certainly, said the Doctor. Green ones you shall have. You know, the trouble is, Sir, said the plough horse as the Doctor opened the front door to let him out the trouble is that anybody thinks he can doctor animals just because the animals don t complain. As a matter of fact, it takes a much cleverer man to be areally good animal doctor than it does to bea good people s doctor. Well, well! said the Doctor. When will my glasses be ready? Wirt anp Humour yi 2:50:39 PM | Poorvi Tl have them for you next week, said the Doctor. Come in again Tuesday Good morning! Then John Dolittle got a fine, big pair of green spectacles; and the plough horse stopped going blind in one eye and could see as well as ever. And soon it became a common sight to see farm animals countryside: wearing glasses in the countryside, round Puddleby;