long is a million years? God replies, For me, it s about a minute. The man asks, How much is a million rupees? God smiles and replies, It s less than a rupee for me. The man quickly requests, God, may I have a rupee? God promptly says, Wait a minute. Work in pairs and take turns to tell the joke. Remember: e Narrator s voice your own voice (speak in a matter-of-fact manner) e Man s voice - change to louder voice (speak with respect) God s voice deep voice (speak in a pleasant tone) Now, work in pairs to create a joke and tell it in front of the class. Let us write I A limerick is a nonsensical and funny verse consisting of five lines. Study the limerick given below and identify the rhyme scheme. 1. There was an Old Man with a beard, Who said, It is just as I feared! Two Owls and a Hen, Four Larks and a Wren, Have all built their nests in my beard! Edward Lear WAAAY Ba La AS NS A RR Unit 2.indd 66 06-Mar-25 2:51:08 PM Wirt anp Humour Now, read another limerick 2. There were two friends in Bengaluru s lanes, One loved books, the other flew planes. They d laugh and they d play, In their own unique way, Creating stories and flying in dreams trains. Remember all limericks have the same rhyme scheme AABBA. II Follow the structure given below and write a limerick on your own. Line 1 : Introduction There was a child from of a person or place Who Lines 2-4: A silly story She/He Line 5 : An unexpected ending Let us explore , I In ancient Indian literature and mythology, there are several humorous or funny characters who play important roles in the stories. These characters often represent wit, humour and mischief while conveying deeper moral lessons. Here are a few well-known funny characters: Take any story to read and share it with your classmates and the teacher. II We can identify the acts of the funny man with certain modern day activities that have playfulness, or unconventional behaviour. ,*~ For example: | , v7 -7 / . . ' STREET PERFORMERS OR CLowns: Like the funny man in the poem, modern! . bos. day street performers or clowns often dress in unusual ways and do iN rs} unexpected acts to entertain people. \ ~ \ XN NN ee XN - -. ~ f \ ~ Unit 2.indd 67 Poorvi PERFORMANCE ArT oR ApsstrAct THEATRE: The funny man s actions, such as singing a song and hopping on his head, resemble performance art or abstract theatre, where artists break conventional rules to create thought-provoking, often humorous experiences. CHILDREN s ENTERTAINMENT AND Comepy Suows: The funny man s behaviour is reflected in children s shows to evoke laughter. In these examples, the common theme is humour, imagination, and defying logic or expectation, which is exactly what the funny man in the