atop farm animals II What challenges do you think Doctor Dolittle might face if more and more animals come to him for help? 1. How might he overcome these challenges to ensure that he provides good treatment? Wirt anp Humour O below ground level often used for storage Poorvi III Arrange the following events in correct order according to the story. Two have been done for you. Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher. 2. Animals from near and far come to Doctor Dolittle for help, crowding his garden. 4. Polynesia teaches Doctor Dolittle animal languages, and he starts understanding and communicating with animals. . 6. The parrot, snimal docto ges ees 1 Dol le to become an anima I doct evealingfetn at animals can talk. 0 CoN \unicate with animals helps him diagnose sean heir illnesses effectively. 10. Word spreads, and people start bringing their sick pets and farm animals to Doctor Dolittle for treatment. o> fp Let us think and reflect I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow. 1. IfI say, Polly wants a cracker , you understand me. But hear this: Kaka oi-ee, fee-fee? Good Gracious! cried the Doctor. What does that mean? That means, Is the porridge hot yet? in bird language. My! You don t say so! said the Doctor. You never talked that way to me before. | Unit 2.indd 50 06-Mar-25 2:50:41 PM a Wirt anp Humour What would have been the good? said Polynesia, dusting some cracker crumbs off her left wing. You wouldn t have understood me if I had. (i) Complete the sentence by choosing the correct option. In the line, Good Gracious! cried the Doctor, the expression Good Gracious can be replaced by ! A. bravo B. gosh C. alas D. hurray (ii) Why had Polynesia never used bird language with the Doctor earlier? (iii) Identify whether the following statement is true or false. Polynesia had been munching on a food item while talking to Doctor Dolittle. (iv) How did Doctor Dolittle feel according to the extract? A. anxious B. surprised C. angry D. relaxed 2. I would like a pair like yours, said the horse only green. They ll keep the Sun out of my eyes while I m ploughing the field. Certainly, said the Doctor. Green ones you shall have. You know, the trouble is, Sir, said the plough horse as the Doctor opened the front door to let him out the trouble is that anybody thinks he can doctor animals just because the animals don t complain. As a matter of fact, it takes a much cleverer man to be a really good animal doctor than it does to be a good people s doctor. (i) Choose a word from the extract to complete the analogy. digging: flower bed:: __: field (ii) Choose the correct word to complete the sentence. Doctor Dolittle s attitude in the extract is A. respectful B. sentimental C. understanding D. careful (iii) Complete the