PERFORMANCE ArT oR ApsstrAct THEATRE: The funny man s actions, such as singing a song and hopping on his head, resemble performance art or abstract theatre, where artists break conventional rules to create thought-provoking, often humorous experiences. CHILDREN s ENTERTAINMENT AND Comepy Suows: The funny man s behaviour is reflected in children s shows to evoke laughter. In these examples, the common theme is humour, imagination, and defying logic or expectation, which is exactly what the funny man in the poem represents. II Sukumar Ray, an Indian poet and illustrator, wrote poems in a similar style in his book Abol Tabol. You may also share a similar poem from your native language with your classmates and the teacher. Unit 2.indd 68 06-Mar-25 2:51:12 PM IV Read and enjoy the poem. My Lost PENcIL Oh pencil, dear pencil, where have you gone? I just had you here a minute at dawn! You were sharp and perfect, ready to write, Now you're missing gone from sight! Did you roll off my desk? Did you fall to the floor? Did someone swipe you for sure? It s always the same, I ve lost fifty this year, By the end of the month, they just disappear! Next time, I'll tie you with tape or a string, Because losing my pencils is a real thing. = Unit 2.indd 69 Poorvi Say THE RIGHT THING Let us do these activities before we read. I Work in pairs and discuss. 1. Te What does Athithi Devo Bhava mean? Why is it important to be polite to guests? II Choose the statements that display polite behaviour when you have guests at home. 1. a F&F wo NWN Offer the guests a glass of water. . Enquire about the well-being of the guests. . Ask the guests when they would leave. . Comment critically about the habits of guests. . Accompany the guests to the door when they leave. III Sometimes you find that a few friends in class are rude while disagreeing with each other on certain issues. Work in groups. How would you deal with such a situation? Share at least three ways in which you can do this. & | Unit 2.indd 70 06-Mar-25 2:51:21 PM Wirt anp Humour S fs Let us read This is a humorous play in which a mother advises her daughter to say the right thing at the right time. However, when guests arrive, the daughter hilariously forgets her mother s guidance. hilariously: in a very funny way blunders: Read the play to find out how she commits blunders and _ @reless embarrasses the guests as well as her mother. USE Soe embarrasses: Characters angles (date guest Mary SHAW : a young girl uncomfortable Mrs. SHAW : Mary s mother Mrs. Harpinc : the wife of Mr. Harding, a wealthy man & Mrs. LEE : Mr. Harding s married sister Scene I , Mrs. SHaw: The room looks cleaner now. Put that coat away in your bedroom. This room isn t