coat away in your bedroom. 1. Identify the kinds of sentences and punctuate them appropriately. (i) the meeting starts at 10.00 a.m. in the conference room (ii) what an exciting adventure it was (iii) how did you solve the problem so quickly (iv) what is the weather forecast today (v) how beautiful is the rainbow (vi) clean up your room before dinner (vii) the children are planning a surprise party for their mom (viii) turn off the music do-mtahse 2:51:35 PM | Poorvi Let us listen I Mrs. Shaw wanted Mary to learn to say the right thing. You will listen to a conversation between a mother and her son about basic manners. As you listen, fill in the blanks given below by selecting the correct option. (Transcript for the teacher on pg. 89 ) 1. How did the son behave in the grocery queue? (i) strangely (ii) impatiently (iii) politely 2. The mother finally refers to her son asa (i) polite youngman (ii) responsibleson (iii) grateful person II You will once again listen to the conversation. As you listen, select four true statements from 1-7 given below. 1. The mother uses the grocery store incident as an opportunity to teach her son about patience and fairness. 2. The son recognises the value of apologising and understands that it shows he notices others. 3. The son is gradually learning the importance of polite words and actions from his mother s guidance. 4. The mother discourages her son from speaking softly in public, suggesting that people should adjust to his voice level. 5. The son feels that covering his mouth when coughing is only important when he s at home. 6. The son receives all advice readily while understanding its importance. 7. The mother uses praise to support the polite behaviours she wants her son to continue practising. Let us speak As you know Intonation is the rise and fall of the pitch of tone while speaking. Let us learn about sentence stress. Sentence stress is laying emphasis on certain word(s) in a sentence. The emphasis on particular words helps to convey the meaning and importance of the sentence. St be Unit 2.indd 84 06-Mar-25 2:51:35 PM Wirt anp Humour Content words like book, run, beautiful, quickly, etc., are mostly stressed instead of function words like she, in, is, etc., in a sentence. I Speak the given declarative sentence aloud. I saw Mrs. Cotter this afternoon. Use falling intonation towards end of the sentence as declarative sentences usually have falling intonation. e Stress the words Mrs. Cotter . Remember, stress does not mean to say the word louder than others. It means to say a word with more emphasis than others. II Speak the following declarative sentences with falling intonation and stress the highlighted words. 1. The room looks cleaner now. 2. You always talk too much. 3. You leave your clothes all over the house. III Work in pairs and speak the following sentences 1-5 aloud, as Mary. Apply stress