that animals can talk? I knew that parrots can talk, said the Doctor. Oh, we parrots can talk in two languages people s language racker: a thin, and bird language, said Polynesia proudly. If I say, Polly "Y Piscutt ; . : usually eaten wants a cracker , you understand me. But hear this: Ka-ka oi- with cheese ee, fee-fee? Good Gracious! cried the Doctor. What does that mean? That means, Is the porridge hot yet? in bird language. My! You don t say so! said the Doctor. You never talked that way to me before. What would have been the good? said Polynesia, dusting some cracker crumbs off her left wing. You wouldn t have understood me if I had. Tell me some more, said the Doctor, all excited; and he rushed over to the drawer and came back with a book and Birds ABC: a pencil. Now don t go too fast and Ill write it down. there) the This is interesting very interesting something quite new. language that Give me the Birds A.B.C. first slowly now. birds speak So that was the way the Doctor came to know that animals had a language of their own and could talk to one another. And all that afternoon, while it was _ raining, Polynesia sat on the kitchen table, | giving him bird words to put down in the book. At teatime, when the dog, Jip, came in, the parrot said to the Doctor, See, he s talking to you. Looks to me as though he were scratching his ear, said the Doctor. But animals don t always speak with their mouths, said the parrot in a high voice, raising her eyebrows. They talk with their ears, with their _ feet, with their tails with everything. ~ Sometimes they don t want to make ts ames | ong =a & Unit 2.indd 45 dmahdg 2:50:37 PM | a ah Poorvi noise. Do you see now the way he s twitching up one side of his nose? What s that mean? asked the Doctor. That means, Can t you see that it has stopped raining? Polynesia answered. He is asking you a question. Dogs nearly always use their noses for asking questions. After a while, with the parrot s help, the Doctor got to learn the language of the animals so well that he could talk to them himself and understand everything they said. Then he gave up being a people s doctor altogether. Let us discuss I Complete the following sentence by selecting a suitable reason. The Cat s-food-Man suggests to Doctor Dolittle that he should become an animal doctor because he _ believes that Dolittle 1. earns less fee by treating human patients 2. enjoys the company of animals as they speak less 3. dislikes spending time with human patients 4. knows more about animals than the local veterinarians II Fill in the blanks by choosing the suitable option given in the brackets. Doctor Dolittle reacts to Polynesia