of a person s own life and experiences (iv) Memoir(s) (usually, a famous person) A written record of events with times and dates, usually official 2. Here are some entries from personal records. Use the definitions above to decide which of the entries might be from a diary, a journal, a log or a memoir. () Iwoke up very late today and promptly got a scolding from Mum! I can t help it how can I miss the FIFA World Cup matches? Ans: (i) 10:30am. Went to the office of the Director 01:00 p.m. Had lunch with Chairman 05:45 p.m. Received Rahul at the airport 09:30 p.m. Dinner at home Ans: (iii) The ride to Ooty was uneventful. We rested for awhile every 50 kmor so, and used the time to capture the magnificent landscape with my HandyCam. From Ooty we went on to Bangalore. What a contrast! The noise and pollution of this once-beautiful city really broke my heart. Ans: (iv) This is how Raj Kapoor found me all wet and ragged outside R.K.Studios. He was then looking for just someone like this for a small role in Mera Naam Joker, and he cast me on the spot. The rest, as they say, is history! yee ouuyy | Arery ml wor Ans: Reprint 2025-26 First Flight Waritinc in a diary is a really strange experience for someone like me. Not only because I ve never written anything before, but also because it seems to me that later on neither I nor anyone else will be interested in the musings of a thirteen-year-old schoolgirl. Oh well, it doesn t matter. I feel like writing, and I have an even greater need to get all kinds of things off my chest. Paper has more patience than people. I thought of this saying on one of those days when I was feeling a little depressed and was sitting at home with my chin in my hands, bored and listless, wondering whether to stay in or go out. I finally stayed where I was, brooding: Yes, paper does have more patience, and since I m not planning to let anyone else read this stiff-backed notebook grandly referred to as a diary , unless I should ever find a real friend, it probably won t make a bit of difference. Now I m back to the point that prompted me to keep a diary in the first place: I don t have a friend. Let me put it more clearly, since no one will believe that a thirteen-year-old girl is completely alone in the world. And I m not. I have loving parents and a sixteen-year-old sister, and there are about thirty people I can call friends. I have a family, loving aunts and a good home. No, on the surface I seem to have everything, except my one true friend. All I think about when I m with friends is having a good time. I can t bring myself to talk about anything