are compound words. They are made up of two or more words. Compound words can be: nouns: headmistress, homework, notebook, outbursts adjectives: long-awaited, stiff-backed verbs: sleep-walk, baby-sit Match the compound words under A with their meanings under B . Use each in a sentence. A B 1. Heartbreaking | obeying and respecting the law 2. Homesick think about pleasant things, forgetting about the present 55 3. Blockhead - something produced by a person, machine or organisation 8. Output do something to an excessive degree Il. Phrasal Verbs A phrasal verb is a verb followed by a preposition or an adverb. Its meaning is often different from the meanings of its parts. Compare the meanings of the verbs get on and run away in (a) and (b) below. You can easily guess their meanings in (a) but in (b) they have special meanings. (a) She got on at Agra when the bus stopped for breakfast. Dev Anand ran away from home when he was a teenager. yey ouuyy | Arery ml wordy (b) * She s eager to get on in life. (succeed) The visitors ran away with the match. (won easily) Reprint 2025-26 First Flight Il. Some phrasal verbs have three parts: a verb followed by an adverb and a preposition. (c) Our car ran out of petrol just outside the city limits. (d) The government wants to reach out to the people with this new campaign. 1. The text you ve just read has a number of phrasal verbs commonly used in English. Look up the following in a dictionary for their meanings (under the entry for the italicised word). (i) plunge (right) in (iii) ramble on (ii) kept back (iv) get along with 2. Now find the sentences in the lesson that have the phrasal verbs given below. Match them with their meanings. (You have already found out the meanings of some of them.) Are their meanings the same as that of their parts? (Note that two parts of a phrasal verb may occur separated in the text.) (i) plunge in speak or write without focus (ii) kept back stay indoors (iii) move up make (them) remain quiet (iv) ramble on have a good relationship with (v) get along with give an assignment (homework) to a person in authority (the teacher) (vi) calm down compensate (vii) stay in go straight to the topic (viii) make up for go to the next grade (ix) hand in not promoted Idioms Idioms are groups of words with a fixed order, and a particular meaning, different from the meanings of each of their words put together. (Phrasal verbs can also be idioms; they are said to be idiomatic when their meaning is unpredictable.) For example, do you know what it means to meet one s match in English? It means to meet someone who is as good as oneself, or even better, in some skill or quality. Do you know what it means to let the cat out of the bag ?