See 3 [sing.] the ability to see: A surgeon needs a good eye and a steady hand. e Way of Seeing 4 [C, usually sing.] a particular way of seeing sth: He looked at the design with the eye of an engineer. e Of Needle 5 [C] the hole in the end of a needle that you put the thread through. IDM be all eyes to be watching sb/sth carefully and with a lot of interest before/in front of sb s (very) eyes in sb s presence; in front of sb: He had seen his life s work destroyed before his very eyes. Be up to your eyes in sth to have a lot of sth to deal with: We re up to our eyes in work. yey ouuyy | Arery ml wordy Reprint 2025-26 First Flight Nn oo You have read the expression not to lose heart in this text. Now find out the meanings of the following expressions using the word heart .Use each of them in a sentence of your own. 1. break somebody s heart 2. close/dear to heart 3. from the (bottom of your) heart 4. have a heart 5. have a heart of stone 6. your heart goes out to somebody V. Contracted Forms When we speak, we use contracted forms or short forms such as these: can t (for can not or cannot) Id (for Iwould or Ihad) _ she s (for she is) Notice that contracted forms are also written with an apostrophe to show a shortening of the spelling of not, would, or is as in the above example. Writing a diary is like speaking to oneself. Plays (and often, novels) also have speech in written form. So we usually come across contracted forms in diaries, plays and novels. 1. Make a list of the contracted forms in the text. Rewrite them as full forms of two words. For example: I ve = I have 2. We have seen that some contracted forms can stand for two different full forms: I'd = 1 had or I would Find in the text the.contracted forms that stand for two different full forms,-and say what these are. Speaking 3 Here is an extract adapted from a one-act play. In this extract, angry neighbours who think Joe the Inventor s new spinning machine will make them lose their jobs come to destroy Joe s model of the machine. You've just seen how contracted forms can make a written text sound like actual speech. Try to make this extract sound more like a real conversation by changing some of the verbs back into contracted forms. Then speak out the lines. [The door is flung open, and several men tramp in. They carry sticks, and one of them, Hos, has a hammer.] Mos : Now where is your husband, mistress? Mary : In his bed. He is sick, and weary. You would not harm him! Reprint 2025-26 Hos : We are going to smash his evil work