after I d finished the rest of my homework, the note about the essay caught my eye. I began thinking about the subject while chewing the tip of my fountain pen. Anyone could ramble on and leave big spaces between the words, but the trick was to come up with convincing arguments to prove the necessity of talking. I thought and thought, and suddenly I had an idea. I wrote the three pages Mr Keesing had assigned me and was satisfied. I argued that talking is a student s trait and that I would do my best to keep it under control, Reprint 2025-26 quaking in its boots shaking with fear and nervousness old fogey an old-fashioned person ramble on talk or write aimlessly for long convincing argument a statement made in such a manner that people believe it but that I would never be able to cure myself of the habit since my mother talked as much as I did if not more, and that there s not much you can do about inherited traits. Mr Keesing had a good laugh at my arguments, but when I proceeded to talk my way through the next lesson, he assigned me a second essay. This time it was supposed to be on An Incorrigible Chatterbox . I handed it in, and Mr Keesing had nothing to complain about for two whole lessons. However, during the third lesson he d finally had enough. Anne Frank, as punishment for talking in class, write an essay entitled Quack, Quack, Quack, Said Mistress Chatterbox . inherited traits qualities (physical or mental) that one gets from one s parents incorrigible something that cannot be corrected (usually a bad quality) The class roared. I had to laugh too, though I'd nearly exhausted my ingenuity on the topic of chatterboxes. It was time to come up with something else, something original. My friend, Sanne, who s good at poetry, offered to help me write the essay from beginning to end in verse and I jumped for joy. Mr Keesing was trying to play a joke on me with this ridiculous subject, but 'd make sure the joke was on him. I finished my poem, and it was beautiful! It was about a mother duck and a father swan with three baby ducklings who were bitten to death by the father because they quacked too much. Luckily, Mr Keesing took the joke the right way. He read the Reprint 2025-26 ingenuity originality and inventiveness = = B = _ i =) = Let = 5 = Let 5 First Flight poem to the class, adding his own comments, and to several other classes as well. Since then I ve been allowed to talk and haven t been assigned any extra homework. On the contrary, Mr Keesing s always making jokes these days. Yours, Anne [Extracted from The Diary of a Young Girl, with slight adaptation] Oral Comprehension Check 1. Why was Mr Keesing annoyed with Anne? What did he