believe that a thirteen-year-old girl is completely alone in the world. And I m not. I have loving parents and a sixteen-year-old sister, and there are about thirty people I can call friends. I have a family, loving aunts and a good home. No, on the surface I seem to have everything, except my one true friend. All I think about when I m with friends is having a good time. I can t bring myself to talk about anything but ordinary everyday things. We don t seem to be able to get any closer, and that s the problem. Maybe it's my fault that we don t confide in each other. In any case, that s just how things are, and unfortunately they re not liable to change. This is why I ve started the diary. To enhance the image of this long-awaited friend in my imagination, I don t want to jot down the facts in this diary the way most people would do, but I want the diary to be my friend, and I m going to call this friend Kitty . Reprint 2025-26 listless with no energy or interest confide to tell personal things privately to a person that one trusts \iie Oral Comprehension Check c< 1. What makes writing ina diary a strange experience for Anne Frank? 2. Why does Anne want to keep a diary? 3. Why did Anne think she could confide more in her diary than in people? Since no one would understand a word of my stories to Kitty if I were to plunge right in, I d better provide a brief sketch of my life, much as I dislike doing so. My father, the most adorable father I ve ever seen, didn t marry my mother until he was thirty-six and she was twenty-five. My sister, Margot, was born in Frankfurt in Germany in 1926. I was born on 12 June 1929. I lived in Frankfurt until I was four. My father emigrated to Holland in 1933. My mother, Edith Hollander Frank, went with him to Holland in September, while Margot and I were sent to Aachen to stay with our grandmother. Margot went to Holland in December, and I followed in February, when I was plunked down on the table as a birthday plunked down (an present for Margot. informal word) I started right away at the Montessori nursery PUt down in a casual school. I stayed there until I was six, at which time I started in the first form. In the sixth form my teacher was Mrs Kuperus, the headmistress. At the end of the year we were both in tears as we said a heartbreaking farewell. In the summer of 1941 Grandma fell ill and had to have an operation, so my birthday passed with little celebration. Grandma died in January 1942. No one knows how often I think of her and still love her. This birthday celebration in 1942 was intended to make up for