i =) = Let = 5 = Let 5 First Flight poem to the class, adding his own comments, and to several other classes as well. Since then I ve been allowed to talk and haven t been assigned any extra homework. On the contrary, Mr Keesing s always making jokes these days. Yours, Anne [Extracted from The Diary of a Young Girl, with slight adaptation] Oral Comprehension Check 1. Why was Mr Keesing annoyed with Anne? What did he ask her to do? 2. How did Anne justify her being a chatterbox in her essay? 3. Do you think Mr Keesing was a strict teacher? 4. What made Mr Keesing allow Anne to talk in class? Thinking about the Text 4 1. 2. > Was Anne right when she said that the world would not be interested in the musings of a thirteen-year-old girl? There are some examples of diary or journal entries in the Before You Read section. Compare these with what Anne writes in her diary. What language was the diary originally written in? In what way is Anne s diary different? Why does Anne need to give a brief sketch about her family? Does she treat Kitty as an insider or an outsider? How does Anne feel about her father, her grandmother, Mrs Kuperus and Mr Keesing? What do these tell you about her? What does Anne write in her first essay? Anne says teachers are most unpredictable. Is Mr Keesing unpredictable? How? What do these statements tell you about Anne Frank as a person? (i) We don t seem to be able to get any closer, and that s the problem. Maybe it's my fault that we don t confide in each other. (ii) I don t want to jot down the facts in this diary the way most people would, but I want the diary to be my friend. (iii) Margot went to Holland in December, and I followed in February, when I was plunked down on the table as a birthday present for Margot. (iv) If you ask me, there are so many dummies that about a quarter of the class should be kept back, but teachers are the most unpredictable creatures on earth. Reprint 2025-26 \bby xo (v) Anyone could ramble on and leave big spaces between the words, but the trick was to come up with convincing arguments to prove the necessity of talking. Thinkin about Language I. Look at the following words. headmistress long-awaited homework notebook stiff-backed outbursts These words are compound words. They are made up of two or more words. Compound words can be: nouns: headmistress, homework, notebook, outbursts adjectives: long-awaited, stiff-backed verbs: sleep-walk, baby-sit Match the compound words under A with their meanings under B . Use each in a sentence. A B 1. Heartbreaking | obeying and respecting the law 2. Homesick think about pleasant things, forgetting about the present 55 3. Blockhead - something produced by a person, machine or organisation 8. Output do something