a particular meaning, different from the meanings of each of their words put together. (Phrasal verbs can also be idioms; they are said to be idiomatic when their meaning is unpredictable.) For example, do you know what it means to meet one s match in English? It means to meet someone who is as good as oneself, or even better, in some skill or quality. Do you know what it means to let the cat out of the bag ? Can you guess? 1. Here are a few sentences from the text which have idiomatic expressions. Can you say what each means? (You might want to consult a dictionary first.) (i) Our entire class is quaking in its boots. (ii) Until then, we keep telling each other not to lose heart. Reprint 2025-26 \lby r< =) (iii) Mr Keesing was annoyed with me for ages because I talked so much. (iv) Mr Keesing was trying to play a joke on me with this ridiculous subject, but I'd make sure the joke was on him. 2. Here are a few more idiomatic expressions that occur in the text. Try to use them in sentences of your own. (i) caught my eye (iii) laugh ourselves silly (ii) he d had enough (iv) can t bring myself to IV. Do you know how to use a dictionary to find out the meanings of idiomatic expressions? Take, for example, the expression caught my eye in the story. Where under which word would you look for it in the dictionary? Look for it under the first word. But if the first word is a grammatical word like a, the, for, etc., then take the next word. That is, look for the first meaningful word in the expression. In our example, it is the word caught. But you won't find caught in the dictionary, because it is the past tense of catch. You'll find caught listed under catch. So you must look under catch for the expression caught my eye. Which other expressions with catch are listed in your dictionary? Note that a dictionary entry usually first gives the meanings of the word itself, and then gives a list of idiomatic expressions using that word. For example, study this partial entry for the noun eye from the Oxford Advanced Learner s Dictionary, 2005. | Eye e Noun e Part of Body 1 [C] either of the two organs on the face that you see with: The suspect has dark hair and green eyes. e Ability to See 3 [sing.] the ability to see: A surgeon needs a good eye and a steady hand. e Way of Seeing 4 [C, usually sing.] a particular way of seeing sth: He looked at the design with the eye of an engineer. e Of Needle 5 [C] the hole in the end of a needle that you put the thread through. IDM be all eyes to be watching sb/sth carefully and with a lot of interest before/in front of sb