1059CHO4 From the Diary of Anne Frank Anne Frank Berore You READ Anneliese Marie Anne Frank (12 June 1929 - February/March 1945) was a German born Jewish girl who wrote while in hiding with her family and four friends in Amsterdam during the German occupation of the Netherlands in World War II. Her family had moved to Amsterdam after the Nazis gained power in Germany but were trapped when I the Nazi occupation extended into would, maybe, have a chance ; to come to Hollywood. the Netherlands. As persecutions _Anne Frank, 10 October 1942 against the Jewish population increased, the family went into hiding in July 1942 in hidden rooms in her father Otto Frank s office building. After two years in hiding, the group was betrayed and transported to the concentration camp system where Anne died of typhus in Bergen-Belsen within days of her sister, Margot Frank. Her father, Otto, the only survivor of the group, returned to Amsterdam after the war ended, to find that her diary had been saved. Convinced that it was a unique record, he took action to have it published in English under the name The Diary of a Young Girl. The diary was given to Anne Frank for her thirteenth birthday and chronicles the events of her life from 12 June 1942 until its Jindal entry of 1 August 1944. It was eventually translated from its original Dutch into many languages and became one of the world s most widely read books. There have also been several films, television and theatrical productions, and even an opera, based on the diary. Described as the work of a mature and insightful mind, the diary provides an intimate examination of daily life under Nazi occupation. Anne Frank has become one of the most renowned and discussed of the Holocaust victims. This is a photo as I would wish myself to look all the time. Then Reprint 2025-26 \lby x Activity 1. Doyoukeep a diary? Given below under A are some terms we use to describe a written record of personal experience. Can you match them with their descriptions under B ? (You may look up the terms in a dictionary if you wish.) A B () Journal A book with a separate space or page for each day, in which you write down your thoughts (ii) Diary and feelings or what has happened on that day A full record of a journey, a period of time, or (iii) Log an event, written every day A record of a person s own life and experiences (iv) Memoir(s) (usually, a famous person) A written record of events with times and dates, usually official 2. Here are some entries from personal records. Use the definitions above to decide which of the entries might be from a diary, a journal, a log or a memoir. () Iwoke up very late today and promptly got a scolding from Mum! I can t help it how can I miss the FIFA World