= = S B _ i =) = Let J = 5 = Let 5 First Flight aD Ss Tn This Lesson Wuat WE Have Done 1. Diary writing is one of the best ways to practise writing. Students do not have to think up or imagine what to write about; they only have to find words to write about what has happened. Initiate your students into the habit of keeping a diary. 2. Anne Frank s diary became a public document after World War II. Discuss with your students diaries which became historical documents, such as Samuel Pepys s diary. You may draw students attention to different types of diaries, e.g. private diary, general diary. Army officers, businessmen, doctors, executives, lawyers, motorists, police officers keep a general diary to record events that happen during the day and events that are scheduled for the day, such as appointments, meetings, things to be done, etc. 3. Passage for listening exercise: The Great Fire of London [1666] September 2nd (Lord s Day). Jane called us up about three in the morning, to tell us of a great fire they saw in the city. So | rose and slipped on my nightgown, and went to her window, and thought it to be on the backside of Marke-Lane at the farthest; but being unused to such fire as followed, | thought it far enough off, and so went to bed again and to sleep. About seven rose again to dress myself, and then looked out of the window, and saw the fire not so much as it was and further off. By and by Jane comes and tells me that she hears that above 300 houses have been burned down tonight by the fire we saw, and that it is now burning down all Fish Street, by London Bridge. So | made myself ready presently, and walked to the Tower, and there got up upon one of the high places, Sir J. Robinson s little son going up with me; and there | did see the houses at that end of the bridge all on fire, and an infinite great fire on this and the other side of the bridge. [From The Diary of Samuel Pepys ] What You Can Do After they have completed the lesson, including the writing exercise, students can be asked to make a diary jotting for the previous day. Perhaps you could also write a diary entry describing what happened in school/class on the previous day, to share with the class try and make it amusing and interesting! Collect students pages (they may be allowed to sign their names or make it anonymous, as they wish) and put them up on the class notice board, together with your page, for everyone to read. Reprint 2025-26 Amanda! Every child feels that she/he is controlled and instructed not to do one thing or another. You too may feel that your freedom is curtailed. Write down some of the things you want