and the units to measure it are gram (g) and kilogram (kg). The space occupied by matter is its volume. The units to measure the volume are litre (L) and millilitre (mL). Kilogram is the unit of mass in the International System of Units (SI). Kilogram is abbreviated in lower case as kg. There is no space between k and g in kg, and no full stop after the symbol, except at the end of a sentence. While writing the mass, always leave a space between the number (numerical value) and the unit. For example, if we have mass of 7 kilograms, it would be written as 7 kg and not as 7 kgs. Similarly, litre is abbreviated as capital L and millilitre as mL. There is no space between m and L in mL. For example, if you have 500 millilitres of water, it would be written as 500 mL, m will be in lower case and L will be in upper case. The SI unit for volume is cubic metre, abbreviated as m*. The abbreviation is written with a superscript 3 to 2 denote cubic metre. For example, if you have volume of 2 cubic metres, it would be written Do you as 2 m3. Always leave a space between number know? (numerical value) and the unit. 1 m?=1000 L. Materials Around Us Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 6.indd 115 10/4/2024 3:16:21 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 6.indd 116 Can all the materials around us be considered as different examples of matter? Discuss with your friends. For example, water is matter, sand and pebbles are matter and so is the cup. Materials are types of matter used in the creation or making of objects. We learnt that materials look different and behave differently. We grouped materials on the basis of similarities or differences in their properties. We find grouping useful as it helps us study and observe patterns in the properties of things. Humans have been classifying not only things, but also rocks, plants and animals. We have learnt about the classification of the living world in the chapter Diversity in the Living World . Just like in the living world, classification of the non-living world is also done on the basis of their properties. Is air matter? Think it over! Yes! But most of the materials that we see today would have also existed earlier. Iam curious to know how people classified them then. We have explored and understood the various properties of materials. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:16:42 PM Chapter 6.indd 117 A similar classification system existed in ancient India. Ayurveda, one of the Indian medical systems, too has a system of grouping things. Te Are fe ere VAT Us We FT: | Torr: eres fererar: fererfer: a feareeker:| (Ashtanga hridaya Sutra sthana 1.18) The shloka precisely talks about the 20 properties (guna ten pairs of opposite properties), which are used to describe all physical matter in Ayurveda. These properties can also be used