air is ___.-_-_.-.-_-__-_and the wooden door is ____-._------------ . Choose the most appropriate option: (i) transparent, opaque (ii) translucent, transparent (iii) opaque, translucent (iv) transparent, translucent Imagine you have two mysterious materials, X and Y. When you try to press material X, it feels rigid and does not change its shape easily. On the other hand, material Y easily changes its shape when you press it. Now, when you mix both materials in water, only material X dissolves completely, Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:17:17 PM Chapter 6.indd 121 10. while material Y remains unchanged. What can materials X and Y be? Can you identify whether material X is hard or soft? What about material Y? Justify your answer. (i) Who am I? Identify me on the basis of the given properties. (a) Ihavelustre 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 Leese en eee (b) Icanbeeasilycompressed. ~LLWWWWW--(c) lIamhardandsolubleinwater. ~-----------(d) Youcannot see clearly throughme. -----------(e) Ihave mass and volume but you cannotseeme. 2 2 2 heen ene (ii) Make your own Who am I? You are provided with the following materials vinegar, honey, mustard oil, water, glucose and wheat flour. Make any two pairs of materials where one material is soluble in the other. Now, make two pairs of materials where one material remains insoluble in the other material. Learning further _; Gather information on different materials which can be recycled. You can take help from various sources, such as newspapers, magazines, elders in your community, and the internet. Recyclers buy old objects based on properties of the materials and do not bother even if an object is broken. Conduct a survey with recyclers near you and find out what properties of materials do they check before buying objects from households. Which materials do they not buy and why? Collect 20-30 objects from your household and classify them based on the properties of the materials they are made up of. Were you able to put them in separate groups? What relationship do you see between the properties of the materials and the use of the objects? Create and decorate a useful object of your choice using discarded materials and bring it to the class. Discuss with your friends what they have made and the materials they have used. Additionally, provide constructive feedback on areas for improvement, considering functionality and any other points. Reprint 2025-26 Materials Around Us 10/4/2024 3:17:20 PM Notes Reprint 2025-26