Tennis ball Cricket ball Hand exercise ball Materials Around Us Any other Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 6.indd 105 10/4/2024 3:15:21 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 6.indd 106 Discuss in class other properties of sports balls, such as size, colour, texture and how high they bounce and understand why balls are made up of specific materials for specific sports. Observe Fig. 6.4 and group the objects in as many different ways as possible. You might have grouped these objects according to their shapes or by their J colour or materials they are AL A made up of. We have learnt that & materials may be classified on the basis of their properties. For example, in_ the A. at kitchen, we usually store things in such a manner Fig. 6.4: Grouping of objects where similar utensils are placed together. Similarly, a grocer usually keeps all types of spices in one corner, pulses and grains in another corner and so on. You may also visit any chemist shop and enquire about how medicines are arranged. Pane BPaxr 6.3 What are the Different Properties of Materials? Let us learn some more properties of materials. 6.3.1 Observe and identify appearance of materials Materials often look different from each other. Freshly cut wood, which is unpolished, has a distinct appearance, quite different from that of iron. Similarly, iron looks different from copper or aluminium. However, there might be some similarities among iron, copper and aluminium that make them different from wood. Let us doa sorting challenge! Collect small pieces of paper, cardboard, wood, chalk, copper wire, aluminium foil and any article made up of brass, bronze, steel, etc. Take a look at the pieces you have collected. Do any of these materials shine when light falls on them? Observe their texture (whether Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:15:23 PM Chapter 6.indd 107 rough or smooth), colour and other noticeable features, and record your observations in the notebook. Group the collected pieces based on their appearance. Materials that typically have shiny surfaces are said to have a lustrous appearance. Such materials with lustre are usually metals. Examples of metals include iron, copper, zinc, aluminium, gold, etc. However, some metals may lose their lustre and start to look dull or non-lustrous due to the effect of air and moisture on them. As a result, we often notice the lustre only on their freshly cut surfaces. Non-lustrous materials are those that do not have a shiny surface. Some examples of non-lustrous materials are paper, wood, rubber, jute, etc. All that glitters is not gold goes an old saying! Not all the materials that shine are metals. Surfaces of some materials are made shiny by polishing or coating them with thin layers of plastic, wax or any other material which makes them look shiny. These materials may not be metals. 6.3.2 Which materials are hard? When you press different objects or materials with your hands, some of them like stones, may be hard to compress, while others, like