mass and weight and their relation in higher classes. 6.3.6 Space and volume Next day, Madam Vidya enters the class. All the students stand up to greet her. She reciprocates and deliberately says, Please keep your bags on your seats and sit down. Students are not able to sit because bags are kept on their seats. Madam Vidya asks, Why are you not sitting? The students reply that there is no place to sit because the bags have occupied that space. Continuing the conversation, she provides two identical glass tumblers to two students and encourages them to pour the remaining water from their drinking water bottles into the respective glass tumblers. On pouring water in the glass tumblers, the students observe that one glass tumbler gets halffilled with water (Fig. 6.8a) while the other is almost completely (a) Half-filled (b) Fully-filled filled with water (Fig. 6.8b). Fig. 6.8: Glass tumblers with varying levels of water Reprint 2025-26 Materials Around Us 10/4/2024 3:16:08 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 6.indd 114 Why is the level of water different in the two tumblers? Madam Vidya elaborates that both tumblers have the same capacity. The water levels differ in each case, which indicates that the amount of water in each tumbler is different. The water in the first tumbler occupies less space, indicating that the volume of water in this tumbler is less than the water in the other tumbler. The space occupied by water represents its volume. Why was I not able to transfer water from the jug into an empty water bottle completely? Now I know the reason behind it ... You may have noticed drinking water bottles of different sizes being sold in the market. Have you noticed 1 L, 500 mL, 200 mL, etc., written as net quantity on the bottles? These indicate the volume of water in the bottles. The bottles of drinking water and milk are labelled as 500 mL, indicating the volume. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:16:12 PM Now you have become familiar with many properties of materials. However, all materials do not possess all these properties. Are there any ; Properties which mee 6.4 What is Matter? can be shown by all Materials? If yes Mass and volume are the two what are those? ? properties that are possessed by all materials. Can we give a general name to anything that possesses these two properties? Anything that occupies space and has mass is called matter. The mass gives the quantity of matter, and the units to measure it are gram (g) and kilogram (kg). The space occupied by matter is its volume. The units to measure the volume are litre (L) and millilitre (mL). Kilogram is the unit of mass in the International System of Units (SI). Kilogram is abbreviated in lower case as kg. There is no space between k and g in kg, and no full stop after the symbol, except at the end of a sentence. While writing the