etc. All that glitters is not gold goes an old saying! Not all the materials that shine are metals. Surfaces of some materials are made shiny by polishing or coating them with thin layers of plastic, wax or any other material which makes them look shiny. These materials may not be metals. 6.3.2 Which materials are hard? When you press different objects or materials with your hands, some of them like stones, may be hard to compress, while others, like an eraser, can be easily compressed. Take a metal key and use it to scratch the surface of a piece of wood, aluminium, stone, iron, candle, chalk and any other material or object. Can some materials be scratched more easily than others? Materials which can be compressed or scratched easily are soft, while other materials which are difficult to compress or scratch are hard. However, these properties are relative in nature. For example, rubber is harder than sponge but softer than iron. Activity 6.5:Let us observe] Hold the objects given in Table 6.3 with your hands. Feel whether the objects are hard or soft. Find out the materials they are made up of. Enter your observations in Table 6.3. Reprint 2025-26 Are all lustrous materials metals? Materials Around Us 10/4/2024 3:15:25 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 e Chapter 6.indd 108 Table 6.3: Hard or soft objects and the materials they are made up of Object Hard/Soft Material(s) Brick Hard Baked clay Water bottle Pillow Tumbler Table Sweater Any other Compare your observations with the observations of your friends and discuss. You have learnt that materials can have different properties, like lustre, hardness, softness and colour. Can you think of any other properties that are shown by materials? Let us explore it further. 6.3.3 Explore materials through which one can see or cannot see Ghulan, Sheeta and Sara are playing hide and seek with their friends. Ghulan hides behind a wall, Sheeta hides behind a big tree in the garden while Sara hides behind the frosted glass door (which has a hazy surface). Sheeta s younger brother can see all of this happening through a glass window of his house. The materials, through which things can be seen clearly, are called transparent. Glass, water, air, cellophane paper, etc., are some examples of transparent materials. Why did Ghulan, Sheeta and Sara choose these places to hide? Do you think it would be possible for Sheeta s brother to see her and her friends through a closed wooden window of the house? Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:15:25 PM There are many materials through which you are not able to see at all. These materials are called opaque. Wood, cardboard and metals are examples of opaque materials. The materials through which objects can be seen, but not clearly, are known as translucent. Butter paper and frosted glass are examples of translucent materials. Lookat Fig. 6.5. Identify and label the nature of materials used by Ghulan (A), Sheeta (B), Sara (C) and