6 Materials Around Us C swear waren @art:) afte cite a RAAT SAA $ 0.3) The materials used to make the crucible (a vessel used to melt substances) are clay and iron. { (Rasaratnasamuchchaya-10.3) b) ' mms 6.1 Observing Objects Around Us Ghulan and Sheeta are thrilled to go to their new class after the summer break. They enter their classroom and start talking. What have you brought to school today? asks Sheeta. 0677CHO6 Look, I I also have a have a new new notebook notebook. and a pen. After some time, Madam Vidya, their science teacher, enters the class and starts interacting with the students to draw their attention to many things they use in their daily life. She asks, How are they similar to or different from each other? What are their shapes and colours? How does it feel when you touch them? Are some of them heavier than Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 6.indd 101 10/4/2024 3:15:05 PM others? All things are made up of some materials like paper, wood, cloth, glass, metal, plastic, clay, and so on. Any substance that is used to create an object is referred to as material. Activity 6.1: Let usidentify $e Make a list of objects you see around and also write the names of the materials they are made up of in Table 6.1. Table 6.1: Identify materials Materials they are I observe v made up of Based on everyday observations, one can conclude that objects are made up of various materials. The earliest pottery found in the Indian subcontinent dates back to 7,000 to 8,000 years in the Ganga plains (Lahuradewa) and in Baluchistan (Mehrgarh). About 4000 BCE onwards, Sindhu-Sarasvati developed techniques of wheelturned pottery production, pigmentation, application of protective or decorative coats (called slips ) of multiple colours, decorative painting, etc. These techniques became further sophisticated during the Sindhu-Sarasvati (also known as Harappan ) Civilisation (2600-1900 BCE), with a bright red surface painted with black-coloured designs displaying geometric patterns, and aquatic and terrestrial animals. The clay used for making pots, dishes, bowls and other items was carefully selected _ and cleaned, sieved, kneaded, turned over a wheel and finally baked in kilns (baked clay is called terracotta ). Pots were used for various purposes, from cooking to storage of food grains, 2) oil, ghee, and so on. Some very large storage jars and other pottery items are exhibited at the Do you National Museum, New Delhi. know? Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 6.indd 102 10/4/2024 3:15:11 PM Let us explore materials further. mums 6.2 How to Group Materials? Activity 6.2: Let US gQrOUP 9 EE Group the objects shown in Fig. 6.1 based on any common property, such as shape, colour, hardness, softness, shine, dullness or materials they are made up of. Fig. 6.1: Objects around us @ Which property did you use to group the objects in Activity 6.2? Did your friends group objects based on similar properties? @ What did you learn