water (Fig. 6.6a). Some materials do not disappear? mix with water and do not disappear even after we stir them for a long time. These materials are insoluble in water (Fig. 6.6b). Water plays an important role in the functioning of our body because it can dissolve a large number of materials. a (a) Soluble material in water (b) Insoluble material in water Materials Around Us Fig. 6.6: What disappears, what does not? Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 6.indd 111 10/4/2024 3:15:50 PM Make your own ORS! ORS Oral Rehydration Solution is used to treat dehydration due to diarrhoea or other illnesses. These ready-made ORS packets are available in primary health centres and also in the market. Each packet is dissolved in a litre of water before use. If these are not available, ORS can be prepared at home by mixing six teaspoons of sugar and half a teaspoon of common salt in one litre of boiled and cooled water. Do liquids like oil, vinegar and honey dissolve in water? What about the gases present in water? Some liquids get completely mixed with water. Some do not mix with water and form a separate layer when left undisturbed for some time. Similarly, some gases are soluble in water whereas others are not. For example, oxygen gas dissolves in water. It is very important for the survival of animals and plants that live in water. mus 6.3.5 How heavy or light? Activity 6.8: Let us meaSUre = @ Let us take three identical paper cups (or bowls). Fill each cup half with the provided materials. @ Fill one with water and mark it as A , second with sand and mark it as B , and the third with pebbles and mark it as C . @ Predict which one would be heavier and which one would be lighter? Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 6.indd 112 10/4/2024 3:16:03 PM Chapter 6.indd 113 @ Weigh each cup using a balance (Fig. 6.7) and record the readings in your notebook. Compare the data and infer which is heavier or lighter. From Activity 6.8, we can say that any object which is heavier or lighter can be measured in terms of a property called mass. The one which is heavier has more mass and the one which is lighter has less mass. Fig. 6.7: Weighing a paper cup containing water Weight is sometimes used in common language for mass as it is determined by weighing. You will learn more about mass and weight and their relation in higher classes. 6.3.6 Space and volume Next day, Madam Vidya enters the class. All the students stand up to greet her. She reciprocates and deliberately says, Please keep your bags on your seats and sit down. Students are not able to sit because bags are kept on their seats. Madam Vidya asks, Why are you not sitting? The students reply that there is no place to sit because the bags have occupied that