Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:16:42 PM Chapter 6.indd 117 A similar classification system existed in ancient India. Ayurveda, one of the Indian medical systems, too has a system of grouping things. Te Are fe ere VAT Us We FT: | Torr: eres fererar: fererfer: a feareeker:| (Ashtanga hridaya Sutra sthana 1.18) The shloka precisely talks about the 20 properties (guna ten pairs of opposite properties), which are used to describe all physical matter in Ayurveda. These properties can also be used to describe all living systems (plants, animals and humans), the environment and also food. These properties are: (i) guru (heavy) x laghu (light in weight) (ii) manda (slow) x ttkshna (quick, fast) (iii) hima (cold) x ushna (hot) (iv) snigdha (unctous) x ruksha (dry) (v) shlakshana (smooth) x khara (rough) (vi) sandra (solid) x drava (liquid) (vii) mridu (soft) x kathina (hard) (viii) sthira (stable) x khala (moving, unstable) (ix) sukshma (subtle, small) x sthila (big, gross) (x) vishada (non slimy) x picchhila (slimy) Classification | Non-lustrous Classify Insoluble Soft | Identify Lusizdus? || Soluble Observe Mass _ Translucent Predict Material + Transparent Record Matter | Volume Reprint 2025-26 Do you know? Materials Around Us 10/4/2024 3:16:52 PM @ Objects are made from a large variety of materials. An object can be made up of a single material or a combination of different materials. @ Wecan use different materials to make objects with similar functions. @ The method of arranging objects into groups is called classification. @ Materials possess different properties which determine their use. @ Materials are grouped or classified based on their similarities or differences in their properties. @ Materials can be grouped based on appearance, such as lustrous or non-lustrous and based on the feel, such as hard or soft. @ Materials are grouped as transparent, translucent or opaque depending on how much we can see through them. @ Some materials are soluble in water, while others remain insoluble. Anything that occupies space and has mass is called matter. @ The space occupied by matter is its volume. @ Mass quantifies the amount of matter present in an object. 1. Find the companion. Link the following words by putting arrows between words that have a connection. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Iron Transparent Copper Solid Bottle Plastic Lustrous 7 Wood Opaque Glass Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 6.indd 118 10/4/2024 3:17:05 PM Chapter 6.indd 119 Win the Word-hub The following words from the chapter like lustrous, non-lustrous, soluble, insoluble, hard, soft, matter, mass, transparent, opaque, volume and translucent are picked up. Grid Students should randomly choose nine words from the given list and write them in the grid. Then, the facilitator either reads the definition of a word or the word itself (randomly) from the given list. The learners have to tick if the particular word is there in the grid. Whoever finishes ticking off all nine words first will shout out Hurray! That person will be the winner if his/her words are marked correctly. Let