rful World of Science As human beings, we have always been curious about our surroundings. We start exploring our surroundings and asking questions right from our childhood. Did you enjoy discovering and exploring the world around you in the Preparatory Stage of school? As you enter the Middle Stage, we will continue this fascinating journey, trying to explore 0677cHO1 and understand the beautiful world we live in. And for that, we have a new subject, Science. Welcome to the wonderful world of Science! Science is a way of thinking, observing and What is doing things to understand the world we live in Science? and to uncover the secrets of the universe. Think of it as a big adventure we ask questions, explore the world and try to understand how things work. For this, the most important thing is to have Curiosity , which is where the title of this book comes from. Whether it is studying tiny grains of sand or massive mountains, a leaf of grass or a vast forest, there is always something new and exciting to discover. Have you ever looked up at the night sky and wondered why thestars shine? Or watched a flower bloom and wondered how it knows when to open? These are just a few of the many mysteries that science helps us unravel. The most wonderful thing about science is that it is everywhere. From the depths of the ocean to the A mountainous region Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 1.indd 1 10/4/2024 3:18:10 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 1.indd 2 A Desert A Coast vastness of outer space, from what is cooking in the kitchen to what is happening on the playground, some of the most groundbreaking discoveries have often come from unexpected places. An underwater view of an Ocean A Galaxy Science is like a giant and unending jigsaw puzzle. Every new discovery we make adds another piece to that puzzle. And you know the best thing about this puzzle? There is no limit to what we can discover, since every new piece of knowledge leads to more questions and more things to find out. Sometimes, we find that a piece of this puzzle has been put in the wrong place and needs to be moved. New discoveries often change our understanding of the world. As you go through this book, you will encounter interesting ideas, do some thought-provoking experiments, and see how some of what we will find out is useful in our Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:19:00 PM daily lives. And guess what happens as we discover more and more? We start realising What will we that these ideas are all connected. explore with We will start off by looking at our thehelpofthis @ home, planet Earth. It is the only planet book? we know that supports life, and it has an environment that we must protect. There is an amazing variety of life on Earth plants and animals that have managed to survive and thrive