things move, or separating the skin of a peanut seed, we hope each chapter of this book will ignite your spirit of inquiry. And hopefully you will have lots of questions on your mind! Even though you may have not realised, you have already been finding answers to many of your questions. Suppose your pen stops writing. What would you do? You would ask yourself the question, Why did my pen stop writing? You might guess that the ink finished. You would then test this guess by opening the pen and checking the ink refill. If itis empty, you would know that your guess was correct. But suppose you found that the ink was not finished. Now what would you do? You would make another guess perhaps the ink might have dried up. To test if this guess is correct or not, you will try something else. This is exactly how Science works! The way you tried to find out why your pen stopped writing is an example of the scientific method. How can we try to find answers toour questions @ on our own? Activity 1.1: Let us think and write Write about a similar problem that you tried to solve. @ What steps did you take? Science is not just about memorising facts and figures or doing experiments. It is about following a step-by-step process that helps us find answers to our questions. So what are the steps that we can follow? The Wonderful World of Science Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 1.indd 5 10/18/2024 9:49:27 AM First, we observe something that we find interesting or we do not understand. Then, we guess a possible answer to that question. We test this guess through experiments or more observations. We then try to analyse the results to see if it actually answers our question. Scientists are people who follow the scientific method to solve problems or to discover new things. But anyone who follows the scientific method is working like a scientist. Someone cooking food may be wondering why the dal has spilled out of the cooker was there too much water? Think of a bicycle repair person trying to find out why a tyre is flat from where did the air leak out? Or an electrician trying to find why a light bulb is not working is there some problem with the bulb or the switch? When we try to ask questions and find out answers, we are all, in a way, scientists! Activity 1.2: Letusthink and write _ _ @ Describe a daily life situation where you think someone was following a scientific method. Do you now realise that there are several daily-life situations where we knowingly or unknowingly apply the scientific Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 1.indd 6 10/18/2024 9:49:28 AM Chapter 1.indd 7 method? Though we all apply the scientific method to some extent, learning science will develop our capabilities for finding solutions to bigger problems and solving more mysteries of