3:19:00 PM daily lives. And guess what happens as we discover more and more? We start realising What will we that these ideas are all connected. explore with We will start off by looking at our thehelpofthis @ home, planet Earth. It is the only planet book? we know that supports life, and it has an environment that we must protect. There is an amazing variety of life on Earth plants and animals that have managed to survive and thrive in different regions on this planet. You might have seen a seed grow into a plant, a caterpillar transform into a beautiful butterfly and many more such observations. How do these plants and animals grow? Of course, to grow, we need food to eat, and especially in a large and diverse country like India, food is so fascinating. Across the country, we have different cuisines with their many tasty dishes. What are they made of? How do we find out? The Wonderful World of Science re] Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 1.indd 3 10/4/2024 3:19:50 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 1.indd 4 Along with food, we need water to survive. Water is sucha delightful substance. Have you ever jumped in a puddle when it rained? Do you ever wonder why and how it rains? Have you noticed that water freezes and becomes ice when we cool it and boils and becomes steam when we heat it? Do you enjoy drinking cool water in the summer or showering with warm water in the winter? How do we understand hot and cold? Whether it is water, or our own body when we have fever, finding out how hot something is can be important! Then again, there are so many different things around us the paper we write on, the metal key, the plastic ruler and the rubber eraser in our box, the magnet that keeps the box closed, the clothes we wear, the cup we drink milk in and so many other things. What are they made of? Are they made of different materials? How do we separate different materials from one another? Reprint 2025-26 10/18/2024 9:49:27 AM We will have an almost unending list of questions about everything on Earth as we further explore this book. But why limit our questions to the Earth alone? We can ask questions on things beyond the Sun, the Moon, and the millions of stars that shine in the sky! Whether you are learning about the structure of a leaf, discovering how things move, or separating the skin of a peanut seed, we hope each chapter of this book will ignite your spirit of inquiry. And hopefully you will have lots of questions on your mind! Even though you may have not realised, you have already been finding answers to many of your questions. Suppose your pen stops writing. What would you do? You would ask yourself the question, Why did my pen stop writing? You might guess that the ink finished.