and the urban local government? Urban Local Bodies Local government structures in urban areas are called urban local bodies . They are decentralised, which means that instead of operating under a central authority at the Reprint 2025-26 12 Grassroots Democracy - Part 3 03-02-2025 05:03:05 | Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy | chapter12.indd 176 top, the local communities have a direct say on how their areas are managed or the issues they face. It is amechanism for citizens living in an area to come together and take decisions about what is best for them. Cities and towns are divided into smaller units called wards , and the ward committees facilitate activities such as conducting health camps, organising a campaign against the use of single-use plastics, and so on. They also keep an eye on anything that might go wrong a water leak, a blocked drain, a damaged road, etc. and report such problems to the authorities. However, the precise functioning of wards differs from State to State, depending on the rules they make. oun Altogether, urban local bodies are responsible for a range of functions helping take care of the infrastructure, maintaining the burial ground, garbage collection and disposal, checking the implementation of government schemes, collecting local taxes and fines, and so on. They also have some role in planning for the area s economic and social development. However, for these bodies to be Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:03:06 | chapter12.indd 177 able to perform their functions efficiently, people living in the city must also perform their duties, which means that they must show care and concern for their area (remember, this is a participatory democracy). For instance, if people carefully follow instructions regarding waste segregation, garbage collection becomes easier; or if they notice a water leakage in a street, reporting it promptly will prevent further wastage of precious water. LET'S EXPLORE Can you think of four or five more actions that responsible citizens might take to help their area of the city? Fig. 12.3. The Madras Corporation The Madras Corporation (now Greater Chennai Corporation), established on 29 September 1688, is the oldest municipal institution in India. The East India Company issued a charter the previous year constituting the town of Fort St. George and all territories within 16 km from the Fort into a corporation. A Parliamentary Act of 1792 gave the Madras Corporation power to levy municipal taxes in the city, which is when the municipal administration properly began. Reprint 2025-26 12 Grassroots Democracy - Part 3 03-02-2025 05:03:07 | | chapter12.indd 178 SERVICES UNDER THE INDORE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION SOLID WASTE BUSINESS, MANAGEMENT HOARDINGS, TRADE LICENSES CRM* MARRIAGE | CRM FIRE CRM VARIOUS CRM WATER CERTIFICATE SERVICES LICENSES TANKER, DEBRIS CLEARANCE TREE CUTTING & TREE TRANSPORTATION CRM SERVICES ON REQUEST a S| Water Tanker | Septic Tanker Mobile Toilet | Ambulance *CRM: Citizen Relationship Management. (The list of services offered by the Indore Municipal Corporation is simplified here.) & Fig. 12.4. Services under the Indore Municipal