each other out we work together in the fields, celebrate festivals together, and even make decisions as a community. Anita: Well, there s still some sense of community in the city. Just the other day, following heavy rains, a house collapsed two streets away. Dozens of people gathered from all over the place to help clear the rubble and make sure no one was trapped inside. Sameer: Doesn't the local government help in such cases? Anita: Yes, it does. In fact, we have local bodies and elected representatives who represent us and our interests. Sameer: Well, it sounds like our village Panchayat, only bigger. Members are elected, too, but because they all know each other, a lot more people can participate and discuss all kinds of issues that concern the village. Sometimes, even us kids can get heard. Anita: Really? You are not making that up? Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:03:15 | chapter12.indd 181 Sameer: Not at all! The other day a few kids noticed that an electricity wire was hanging dangerously low, almost touching the roof of a building. Not only did we report it, but we explained to one of our Gram Sabha members that an electric post should be shifted a little. And it was done! Anita: Great! I suppose that s how democracy should work. It seems more complicated in the city, but the idea is the same everyone's voice matters. Sameer: Yes, it does! Sorry, I must make a move. My mother needs my help for a little shopping. Thanks for telling me about the city. Anita: And thanks for telling me about your village! I am definitely going to look around. Sameer: Well, maybe we'll meet again sometime. Bye! Before we move on... + Inurban areas, decentralised governance works through different urban local bodies, which fulfil various functions affecting the citizens lives. As with the rural context, urban local bodies have elected members who represent the local citizens. The citizens also have duties to ensure that the local bodies are able to perform their functions efficiently. Questions, activities and projects 1. On your way to school, you and your friends notice that a water pipe is leaking. A lot of water is being wasted on account of the leak. What would you and your friends do in such a situation? 2. Invite amember of an urban local body near you to your class. Discuss with them their role and responsibilities. Prepare a set of questions to ask them so that the meeting is fruitful. Reprint 2025-26 12 Grassroots Democracy - Part 3 03-02-2025 05:03:16 | 3. Discuss with adult members of your family and neighbourhood, and make a list of their expectations from the urban local bodies. 4. Make a list of characteristics of a good urban local body. What are the similarities and differences between the Panchayati Raj system in rural areas and the urban local bodies? Noodles Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy *'Noodles is our abbreviation for Notes and Doodles