Thinking about the Text I. Answer these questions. 1. At last a sympathetic audience. (i) Who says this? (ii) Why does he say it? (iii) Is he sarcastic or serious? 2. Why does the intruder choose Gerrard as the man whose identity he wants to take on? 3. I said it with bullets. (i) Who says this? (ii) What does it mean? (iii) Is it the truth? What is the speaker s reason for saying this? 4. What is Gerrard s profession? Quote the parts of the play that support your answer. 5. You'll soon stop being smart. (i) Who says this? IfI Were You / 115 @& Reprint 2025-26 (ii) Why does the speaker say it? (iii) What according to the speaker will stop Gerrard from being smart? 6. They can t hang me twice. (i) Who says this? (ii) Why does the speaker say it? 7. A mystery I propose to explain. What is the mystery the speaker proposes to explain? 8. This is your big surprise. (i) Where has this been said in the play? (ii) What is the surprise? 3 Thinking about Language I. Consult your dictionary and choose the correct word from the pairs given in brackets. 1. The (site, cite) of the accident was (ghastly/ghostly). Our college (principle/principal) is very strict. I studied (continuously/continually) for eight hours. The fog had an adverse (affect/effect) on the traffic. Cezanne, the famous French painter, was a brilliant (artist/artiste). oak wD The book that you gave me yesterday is an extraordinary (collage/college) of science fiction and mystery. 7. Our school will (host/hoist) an exhibition on cruelty to animals and wildlife conservation. 8. Screw the lid tightly onto the top of the bottle and (shake/shape) well before using the contents. I il . Irony is when we say one thing but mean another, usually the opposite of what we say. When someone makes a mistake and you say, Oh! that was clever! , that is irony. You re saying clever to mean not clever . Expressions we often use in an ironic fashion are: e Oh, wasn t that clever!/Oh that was clever! e You have been a great help, I must say! e You've got yourself into a lovely mess, haven t you? e Oh, very funny!/ How funny! We use a slightly different tone of voice when we use these words ironically. Read the play carefully and find the words and expressions Gerrard uses in an ironic way. Then say what these expressions really mean. Two examples have & 116 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 hl been given below. Write down three more such expressions along with what they really mean. What he means What the author says Why, this is a surprise, Mr er | He pretends that the intruder is a social visitor whom he is welcoming. In this way he hides his fear. At last a sympathetic audience! He pretends that the intruder wants to listen to him, whereas actually the intruder wants to find