ke * 9. If | Were You O959CHI1 Before You READ Gerrard lives alone in a lonely cottage. An intruder, who is a criminal, enters his cottage. He intends to murder Gerrard and take on his identity. Does he succeed? The following words and phrases occur in the play. Do you know their meanings? Match them with the meanings given, to find out. cultured an informal expression for a fashionable vehicle count on unnecessary and usually harmful engaged exaggerated melodramatic sophisticated; well mannered to be smart here, a tone of voice inflection avoid wise guy an unexpected opportunity for SUCCESS a dandy bus trap tradespeople a Christian religious teacher who teaches on Sundays in Church gratuitous (American English) a person who pretends to know a lot dodge depend on; rely on lucky break (American English) an informal way of saying that one is being too clever Sunday-school teacher occupied; busy frame merchants ScENE: A small cottage interior. There is an entrance back right (which may be curtained). Another door to the left must be a practical door. The furniture is simple, consisting of a small table towards the left, a chair or two, and a divan rather upstage on the right. On the table is a telephone. Reprint 2025-26 (When the curtain rises Gerrard is standing by the table making a phone call. He is of medium height, and wearing horn-rimmed glasses ... He is dressed in a lounge suit and a great coat. His voice is cultured.) GERRARD: ... Well, tell him to phone up directly. I must know... Yes, I expect I'll still be here, but you mustn t count on that... In about ten minutes time. Right-ho. Goodbye. (He puts down the phone and goes to the divan on the left, where there is a travelling bag, and starts packing. Whilst he is thus engaged, another man, similar in build to Gerrard enters from the right silently revolver in hand. He is flashily dressed in an overcoat and a soft hat. He bumps accidentally against the table, and at the sound Gerrard turns quickly.) GERRARD : (pleasantly) Why, this is a surprise, Mr er INTRUDER : I m glad you're pleased to see me. I don t think you'll be pleased for long. Put those paws up! GERRARD : This is all very melodramatic, not very original, perhaps, but... INTRUDER : Trying to be calm and er GerraRD : Nonchalant is your word, I think. INTRUDER : Thanks a lot. You'll soon stop being smart. Pll make you crawl. I want to know a few things, see. Youll soon stop being smart. I'll make you crawl. & 110 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 vb # * GerraRD : Anything you like. I know all the answers. But before we begin I should like to change my position; you may be comfortable, but I am not. INTRUDER : Sit down there, and no funny business. (Motions to a chair, and seats himself on the divan by the bag.) Now