of silkworms (= for silk) CELLS/BACTERIA 6 [C] (biology, medical) a group of ceils or bacteria, especially one taken from a person or an animal and grown for medical or scientific study, or to produce food; the process of obtaining and growing these cells: a culture of cells from the cumour Yogurt is made from active cultures. to do/take a throat culture @ verb [VN] (biology, medical) to grow a group of cells or bacteria for medical or scientific study cul-tured / kaltfad; NAmE -tJard/ adj. 1 (of people) well educated and able to understand and enjoy art, literature, etc. EAI CULTIVATED 2 (of cells or bacteria) grown for medical or scientific study 3 (of PEARLS) grown artificially IfI Were You / 117 @ Reprint 2025-26 (Noun, verb, adjective, adverb, synonyms, etc. are signposts which help you locate the right meaning and usage, and give information about the part of speech that the word is.) Look up the dictionary entries for the words sympathy, familiarity, comfort, care, and surprise. Use the information given in the dictionary and complete the table. Noun Adjective Adverb Verb Meaning sympathy familiarity comfort care surprise & oi Speaking 1. Imagine you are Gerrard. Tell your friend what happened when the Intruder broke into your house. [Clues : Describe (i) the intruder his appearance, the way he spoke, his plan, his movements, etc., (ii) how you outwitted him.] 2. Enact the play in the class. Pay special attention to words given in italics before a dialogue. These words will tell you whether the dialogue has to be said in a happy, sarcastic or ironic tone and how the characters move and what they do as they speak. Read these carefully before you enact the play. he pe Writing I. Which of the words below describe Gerrard and which describe the Intruder? smart humorous clever beautiful cool confident flashy witty nonchalant Write a paragraph each about Gerrard and the Intruder to show what qualities they have. (You can use some of the words given above.) II. Convert the play into a story (150-200 words). Your story should be as exciting and as witty as the play. Provide a suitable title to it. & 118 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26