your big surprise. I said you wouldn t kill me and I was right. Why do you think I am here today and gone tomorrow, never see tradespeople? You say my habits would suit you. You are a crook. Do you think I am a Sunday-school teacher? The game s up as far as I m concerned. Things went wrong with me. I said it with bullets and got away. Unfortunately they got one of my men, and found things the fool should have burnt. Tonight I m expecting trouble. My bag s packed ready to clear off. There it is. It s a bag all right and this is a gun all right. What s all this? That s a disguise outfit; false moustaches and what not. Now do you believe me? (musingly) 1 don t know. For God s sake clear that muddled head of yours and let s go. Come with me in the car. I can use you. If you find it s a frame, you ve got me in the car, and you've still got your gun. May be your're right. Then don t waste time. (Goes and picks up hat // and bag.) ( | Careful, boss, I m watching you. I have got a man posted on the main road. He'll Gerrard gives him a push ring up if he sees the into the cupboard... Reprint 2025-26 hl INTRUDER GERRARD INTRUDER GERRARD a * police, but I don t want to leave... (telephone bell rings) Come on! They re after us. Through here straight to the garage. How do I know that you are telling the truth? Oh, don t be a fool. Look for yourself. (Gerrard opens door and steps away. Intruder leans forward to inspect it, with his side towards Gerrard, but with the revolver ready. As he turns his head, Gerrard gives him a push into the cupboard, knocking the revolver out of his hand. He slams the door and locks it, picks up the revolver and goes to the phone, where he stands with the gun pointed at the cupboard door.) (rattles door and shouts) Let me out of here! Hello. Yes, speaking. Sorry I can t let you have the props in time for rehearsal, I ve had a spot of bother quite amusing. I think I'll put it in my next play. Listen, can you tell our friend the Sergeant to come up here at once? You'll probably find him in the Public Bar. DOUGLAS JAMES % Thinking about the Text I. Answer these questions. 1. At last a sympathetic audience. (i) Who says this? (ii) Why does he say it? (iii) Is he sarcastic or serious? 2. Why does the intruder choose Gerrard as the man whose identity he wants to take on? 3. I said it with bullets. (i) Who says this? (ii) What does it mean? (iii) Is it the truth? What is the speaker s reason for saying this? 4. What is Gerrard