a * I'm O.K. I ve got a reason for everything. I m going to be Vincent Charles Gerrard, see. I ve got to know what he talks like. Now I know. That posh stuff comes easy. This is Mr V.C. Gerrard speaking. (Pantomime of phoning, in imitation cultured voice.) And that s not all. (He stands up.) Get up a minute (Gerrard stands.) Now take a look at me. You're not particularly decorative. No! Well, that goes for you, too. I ve only got to wear specs and I'll be enough like you to get away with it. What about your clothes? They'll let you down if you re not careful. That'll be all right. Yours will fit me fine. That is extremely interesting, but you seem to miss the point of my remark. I said, you were luckier than most melodramatic villains. It was not a tribute to your intelligence. You won t kill me for a very good reason. So that s what you think. You'll let me go, and thank God you didn t shoot sooner. Come on. What s on your mind! Better be quick. This conversation bores me. Your idea is to elude the police by killing me and taking on my identity? Yes, I like the idea. But are you sure it s going to help you? Now listen here. I ve got this all planned. I did a job in town. Things went wrong and I killed a cop. Since then I've done nothing but dodge. And this is where dodging has brought you? It brought me to Aylesbury. That s where I saw you in the car. Two other people saw you and started to talk. I listened. It looks like youre a bit queer kind of a mystery man. A mystery which I propose to explain. (disregarding him) You phone your orders and sometimes you go away suddenly and come back just the same. Those are just the things I want to do. Hearing about you was one of my luckiest breaks. Apparently you haven't the intelligence to ask why I am invested in this cloak of mystery. ot IfI Were You / 113 @& Reprint 2025-26 INTRUDER GERRARD INTRUDER GERRARD INTRUDER GERRARD INTRUDER GERRARD INTRUDER GERRARD INTRUDER GERRARD & 114 / Beehive (preparing to shoot) As I said before, this conversation bores me. Don t be a fool. If you shoot, you'll hang for sure. If not as yourself, then as Vincent Charles Gerrard. What is this? This is your big surprise. I said you wouldn t kill me and I was right. Why do you think I am here today and gone tomorrow, never see tradespeople? You say my habits would suit you. You are a crook. Do you think I am a Sunday-school teacher? The game s up as far as I m concerned. Things went wrong with me. I said it with bullets and got away. Unfortunately they got one of my men, and found things