a HNN | Unit 5.indd 72 30-05-2018 11:52:48 | The Dog and His Bone A hungry dog while searching about food found a bone. He picked it out and held it tightly in his mouth and ran out into the woods, to a safe place to enjoy it in ease. He growled and frowned at anyone who attempted to take it over. He chewed the bone for a very long time and this made him quite thirsty. He came to a stream to quench his thirst. He trotted around the footbridge and happened to glance into the water. He saw his own reflection in the water. Thinking it was another dog with a bigger bone, he growled and scowled towards it. The reflection growled and scowled back. Being greedy by nature, he wanted that bone too. He snapped his sharp teeth at the image on the water. He barked at the other dog, hoping to scare him into giving that bone. His own big bone fell with a splash, went over of sight, the moment he opened his mouth to bite! Unit 5 footbridge: pedestrians a_ bridge for ia On and off/ Off and on On and off Meaning: at regular intervals Incorrect: He has been working off and on several months to complete his PhD thesis. Correct: He has been working on and off several months to complete his PhD thesis. Off and on Meaning: occasionally Incorrect: He visits me on and off. Correct: He visits me off and on. Gl oS GS om oo eS 73) iG) 3S OOS +) 2) NeEMeMe Mae Mata aaa ata Watatiatia Matiatataatle | Unit 5.indd 73 30-05-2018 11:52:48 | fy @ @ Ni r) PN 4 Fun fact Accept / Except Accept is a verb which means to receive . Except is used aS a preposition and means not including . Incorrect: Sandhya excepted her student's offer to drive her home. Correct: Sandhya accepted her student s offer to drive her home. Incorrect: The paper submissions can be done on weekdays, accept Mondays. Correct: The paper submissions can be done on weekdays, except Mondays. SLE) QI @ oy / Fe Q ws, Gaye SME MS MS MSHS HEM SMS OEM Se MSM SMS MSHS OSHS HSM SMS Met | Unit 5.indd 74 2. Rearrange each set of words to make sentences. Use appropriate punctuation marks. (a) when I gave her, the bad news, she turned pale (b) become rotten, as it has, the apple, don t eat (c) great friends, last quarrel, after their, they became (d) first and only novel, after her, got a prize, she became famous Ok] @ LISTENING How brave are you? Take a minute to think over this question. There are people who risk their lives to save someone s life from danger. Here is a child who dared and saved lives. Let us listen to the story of a braveheart. The Brave Hearts On October 26, 2009, Jhalaram s hut in the village Sarneshwar in Rajasthan,