fear ? First one has been done for you. (a) fearsome (e) fear (b) fear (f) fear (c) fear (g) fear (d) fear (h) fear GRAMMAR Reported Speech: Reporting questions 1. You have learnt how to report questions from direct to indirect speech. Here is a paragraph with direct speech questions. Read them carefully and report into indirect speech. Rewrite the paragraph in the space given below. Once an old man asked a young boy, Who do you think are the most intelligent people? The young man said in return, Who do you think so? The old man said, How can sons and daughters be intelligent without learning from their parents? The young man said, How did you as a parent learn? The old man said, Why are you hijacking my question by asking me back? The young man said, Didn t you know that you as a parent, now have learnt all the things on your own? The old man said, How do you say that we all learnt from others? The young man said, Why do you ask me about how to operate electronic gadget all the time? The old man said, Why can t I ask you because I have paid for the gadget you use? Unit 5 Lag BW Fun fact | It s / Its Incorrect: I do believe its her hard work. Correct: I do believe it s her hard work. Incorrect: The dog is waving it s tail. Correct: The dog is waving its tail. Gl oS GS om ag, @ ow: OQ (OTTEK) NeEMeMe Mae Mata aaa ata Watatiatia Matiatataatle | Unit 5.indd 71 30-05-2018 11:52:48 | 2. Now here is a set of sentences given in indirect speech. Change them into direct speech. (a) Romesh asked Lata whether she (a) Romesh could go with him for a picnic the next day. (b) Lata replied why had he asked her | (b) Lata to join. (c) Romesh asked Lata why she was | (c) Romesh questioning him. (d) Lata replied there was no use| (d) Lata visiting the place she had seen before. (e) Romesh asked Lata what was (e) Romesh wrong in visiting the same place again for the place was not the same. ~ @Eprmne @) 1. Some of the prepositions are incorrectly used in the following story. Correct them and read the story aloud. i , Then rewrite the story in the space given below. ae @ WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1 QO Mm 515050505 05050505 05054505 054054S0U54505os5u5o5 NTTTTTOTOUTTOTTAOEEOCTARCUTAATAE ERE a HNN | Unit 5.indd 72 30-05-2018 11:52:48 | The Dog and His Bone A hungry dog while searching about food found a bone. He picked it out and held it tightly in his mouth and ran out into the woods, to a safe place to enjoy it in ease. He growled and frowned at anyone who attempted to take it over. He chewed the bone for a very long time and this made him quite thirsty. He came to