the ship and a rescue boat was immediately sent for me. This was my miraculous escape from the deadly serpent. (Source: Anonymous) Discuss what effect did the story have an you? What would you have done, if you were in the narrator s place? Does it teach you how to save yourself from danger? Now based on your reading of the story, answer the questions that follow. You may read the story again. 1. What made the narrator go on a voyage? (a) He was rich and satisfied with his life. (b) He felt bored of his life. (c) He had urge to go on a voyage. (d) He was adventurous. 2. How did the narrator and his friends feed themselves? (a) They ate fish. (b) They could not find anything to eat. (c) They ate fruits to survive. (d) They ate the food they had brought with themselves. 3. The narrator and his companions were on the tree. The serpent swallowed his companion but not the narrator. Why? Unit 5 wildly: uncontrolled; unrestrained; very enthusiastic or excited we 8 Fun fact Common Suffixes that make nouns -ation inform information transform transformation -ness ill illness kind kindness Gl oS GS om oo (7) S os 8 (OTTEK) NeEMeMe Mae Mata aaa ata Watatiatia Matiatataatle | Unit 5.indd 69 30-05-2018 11:52:48 | 4. How did the narrator save himself from the serpent? . 5. Find the words in the story which mean the nearest to Fun fact i the words given below. (a) rich (First para) Common Error (b) moved (Second para) Incorrect: ; ; Arti is living far away with (c) tired (Third para) india. (a) scared (Fifth para) Correct: (e) urge (Fifth para) Arti is living far away from India. 6. Now find words in the story which mean the opposite of the given words. (a) poor (First para) (b) weak (Third para) (c) enforce (Third para) (d) insecurely (Sixth para) (e) offensive (Sixth para) 3) VocaBULARY 1. The story of Miraculous Escape has a number of words which describe the narrator s feeling of fear and getting tired of the journey. List the words of the two feelings and experiences. Fer | Getting tired Exhausted, fy @ @ N r) oe, Sars r) e} yo WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] % (TKS) SME MS MS MSHS HEM SMS OEM Se MSM SMS MSHS OSHS HSM SMS Met | Unit 5.indd 70 30-05-2018 11:52:48 | @ 2. Can you now add suffix which can mean or relate to the word fear ? First one has been done for you. (a) fearsome (e) fear (b) fear (f) fear (c) fear (g) fear (d) fear (h) fear GRAMMAR Reported Speech: Reporting questions 1. You have learnt how to report questions from direct to indirect speech. Here is a paragraph with direct speech questions. Read them carefully and report into indirect speech. Rewrite the paragraph in the space given below. Once an old man asked a young boy, Who do you think are