after their, they became (d) first and only novel, after her, got a prize, she became famous Ok] @ LISTENING How brave are you? Take a minute to think over this question. There are people who risk their lives to save someone s life from danger. Here is a child who dared and saved lives. Let us listen to the story of a braveheart. The Brave Hearts On October 26, 2009, Jhalaram s hut in the village Sarneshwar in Rajasthan, suddenly caught fire. His two daughters, aged two-and-a-half years and one year, as well as ten goats were in the hut at that time. WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] 30-05-2018 11:52:48 | Shrawan Kumar, a six-year old boy, was playing in his house at a distance of about 200 feet. Seeing smoke coming out from Jhalaram s house, he ran towards it. He saw the children sitting on a cot and screaming for help, and the goats caught in the flames. Shrawan entered the house, lifted the younger child in one arm and pulling the older one by the hand, brought them out safely. He took them to his house, then ran to inform his father and the children s father. The elders rushed to the site. But by that time, the goats had died and the household belongings had been destroyed in the fire. It was Shrawan Kumar s daring act that saved the lives of the two children. (Shrawan Kumar, 6 years old, Sarneshwar, Rajasthan) (Source: Children s World, May 2012) Your teacher will read out the story. Listen to the story carefully and answer the questions below. You may ask the teacher to read out the story more than once. 1. Where is the village of Sarneshwar? 2. Whose hut had caught fire? 3. Who all were there in the hut when it caught fire? 4. Why did Shrawan run towards Jhalaram s house? Unit 5 La Spellings British American Colour Color Honour Honor Programme Program Travelling Traveling Fulfil Fulfill Centre Center Dialogue Dialog Grey Cray Gl oS GS om CY) @ ow: 80 (OTTEK) NeEMeMe Mae Mata aaa ata Watatiatia Matiatataatle | Unit 5.indd 75 30-05-2018 11:52:48 | fy @ @ Ni r) PST 4 Superfluous commas Many times, commas are used liberally even when they are not necessary. Incorrect: Hari never went into the city, because he did not feel comfortable driving in traffic. Correct: Hari never went into the city because he did not feel comfortable driving in traffic. Incorrect: Roma wants to get a degree in Fine Arts, or Music. Correct: Roma wants to get a degree in Fine Arts or Music. Incorrect: The book on the table, belongs to Sara. Correct: The book on the _ table belongs to Sara. SLE) iY ie /O & oe & Gaye SME MS MS MSHS HEM SMS OEM Se MSM SMS MSHS OSHS HSM SMS Met | Unit 5.indd 76 5. How did Shrawan save the two children? 6. What happened to the goats? Q @