degree in Fine Arts, or Music. Correct: Roma wants to get a degree in Fine Arts or Music. Incorrect: The book on the table, belongs to Sara. Correct: The book on the _ table belongs to Sara. SLE) iY ie /O & oe & Gaye SME MS MS MSHS HEM SMS OEM Se MSM SMS MSHS OSHS HSM SMS Met | Unit 5.indd 76 5. How did Shrawan save the two children? 6. What happened to the goats? Q @ SPEAKING Imagine yourself as the narrator in the story The Miraculous Escape and describe your experience during your voyage. Jot down the points you want to speak on. Then narrate your experience to your partner. You may begin like this: I have been thinking of going on a voyage. And here came the opportunity to sail on a ship! I enjoyed the bule sea, the silence all around, amazing sunrise for a week. Then suddenly Your points: 3 Writinc 1. A group of pictures are given here. They make a story. This story is from the Tales of Panchatantra. WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] 30-05-2018 11:52:49 | | Unit 5.indd 77 30-05-2018 11:52:49 | Now write the story in the lines provided below. Provide a suitable title to the story. 2. Courage needs no age and comes after we let go of all our fears. Every year, on the Republic Day, National Bravery Awards are given to selected children for their act of bravery against all odds. These children are able to achieve this glory as they overcome their moments of fear and do their best to save precious lives. Le} Make a list of any five such children and their actions for which they have been awarded the National Bravery Award. 2 Write a few paragraphs on each child. Keep your writings (>, in the Class Library or the Reading Club for all your friends Ny e to read. eile @ @ 78) WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1 QO om SME MS MS MSHS HEM SMS OEM Se MSM SMS MSHS OSHS HSM SMS Met | Unit 5.indd 78 30-05-2018 11:52:49 | (Source: https://www.ndtv.com/india-news /national-bravery-awards2018-meet-the- 18-bravehearts-of-india- 1802479) Ck] @ ProJEcT 1. The stories of The Snake and the Mirror and The Miraculous Escape show how people face danger and are scared of animals. As children, many of us fear stray dogs. Both adults and children are scared of snakes. Fear exists in most of us. Some fears have bases and others do not. Let us conduct a survey of what people fear about. You may follow the guidelines given below. Form groups of four, and select an area for your survey. It may be your classmates, teachers or people in your neighbourhood. Develop a questionnaire to collect information about the fears people have. You may have at least eight to ten questions. Decide how many people you will ask the questions for the survey. Ask people the questions. Write their opinions in tabular form. Now write the first draft of the