976CHOS s You have read the story The Snake and the Mirror . Now read the poems given in the textbook, Beehive, The Snake Trying (page 125) and Green Snake (page 126). e Note the actions of these three snakes. Note the reactions of the story writer and the poets. What do they feel? Do you think any of the snakes wanted to do any harm? e What is the human behaviour towards them? U iscuss all these points with your partner and together share with your other friends. Wee ee ewe ewe ew ee ee eee ee ee ew ewe ee ee eee eH Zw Ct] 3 Reapinc CoMPREHENSION Read the passage given below and answer the questions that follow. THE Miracutous EscaPe I had been very wealthy and prosperous and was leading a very comfortable life. I had all the worldly pleasures with me. But soon I became bored of my idle life. The urge to go on a voyage became stronger and stronger day by day. It haunted me like anything. So one day I boarded a ship and went trading from island to island with other merchants. When we started, the weather was fine and the sea was calm. But on the fourth day of our voyage, our ship was caught in a terrific/terrible hurricane and we wandered from our set course. The tempest continued for several days and drove us near an island. The captain of the ship Reprint 2025-26 Unit 5.indd 67 1/7/2019 10:06:19 AM rustle: make a soft, muffled crackling sound like that caused by the movement of dry leaves or paper alarm: a warning of danger penetrate: force a way into ~ or through @ 2) y) aM, SB ej [I go Gaye SME MS MS MSHS HEM SMS OEM Se MSM SMS MSHS OSHS HSM SMS Met | Unit 5.indd 68 was reluctant to cast anchor at the port as it was a much dreaded place. The violent waves of the sea had exhausted us. We were all tired and hungry so we went in search of food and water. We were fortunate enough to find fruit trees and a stream of fresh and cool water which gave us strength and energy and relieved us from hunger. It had started getting dark. As we were tired we went to sleep but were soon startled by a rustling noise which came from a very long and huge python like serpent gliding swiftly towards us. We ran to save our lives but the serpent was quick enough to swallow one of my companions. We kept running till we had covered a good enough distance from the serpent. We felt a bit relieved but at the same time sad as we had lost a friend of ours. We took shelter on the top of a tree and thought ourselves to be safe. But we were mistaken for we had hardly slept a little time when we heard a hissing sound which alarmed and frightened