the ghastly experience he began to reason with himself, and finally concluded that it must have been some sort of auto suggestion, some trick that his subconscious had played on him. By the time he had got up in the morning, had a bath and come out to have his breakfast, the horror of the previous night had faded from his memory. Iswaran greeted him at the door with his lunch packet and his bag. Just as Mahendra was stepping out Iswaran grinned and said, Sir, remember the other day when I was telling you about the female ghost with a foetus in its arms, you were so angry with me for imagining things? Well, you saw her yourself last night. I came running hearing the sound of moaning that was coming from your room... A chill went down Mahendra s spine. He did not wait for Iswaran to complete his sentence. He hurried away to his office and handed in his papers, resolving to leave the haunted place the very next day! R.K. LAxMAN Iswaran the Storyteller/ 17 fad disee Ww a SF 5 My soe Reprint 2025-26 Glossary in thrall: the state of being in someone s power depredations: attacks which are made to destroy something guttural sound: sound produced in the throat; harsh-sounding feline: relating to cats or other members of the cat family BLE Tank Asour Ir 1. In what way is Iswaran an asset to Mahendra? 2. How does Iswaran describe the uprooted tree on the highway? What effect does he want to create in his listeners? 3. How does he narrate the story of the tusker? Does it appear to be plausible? 4. Why does the author say that Iswaran seemed to more than make up for the absence of a TV in Mahendra s living quarters? 5. Mahendra calls ghosts or spirits a figment of the imagination. What happens to him on a full-moon night? 6. Can you think of some other ending for the story? ae Tai Asvour It Is Iswaran a fascinating storyteller? Discuss with your friends the qualities of a good storyteller. Try to use these qualities and tell a story. BLE Sueccste Reanine e The Story Teller by Saki (H.H. Munro) e Ghost Stories (ed.) Ruskin Bond e The Canterville Ghost by Oscar Wilde e Pret in the House by Ruskin Bond 18 / Moments do* + Reprint 2025-26 et ee