the open. The elephant grunted and menacingly swung a branch of a tree which it held in its trunk. It stamped its feet, kicking up a lot of mud and dust. It looked frightening. But I moved slowly towards it, stick in hand. People were watching the scene hypnotised from nearby housetops. The elephant looked at me red-eyed, ready to rush towards me. It lifted its trunk and trumpeted loudly. At that moment I moved forward and, mustering all my force, whacked 14 / Moments * gs ? Dvn Ba: Reprint 2025-26 Bow hsb its third toenail on the quick. The beast looked stunned for a moment; then it shivered from head to foot and collapsed. At this point Iswaran would leave the story unfinished, and get up mumbling, I will be back after lighting the gas and warming up the dinner. Mahendra who had been listening with rapt attention would be left hanging. When he returned, Iswaran would not pick up the thread of the story right away. Mahendra would have to remind him that the conclusion was pending. Well, a veterinary doctor was summoned to revive the animal, Iswaran would shrug casually. Iwo days later it was led away by its mahout to the jungle. Well, how did you manage to do it, Iswaran how did you bring down the beast? It has something to do with a Japanese art, I think, sir. Karate or ju-jitsu it is called. I had read about it somewhere. It temporarily paralyses the nervous system, you see. Not a day passed without Iswaran recounting some story packed with adventure, horror and suspense. Whether the story was credible or not, Mahendra enjoyed listening to it because of the inimitable way in which it was told. Iswaran seemed to more than make up for the absence of a TV in Mahendra s living quarters. One morning when Mahendra was having breakfast Iswaran asked, Can I make something special for dinner tonight, sir? After all today is an auspicious day according to tradition we prepare various delicacies to feed the spirits of our ancestors today, sir. That night Mahendra enjoyed the most delicious dinner and complimented Iswaran on his culinary skills. He seemed very pleased but, unexpectedly, launched into a most garish account involving the supernatural. You know, sir, this entire factory area we are occupying was once a burial ground, he started. Mahendra was jerked out of the pleasant reverie he had drifted into after the satisfying meal. I knew on the first day itself when Isaw a human skull lying on the path. Even now I come across a number of skulls and bones, Iswaran continued. Iswaran the Storyteller/ 15 fad disee Ww a SF 5 My soe Reprint 2025-26 He went on to narrate how he sometimes saw ghosts at night. I am not easily frightened by these things, sir. I am a brave fellow. But one horrible ghost of a woman which appears off and on at midnight during the full