hand in air but to do the same through a solid block of wood we need a karate expert. 4. Liquids generally have lower density as compared to solids. But you must have.observed that ice floats on water. Find out why. 14 Can Matter Change its State? We all know from our observation that water can exist in three states of matter solid, as ice, liquid, as the familiar water, and gas, as water vapour. What happens inside the matter during this change of state? What happens to the particles of matter during the change of states? How does this change of state take place? We need answers to these questions, isn t it? 1.4.1 EFFECT OF CHANGE OF TEMPERATURE Activity e Take about 150 g ofice in a beaker and suspend a laboratory thermometer so that its bulb is in contact with the ice, as in Fig. 1.6. Burner Thermometer Glass stirrer = (b) Fig. 1.6: (a) Conversion of ice to water, (b) conversion of water to water vapour SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 e Start heating the beaker on a low flame. e Note the temperature when the ice starts melting. e Note the temperature when all the ice has converted into water. e Record your observations for this conversion of solid to liquid state. e Now, put a glass rod in the beaker and heat while stirring till the water starts boiling. e Keep a careful eye on the thermometer reading till most of the water has vaporised. e Record your observations for the conversion of water in the liquid state to the gaseous state. On increasing the temperature of solids, the kinetic energy of the particles increases. Due to the increase in kinetic energy, the particles start vibrating with greater speed. The energy supplied by heat overcomes the forces of attraction between the particles. The particles leave their fixed positions and start moving more freely. A stage is reached when the solid melts and is converted to a liquid. The minimum temperature at which a solid melts to become a liquid at the atmospheric pressure is called its melting point. The melting point of a solid is an indication of the strength of the force of attraction between its particles. The melting point of ice is 273.15 K*. The process of melting, that is, change of solid state into liquid state is also known as fusion. When a solid melts, its temperature remains the same, so where does the heat energy go? You must have observed, during the experiment of melting, that the temperature of the system does not change after the melting point is reached, till all the ice melts. This happens even though we continue to heat the beaker, that is, we continue to supply heat. This heat gets used up in changing the state by overcoming the forces of attraction between the particles. As this heat energy is absorbed by ice without showing any rise in temperature, it is considered that it gets hidden into