attraction between the particles are maximum in solids, intermediate in liquids and minimum in gases. e The spaces in between the constituent particles and kinetic energy of the particles are minimum in the case of solids, intermediate in liquids and maximum in gases. SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 MATTER IN OUR SURROUNDINGS The arrangement of particles is most ordered in the case of solids, in the case of liquids layers of particles can slip and slide over each other while for gases, there is no order, particles just move about randomly. The states of matter are inter-convertible. The state of matter can be changed by changing temperature or pressure. Sublimation is the change of solid state directly to gaseous state without going through liquid state. Deposition is the change of gaseous state directly to solid state without going through liquid state. Boiling is a bulk phenomenon. Particles from the bulk (whole) of the liquid change into vapour state. Evaporation is a surface phenomenon. Particles from the surface gain enough energy to overcome the forces of attraction present in the liquid and change into the vapour state. The rate of evaporation depends upon the surface area exposed to the atmosphere, the temperature, the humidity and the wind speed. Evaporation causes cooling. Latent heat of vaporisation is the heat energy required to change 1 kg of a liquid to gas at atmospheric pressure at its boiling point. Latent heat of fusion is the amount of heat energy required to change 1 kg of solid into liquid at its melting point. Some measurable quantities and their units to remember: kelvin K metre m kilogram kg newton N cubic metre m? kilogram per cubic metre kg m? pascal Pa Reprint 2025-26 MO Exercises . Convert the following temperatures to the celsius scale. (a) 293 K (b) 470 K . Convert the following temperatures to the kelvin scale. (a) 25 C (b) 373 C . Give reason for the following observations. (a) Naphthalene balls disappear with time without leaving any solid. (b) We can get the smell of perfume sitting several metres away. . Arrange the following substances in increasing order of forces of attraction between the particles water, sugar, oxygen. . What is the physical state of water at (a) 25 C (b) O C (c) 100 C ? . Give two reasons to justify (a) water at room temperature is a liquid. (b) an iron almirah is a solid at room temperature. . Why is ice at 273 K more effective in cooling than water at the same temperature? . What produces more severe burns, boiling water or steam? . Name A,B,C,D,E and F in the following diagram showing change in its state SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 Group Activity Prepare a model to demonstrate movement of particles in solids, liquids and gases. For making this model you will need A transparent jar e A big rubber balloon or piece of stretchable rubber sheet A string e Few chickpeas or black gram or dry green peas. How