Chapter 1 As we look at our surroundings, we see a large variety of things with different shapes, sizes and textures. Everything in this universe is made up of material which scientists have named matter . The air we breathe, the food we eat, stones, clouds, stars, plants and animals, even a small drop of water or a particle of sand every thing is matter. We can also see as we look around that all the things mentioned above occupy space and have mass. In other words, they have both mass* and volume**. Since early times, human beings have been trying to understand their surroundings. Early Indian philosophers classified matter in the form of five basic elements the Panch Tatva air, earth, fire, sky and water. According to them everything, living or nonliving, was made up of these five basic elements. Ancient Greek philosophers had arrived at a similar classification of matter. Modern day scientists have evolved two types of classification of matter based on their physical properties and chemical nature. In this chapter we shall learn about matter based on its physical properties. Chemical aspects of matter will be taken up in subsequent chapters. 1.1 Physical Nature of Matter 1.1.1 MATTER IS MADE UP OF PARTICLES For a long time, two schools of thought prevailed regarding the nature of matter. One school believed matter to be continuous like a block of wood, whereas, the other thought that matter was made up of particles like sand. Let us perform an activity to decide about the nature of matter is it continuous or particulate? * The SI unit of mass is kilogram (kg). 0964CHOi MATTER IN OuR SURROUNDINGS Activity __ Take a 100 mL beaker. Fill half the beaker with water and mark the level of water. e Dissolve some salt/ sugar with the help of a glass rod. Observe any change in water level. What do you think has happened to the salt? e Where does it disappear? Does the level of water change? In order to answer these questions we need to use the idea that matter is made up of particles. What was there in the spoon, salt or sugar, has now spread throughout water. This is illustrated in Fig. 1.1. Particles of water magnified millions of times Fig. 1.1: When we dissolve salt in water, the particles of salt get into the spaces between particles of water. 1.1.2 How SMALL ARE THESE PARTICLES OF MATTER? e Take 2-3 crystals of potassium permanganate and dissolve them in 100 mL of water. ** The SI unit of volume is cubic metre (m ). The common unit of measuring volume is litre (L) such that 1L = 1 dm , 1L = 1000 mL, 1 mL = 1 cm . Reprint 2025-26 e Take out approximately 10 mL of this solution and put it into 90 mL of clear water. Take out 10 mL of this solution and put it into another 90 mL of clear water. Keep diluting the