the Celsius scale to the Kelvin scale you have to add 273 to the given temperature. MATTER IN OUR SURROUNDINGS Reprint 2025-26 are some that change directly from solid state to gaseous state and vice versa without changing into the liquid state. Activity Take some camphor. Crush it and put it in a china dish. Put an inverted funnel over the china dish. e Put a cotton plug on the stem of the funnel, as shown in Fig. 1.7. Cotton plug Inverted funnel Camphor vapours Camphor solidified China dish Burner Fig. 1.7: Sublimation of camphor e Now, heat slowly and observe. e What do you infer from the above activity? Achange of state directly from solid to gas without changing into liquid state is called sublimation and the direct change of gas to solid without changing into liquid is called deposition. 1.4.2 EFFECT OF CHANGE OF PRESSURE We have already learnt that the difference in various states of matter is due to the difference in the distances between the constituent particles. What will happen when we start putting pressure and compress a gas enclosed in a cylinder? Will the particles come closer? Do you think that increasing or decreasing the pressure can change the state of matter? Piston Piston Piston Cylinder Cylinder Cylinder > > Fig. 1.8: By applying pressure, particles of matter can be brought close together Applying pressure and reducing temperature can liquefy gases. Have you heard of solid carbon dioxide (CO,)? It is stored under high pressure. Solid CO, gets converted directly into gaseous state on decrease of pressure to 1 atmosphere* without coming into liquid state. This is the reason that solid carbon dioxide is also known as dry ice. Thus, we can say that pressure and temperature determine the state of a substance, whether it will be solid, liquid or gas. Liquid Sublimation : Deposition Fig. 1.9: Interconversion of the three states of matter * atmosphere (atm) is a unit of measuring pressure exerted by a gas. The unit of pressure is Pascal (Pa): 1 atmosphere = 1.01 x 10 Pa. The pressure of air in atmosphere is called atmospheric pressure. The atmospheric pressure at sea level is 1 atmosphere, and is taken as the normal atmospheric pressure. SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 uestions 1. Convert the following temperature to celsius scale: a. 300 K b. 573K 2. What is the physical state of water at: a. 250 C b. 100 C ? 3. For any substance, why does the temperature remain constant during the change of state? 4. Suggest a method to liquefy atmospheric gases. 1.5 Evaporation Do we always need to heat or change pressure for changing the state of matter? Can you quote some examples from everyday life where change of state from liquid to vapour takes place without the liquid reaching the boiling point? Water, when left uncovered, slowly changes into vapour. Wet clothes dry up. What happens to water in the above two examples? We know that particles of matter are always