together? The above three activities (1.6, 1.7 and 1.8) suggest that particles of matter have force acting between them. This force keeps the particles together. The strength of this force of attraction varies from one kind of matter to another. uestions 1. Which of the following are matter? Chair, air, love, smell, hate, almonds, thought, cold, lemon water, smell of perfume. 2. Give reasons for the following observation: The smell of hot sizzling food reaches you several metres away, but to get the smell from cold food you have to go close. 3. A diver is able to cut through water in a swimming pool. Which property of matter does this observation show? 4. What are the characteristics of the particles of matter? Reprint 2025-26 1.3 States of Matter Observe different types of matter around you. What are its different states? We can see that matter around us exists in three different states- solid, liquid and gas. These states of matter arise due to the variation in the characteristics of the particles of matter. Now, let us study about the properties of these three states of matter in detail. 1.3.1 THE SOLID STATE 1.9 Collect the following articles a pen, a book, a needle and a piece of wooden stick. Sketch the shape of the above articles in your notebook by moving a pencil around them. e Do all these have a definite shape, distinct boundaries and a fixed volume? e What happens if they are hammered, pulled or dropped? e Are these capable of diffusing into each other? e Try compressing them by applying force. Are you able to compress them? Activity All the above are examples of solids. We can observe that all these have a definite shape, distinct boundaries and fixed volumes, that is, have negligible compressibility. Solids have a tendency to maintain their shape when subjected to outside force. Solids may break under force but it is difficult to change their shape, so they are rigid. Consider the following: (a) What about a rubber band, can it change its shape on stretching? Is it a solid? (b) What about sugar and salt? When kept in different jars these take the shape of the jar. Are they solid? (c) What about a sponge? It is a solid yet we are able to compress it. Why? All the above are solids as: e A rubber band changes shape under force and regains the same shape when the force is removed. If excessive force is applied, it breaks. e The shape of each individual sugar or salt crystal remains fixed, whether we take it in our hand, put it ina plate or in a jar. e A sponge has minute holes, in which air is trapped, when we press it, the air is expelled out and we are able to compress it. 1.3.2 THE LIQUID STATE Activity e Collect the following: (a) water, cooking oil, milk, juice, a cold drink. (b) containers of different shapes. Put a 50 mL