colour of ink to spread evenly throughout the water? Activity 15 e Drop a crystal of copper sulphate or potassium permanganate into a glass of hot water and another containing cold water. Do not stir the solution. Allow the crystals to settle at the bottom. What do you observe just above the solid crystal in the glass? e What happens as time passes? What does this suggest about the particles of solid and liquid? Does the rate of mixing change with temperature? Why and how? From the above three activities (1.3, 1.4 and 1.5), we can conclude the following: SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 Particles of matter are continuously moving, that is, they possess what we call the kinetic energy. As the temperature rises, particles move faster. So, we can say that with increase in temperature the kinetic energy of the particles also increases. In the above three activities we observe that particles of matter intermix on their own with each other. They do so by getting into the spaces between the particles. This intermixing of particles of two different types of matter on their own is called diffusion. We also observe that on heating, diffusion becomes faster. Why does this happen? 1.2.3 PARTICLES OF MATTER ATTRACT EACH OTHER Activity e Play this game in the field make four groups and form human chains as suggested: e The first group should hold each other from the back and lock arms like Idu-Mishmi dancers (Fig. 1.3). Fig. 1.3 e The second group should hold hands to form a human chain. e The third group should form a chain by touching each other with only their finger tips. e Now, the fourth group of students should run around and try to break the three human chains one by one _ into as many small groups as possible. e Which group was the easiest to break? Why? MATTER IN OUR SURROUNDINGS e If we consider each student as a particle of matter, then in which group the particles held each other with the maximum force? Activity e Take an iron nail, a piece of chalk and a rubber band. e Try breaking them by hammering, cutting or stretching. e In which of the above three substances do you think the particles are held together with greater force? Activity Take some water in a container, try cutting the surface of water with your fingers. e Were you able to cut the surface of water? e What could be the reason behind the surface of water remaining together? The above three activities (1.6, 1.7 and 1.8) suggest that particles of matter have force acting between them. This force keeps the particles together. The strength of this force of attraction varies from one kind of matter to another. uestions 1. Which of the following are matter? Chair, air, love, smell, hate, almonds, thought, cold, lemon water, smell of perfume. 2. Give reasons for the following observation: The smell of hot sizzling food reaches you several metres away, but