The shape of each individual sugar or salt crystal remains fixed, whether we take it in our hand, put it ina plate or in a jar. e A sponge has minute holes, in which air is trapped, when we press it, the air is expelled out and we are able to compress it. 1.3.2 THE LIQUID STATE Activity e Collect the following: (a) water, cooking oil, milk, juice, a cold drink. (b) containers of different shapes. Put a 50 mL mark on these containers using a measuring cylinder from the laboratory. e What will happen if these liquids are spilt on the floor? e Measure 50 mL of any one liquid and transfer it into different containers one by one. Does the volume remain the same? e Does the shape of the liquid remain the same ? e When you pour the liquid from one container into another, does it flow easily? We observe that liquids have no fixed shape but have a fixed volume. They take up the shape of the container in which they are kept. Liquids flow and change shape, so they are not rigid but can be called fluid. Refer to activities 1.4 and 1.5 where we saw that solids and liquids can diffuse into liquids. The gases from the atmosphere diffuse and dissolve in water. These gases, especially oxygen and carbon dioxide, are essential for the survival of aquatic animals and plants. All living creatures need to breathe for survival. The aquatic animals can breathe under water due to the presence of dissolved oxygen in water. Thus, we may conclude that solids, liquids and gases can diffuse into liquids. The rate of diffusion of liquids is SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 higher than that of solids. This is due to the fact that in the liquid state, particles move freely and have greater space between each other as compared to particles in the solid state. 1.3.3 THE GASEOUS STATE Have you ever observed a balloon seller filling a large number of balloons from a single cylinder of gas? Enquire from him how many balloons is he able to fill from one cylinder. Ask him which gas does he have in the cylinder. Activity e Take three 100 mL syringes and close their nozzles by rubber corks, as shown in Fig.1.4. e Remove the pistons from all the syringes. Leaving one syringe untouched, fill water in the second and pieces of chalk in the third. e Insert the pistons back into the syringes. You may apply some vaseline on the pistons before inserting them into the syringes for their smooth movement. e Now, try to compress the content by pushing the piston in each syringe. a Piston = MY Gas i a Rubber cork Fig. 1.4 e What do you observe? In which case was the piston easily pushed in? e What do you infer from your observations? MATTER IN OUR SURROUNDINGS We have observed that gases are highly compressible as compared to solids and liquids. The liquefied