Ratio Figure 8.4 @ RR yy YY Ir (round, green) (wrinkled, yellow) y t x? On Rr Yy (round, yellow) Oo.* .v Rr Yy Rr Yy Fl Fl ve Qe Oe 2ee9 @ a : z ) wa 5 & 315 round, yellow 101 wrinkled, yellow 1e) 108 round, green @ 3 oO @ 32 wrinkled, green 556 seeds Figure 8.5 How do germ-cells make a single set of genes from the normal two Independent inheritance copies that all other cells in the body have? If progeny plants inherited a of two separate traits, single whole gene set from each parent, then the experiment explained shape and colour of seeds in Fig. 8.5 cannot work. This is because the two characteristics R and y would then be linked to each other and cannot be independently Heredity Reprint 2025-26 : Male Gametes Xs Y ) Offsprings K | Female Zygote Figure 8.6 Sex determination in human beings inherited. This is explained by the fact that each gene set is present, not as a single long thread of DNA, but as separate independent pieces, each called a chromosome. Thus, each cell will have two copies of each chromosome, one each from the male and female parents. Every germcell will take one chromosome from each pair and these may be of either maternal or paternal origin. When two germ cells combine, they will restore the normal number of chromosomes in the progeny, ensuring the stability of the DNA of the species. Such a mechanism of inheritance explains the results of the Mendel experiments, and is used by all sexually reproducing organisms. But asexually reproducing organisms also follow similar rules of inheritance. Can we work out how their inheritance might work? 8.2.4 Sex Determination We have discussed the idea that the two sexes participating in sexual reproduction must be somewhat different from each other for a number N Female of reasons. How is the sex of a newborn individual determined? Different species use very different strategies for this. Some rely entirely on environmental cues. Thus, in some animals like a few reptiles, the temperature at which fertilised eggs are kept determines whether the animals developing in the eggs will be male or female. In other animals, such as snails, individuals can change sex, indicating that sex is not genetically determined. However, in human beings, the sex of the individual is largely genetically determined. In other words, the genes inherited from our parents decide whether we will be boys or girls. But so far, we have assumed that similar gene sets are inherited from both parents. If that is the case, how can genetic inheritance determine sex? The explanation lies in the fact that all human chromosomes are not paired. Most human chromosomes have a maternal and a paternal copy, and we have 22 such pairs. But one pair, called the sex chromosomes, is odd in not always being a perfect pair. Women have a perfect pair of sex chromosomes, both called X. But men