count of individuals exhibiting a particular trait in each generation. This helped him to arrive at the laws of inheritance. Mendel used a number of contrasting visible characters of garden peas - round/wrinkled seeds, tall/short plants, white/violet flowers and so on. He took pea plants with different characteristics a tall plant and a short plant, produced progeny by crossing them, and calculated the percentages of tall or short progeny. In the first place, there were no halfway characteristics in this firstsenate or F1 progeny no medium-height plants. All plants were tall. This meant that only one of the parental traits was seen, not some mixture of the two. So the next question was, were the tall plants in the Fl generation exactly the same as the tall plants of the parent generation? Mendelian experiments test this > by getting both the parental plants and these F1 tall plants to reproduce by self-pollination. The progeny of the parental plants are, of course, all tall. However, the second-generation, or F2, progeny of the F 1 tall plants are not all tall. Instead, one quarter of them Fix Fl Fa are short. This indicates that both the tallness and shortness traits were inherited in the F1 plants, but only the tallness trait was expressed. This led Mendel _ Tall x Short All tal ne (TT) (tt) to propose that two copies of factor (now called genes) controlling traits are present in sexually reproducing organism. These two may be identical, or may be Tall x Tall rn ei. A different, depending on the parentage. A pattern of (Tt) (Tt) cn) Tt ttt inheritance can be worked out with this assumption, as shown in Fig. 8.3. Figure 8.3 Inheritance of traits over two generations Activity 8.2 = In Fig. 8.3, what experiment would we do to confirm that the F2 generation did in fact have a 1:2:1 ratio of TT, Tt and tt trait combinations? In this explanation, both TT and Tt are tall plants, while only ttis a short plant. In other words, a single copy of T is enough to make the plant tall, while both copies have to be t for the plant to be short. Traits like T are called dominant traits, while those that behave like t are called recessive traits. Work out which trait would be considered dominant and which one recessive in Fig. 8.4. 130 Science Reprint 2025-26 What happens when pea plants showing two different characteristics, rather than just one, are bred with each other? What do the progeny of a tall plant with round seeds and a short plant with wrinkled-seeds look like? They are all tall and have round seeds. Tallness and round seeds are thus dominant traits. But what happens when these F1 progeny are used to generate F2 progeny by self-pollination? A Mendelian experiment will find that some F2 progeny are tall plants with round seeds, and some were short plants with wrinkled seeds. However, there would also be some F2 progeny that