proportional to the ratio of the volumes? and for customers. For reducing ecological footprint, what would you recommend to the company and to the customer? Does the same occur for other products? Make similar tables for other products in the market, capturing different prices for different measures of the same product, e.g., rice or atta (flour). ] | | Discuss the pros and cons of different size bottles for the company Gra) Talk Observe the products for which the prices are proportional to the different measures. Discuss in class the proportionality of prices to measures of the same product. pee ee we ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee eee eB ee ee ee eee eee ee ee Ee KH HK Note to the Teacher: Give a project to students. Start by dividing the class into | groups. Each group should go to one shop and collect prices for different measures ! of the same product. For example, they should note down the prices of 500 g of | rice, 1 kg of rice, and 10 kg of rice. They should make tables with measure sizes and | prices, and present them to the rest of the class. They should discuss if the prices are proportional or not, and why. ; 7.5 Sharing, but Not Equally! @ Activity 3: Form a pair. Collect 12 countable objects or counters (it can be coins, seeds, or pebbles). Now, share them between the two of you in different ways. (?) If you divide them equally, what is the ratio of the number of counters with each of you? Each of you will get 6 counters. So, the ratio is 6: 6, or 1: 1 in its simplest form. Now let us not share equally. If your partner gets 5 counters, how many objects will you get? What is the ratio of the counters? Proportional Reasoning-1 The ratio of the counters of your partner to yours is 5: 7. (?) Now, if you want to share the counters between the two of you in the ratio of 3: 1, how many counters would each of you get? Share the counters in different ways and see which combination is in the ratio 3:1. One way to share the counters in the ratio of 3: 1 is as follows 1. Your partner takes 3 counters and you take 1 counter. There are now 8 counters left. 2. Your partner takes 3 more counters and you take 1 more counter. There are now 4 counters left. 3. Your partner takes 3 more counters and you take 1 more counter. There are no more counters left. So, your partner gets 9 counters in total and you get 3 counters. When we divide 12 counters in the ratio of 3 : 1 between two people, one gets 9 counters and the other gets 3 counters. 12 fo The whole is 12 AN The whole is 4 (= 3 + 1) Sharing 12 . in the