in length. Nitin used 3 bags of cement but Hari used only 2 bags of cement. Nitin was worried that the wall Hari built would not be as strong as the wall he built because she used less cement. (?) Is Nitin correct in his thinking? In Nitin and Hari s case, we should compare the ratio of the length of the wall to the bags of cement used by each of them and see whether they are proportional. The ratio in Nitin s case is 60 : 3, i.e., 20: 1 (in its simplest form). The ratio in Hari s case is 40: 2, i.e., 20 : 1 (in its simplest form). Since both ratios are proportional, the walls are equally strong. Nitin should not worry! Example 4: In my school, there are 5 teachers and 170 students. The ratio of teachers to students in my school is 5 : 170. Count the number of teachers and students in your school. What is the ratio of teachers to students in your school? Write it below. (?) Is the teacher-to-student ratio in your school proportional to the one in my school? Example 5: Measure the width and height (to the nearest cm) of the blackboard in your classroom. What is the ratio of width to height of the blackboard? (?) Can you draw a rectangle in your notebook whose width and height are proportional to the ratio of the blackboard? (?) Compare the rectangle you have drawn to those drawn by your Ci classmates. Do they all look the same? Talk peer ee ee ee ew ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee eee ee ee eH Note to the Teacher: Give more such examples that students can relate to and ask them to give reasons why they think they are correct. Engaging with these problems and finding solutions through a process of proportional reasoning should go along with learning procedures and methods to solve the problems. Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 2 Example 6: When Neelima was 3 years old, her mother s age was 10 times her age. What is the ratio of Neelima s age to her mother s age? What would be the ratio of their ages when Neelima is 12 years old? Would it remain the same? The ratio of Neelima s age to her mother s age when Neelima is 3 years old is 3 : 30 (her mother s age is 10 times Neelima s age). In the simplest form, it is 1: 10. When Neelima is 12 years old (i.e., 9 years later), the ratio of their ages will be 12 : 39 (9 years later, her mother would be 39 years old). In the simplest form, it is 4: 13. When we add (or subtract) the same number from the terms of a ratio, the ratio changes and is not necessarily proportional to the original ratio. 2 Example 7: Fill in the