For your height, if your neck and the rest of the body also had this ratio, how tall would your neck be? 5. Let us try an ancient problem from Lilavati. At that n) time weights were measured in a unit named palas and niskas was a unit of money. If 2 : palas of saffron Proportional Reasoning-1 costs : niskas, O expert businessman! tell me quickly what quantity of saffron can be bought for 9 niskas? 6. Harmain is a 1-year-old girl. Her elder brother is 5 years old. What will be Harmain s age when the ratio of her age to her brother s age is 1:2? 7. The mass of equal volumes of gold and water are in the ratio 37: 2. If 1 litre of water is 1 kg in mass, what is the mass of 1 litre of gold? 8. It is good farming practice to apply 10 tonnes of cow manure for 1 acre of land. A farmer is planning to grow tomatoes in a plot of size 200 ft by 500 ft. How much manure should he buy? (Please refer to the section on Unit Conversions earlier in this chapter). 9. Atap takes 15 seconds to fill a mug of water. The volume of the mug is 500 mL. How much time does the same tap take to fill a bucket of water if the bucket has a 10-litre capacity? 10. One acre of land costs 15,00,000. What is the cost of 2,400 square feet of the same land? 11. A tractor can plough the same area of a field 4 times faster than a pair of oxen. A farmer wants to plough his 20-acre field. A pair of oxen takes 6 hours to plough an acre of land. How much time would it take if the farmer used a pair of oxen to plough the field? How much time would it take him if he decides to use a tractor instead? 12. The <%10coinis an alloy of copper andnickelcalled cupro-nickel . Copper and nickel are mixed ina 3: 1 ratio to get this alloy. The mass of the coin is 7.74 grams. If the cost of copper is 906 per iy kg and the cost of nickel is 1,341 per kg, what is the cost of ' these metals in a %10 coin? = Ratios in the form of a: b indicate that for every a unit of the first quantity, there are b units of the second quantity. a and b are the terms in the ratio. Two ratios a : b and c : d are proportional (written a: b::c: d) if their terms change by the same factor, i.e., if ad = be. = If xis divided into two parts in the ratio m:n, then the quantity of the . xX . . xX first part is m x Th and the quantity of the second part is n x a Binairo Binairo, also known as Takuzu, is a