PROPORTIONAL REASONING-1 > q : oB7aCHO7 eh > a vat * % 4. e oe} Sr Sea Sem Seay Seay Seay Se Say ray Seay Sa Say Seay Wg) go) ao) go) og) gh oh oho o Oa et lel he ll See ae ant eat deat dead dad dead dt De dt Dd dd dt 7.1 Observing Similarity in Change We are all familiar with digital images. We often change the size and orientation of these images to suit our needs. Observe the set of images below Image D We can see that all the images are of different sizes. 2?) Which images look similar and which ones look different? Images (A, C, and D) look similar, even though they have different sizes. Chapter 7.indd 159 10-07-2025 15:14:27 Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 (?) Do images B and E look like the other three images? No, they are slightly distorted. The tiger appears elongated in B, and compressed and fatter in E! (?) Why? You may notice that images A, C, and D are rectangular, but E is I 4 52, square. Maybe that is why E looks different. But Bis alsoarectangle! (wat), Why does it look different from the other rectangular images? Talk Can we observe any pattern to answer this question? Perhaps by measuring the rectangles? Image Width Gin mm) | Height Gn mm) a a ~imageD 8) er oe ee (?) What makes images A, C, and D appear similar, and B and E different? When we compare image A with C, we notice that the width of C is half that of A. The height is also half of A. Both the width and height have changed by the same factor (through multiplication), : in this case. Since the widths and heights have changed by the same factor, the images look similar. When we compare image A with image B, we notice that the width of B is 20 millimetre (mm) less than that of A. The height too is 20 mm less than the height of A. Even though the difference (through subtraction) is the same, the images look different. Have the width and height changed by the same factor? The height of B is half the height of A. But the width of B is not half the width of A. Since the width and height have not changed by the same factor, the images look different. (?) Can you check by what factors the width and height of image D change as compared to image A? Are the factors the same? Images A, C, and D look similar because their widths and heights have changed by the same factor. We say that the changes to their widths and heights are proportional. Proportional Reasoning-1 7.2 Ratios We use the notion of a ratio to represent such proportional relationships in mathematics. We can say that the ratio of width to height of image A is 60 : 40. The numbers 60 and 40 are