80: ? (?) What is the factor of change in the first term? We can find that by dividing the terms an = 5. The number of students is reduced by a factor of 4. On multiplying the weight of rice by the same factor, we get, 15 x= 10. So, the cook should make 10 kg of rice on that day. The situation above is a typical example of a problem where we need to use proportional reasoning to find a solution. Four quantities are Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 linked proportionally, out of which three are known and we must find the fourth, unknown, quantity. To solve such problems, we can model two proportional ratios using algebraic notation as a:b:c:d. For these two ratios to be proportional, we know that term c should be a multiple of term a by a factor, say f, and term d should be a multiple of term b by the same factor f- So, c=fa _...(4) d=fb _ ...(2) From (1) and (2), we can say that, f= & anaf=$. c_d Therefore, ap Multiplying both sides by ab, we get, ab x < = ab x abx& -abx4 bc = ad or ad = bc Thus, when a:b::c:d, then ad= bc. This is known as cross multiplication of terms. Since ad = bc, we can show that _ be d=". Two ratios are proportional if their terms are equal when cross multiplied. The fourth unknown quantity can be found through such cross multiplication. In ancient India, Aryabhata (199 CE) and others called such problems of proportionality Rule of Three problems. There were 3 numbers given the pramana (measure a in our case), the phala (fruit b in our case), and the ichchha (requisition c in our case). To find the ichchhaphala (yield d in our case), Aryabhata says, Multiply the phala by the ichchha and divide the resulting product by the pramana. In other words, Aryabhata says, pramana : phala :: ichchha : ichchhaphala, therefore, pramana x ichchhaphala = phala x ichchhda. Proportional Reasoning-1 Thus, phala x ichchha pramana Using the cross multiplication method proposed by Aryabhata, ancient Indians solved complex problems that involved proportionality. ichchhaphala = Example 9: A car travels 90 km in 150 minutes. If it continues at the same speed, what distance will it cover in 4 hours? If it continues at the same speed, the ratio of the time taken should be proportional to the ratio of the distance covered. 150:90::4:? (?) Is this the right way to formulate the question? No, because 150 is in minutes, but 4 is in hours. The second ratio should use the same units for time as the first ratio. Since 4 hours is 240 minutes, the right form is 150: 90:: 240: ? (?) How can you find the distance covered in 240 minutes? Discuss with your classmates and find the answer using different strategies. Note to the Teacher: Instead of giving one method to solve the problem of the