of GVA and other information relating to the Indian economy. For evaluation purposes, particularly to develop the analytical ability of learners, teachers can refer to this report through the Internet to get data for different years. Due to change in methodology, latest data is not used in the chapter. The employment figures are based on data taken from the five-yearly surveys on employment and unemployment conducted by the National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO) now known as National Statistical Office (NSO). NSO is an organisation under the Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, Government of India. The website you can log onto is: http:/mospi.gov.in. Employment data is also available from other sources such as Census of India. UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Reprint 2025-26 SECTORS oF THE INDIAN ECONOMY Let us look at these pictures. You will find that people are engaged in various economic activities. Some of these are activities producing goods. Some others are producing services. These activities are happening around us every minute even as we speak. How do we understand these activities? One way of doing this is to group them (classify them) using some important criterion. These groups are also called sectors. ie ~ ett Tet ie We begin by looking at different kind of economic activities. There are many activities that are undertaken by directly using natural resources. Take, for example, the cultivation of cotton. It takes place within a crop season. For the growth of the cotton plant, we depend mainly, but not entirely, on natural factors like rainfall, sunshine and climate. The product of this activity, cotton, is a natural product. Similarly, in the case of an activity like dairy, we are dependent on the biological process of Primary Tertiary (Service) Sector the animals and availability of fodder etc. The product here, milk, also is a natural product. Similarly, minerals AD and ores are also natural ro ae products. When we produce a good by exploiting natural resources, it is an activity of the primary sector. Why primary? This is because it forms the base for all other products that we subsequently make. Since most of the natural products we get are from agriculture, dairy, fishing, forestry, this sector is also called agriculture and related sector. produces natural goods helps to develop Secondary |) other sectors (Industrial) Sector ABS & de KL The secondary sector covers activities in which natural products are changed into other forms through ways of manufacturing that we associate with industrial activity. It is the next step after primary. The product is not produced by nature but has to be made and therefore some process of manufacturing is essential. This could be in a factory, a workshop or at home. For example, using cotton fibre from the plant, we A produces manufactured goods spin yarn and weave cloth. Using sugarcane as a raw material, we make sugar or gur. We convert earth into bricks and use bricks to make houses and buildings. Since this sector gradually became associated with the different