as during some seasons, some people may be asked to leave. A lot also depends on the whims of the employer. This sector includes a large number of people who are employed on their own doing small jobs such as selling on the street or doing repair work. Similarly, farmers work on their own and hire labourers as and when they require. In contrast, Kamal works in the unorganised sector. The unorganised sector is characterised by small and scattered units which are largely outside the control of the government. There are rules and regulations but these are not followed. Jobs here are LET S WORK THESE OUT 1. Look at the following examples. Which of these are unorganised sector activities? (i) A teacher taking classes in a school (ii) A headload worker carrying a bag of cement on his back in a market (iii) A farmer irrigating her field (iv) A doctor in a hospital treating a patient (v) A daily wage labourer working under a contractor (vi) A factory worker going to work in a big factory (vii) A handloom weaver working in her house 2. Talk to someone who has a regular job in the organised sector and another who works in the unorganised sector. Compare and contrast their working conditions in all aspects. 3. How would you distinguish between organised and unorganised sectors? Explain in your own words. 4. The table below shows the estimated number of workers in India in the organised and unorganised sectors in the late 1990s. Read the table carefully. Fill in the missing data and answer the questions that follow. TABLE 2.3 WORKERS IN DIFFERENT SECTORS (IN MILLIONS) | Sector | Organised | __Unorganised | Total Primary 8 Total " What is the percentage of people in the unorganised sector in agriculture? "Do you agree that agriculture is an unorganised sector activity? Why? " If we look at the country as a whole, we find that % of the workers in India are in the unorganised sector. Organised sector employment is available to only about - % of the workers in India. SECTORS OF THE INDIAN ECONOMY SS Reprint 2025-26 How to Protect Workers in the Unorganised Sector? The organised sector offers jobs that are the most sought-after. But the employment opportunities in the organised sector have been expanding very slowly. It is also common to find many organised sector enterprises in the unorganised sector. They adopt such strategies to evade taxes and refuse to follow laws that protect labourers. As a result, a large number of workers are forced to enter the unorganised sector jobs, which pay a very low salary. They are often exploited and not paid a fair wage. Their earnings are low and not regular. These jobs are not secure and have no other benefits. Since the 1990s, it is also common to see a large number of workers losing their jobs in the organised sector. These workers are forced to take up jobs in the unorganised sector