hospitals, private schools, professional training etc. You can see this change quite sharply in cities, especially in big cities. Fourth, over the past decade or so, certain new services such as those based on information and communication technology have become important and essential. The production of these services has been rising rapidly. In Chapter 4, we shall see examples of these new services and the reasons for their expansion. However, you must remember that not all of the service sector is growing equally well. Service sector in India employs many different kinds of people. At one end there are a limited number of services that employ highly skilled and educated workers. At the other end, there are a very large number of workers engaged in services such as small shopkeepers, repair persons, transport persons, etc. These people barely manage to earn a living and yet they perform these services because no alternative opportunities for work are available to them. Hence, only a part of this sector is growing in importance. You shall read more about this in the next section. Where are most of the people employed? Graph 2 presents percentage share of the three sectors in GVA. Now you can directly see the changing importance of the sectors over the forty years. Graph 2: Share of Sectors in GVA 1977-78 mPrimary Secondary Tertiary A remarkable fact about India is that while there has been a change in the share of the three sectors in GVA, a similar shift has not taken place in employment. Graph 3 shows the share of employment in the three sectors in 1977-78 and 2017-18. The primary sector continues to be the largest employer even now. Graph 3 : Share of Sectors in Employment (%) 90 70 50 30 10 1977-78 2017-18 Why didn t a similar shift out of primary sector happen in case of employment? It is because not enough jobs were created in the secondary and tertiary sectors. Even SECTORS OF THE INDIAN ECONOMY Qi 2> Reprint 2025-26 @ Primary Secondary Tertiary though industrial output or the production of goods went up by more than nine times during the period, employment in the industry went up by around three times. The same applies to the tertiary sector as well. While production in the service sector rose by 14 times, employment in the service sector rose around five times. As aresult, more than half of the workers in the country are working in the primary sector, mainly in agriculture, producing only about one sixth of the GVA. In contrast to this, the secondary and tertiary sectors produce the rest of the produce whereas they employ less about half the people. Does this mean that the workers in agriculture are not producing as much as they could? What it means is that there are more people in agriculture than is necessary. So, even if you move a few people out, production will not be affected. In other words, workers in the agricultural sector are