sixth of the GVA. In contrast to this, the secondary and tertiary sectors produce the rest of the produce whereas they employ less about half the people. Does this mean that the workers in agriculture are not producing as much as they could? What it means is that there are more people in agriculture than is necessary. So, even if you move a few people out, production will not be affected. In other words, workers in the agricultural sector are underemployed. For instance, take the case ofa small farmer, Laxmi, owning about two hectares of unirrigated land dependent only on rain and growing crops, like jowarand arhar. All five members of her family work in the plot throughout the year. Why? They have nowhere else to go for work. You will see that everyone is working, none remains idle, but in actual fact, their labour effort gets divided. Each one is doing some work but no one is fully employed. This is the situation of underemployment, where people are apparently working but all of them are made to work less than their potential. This kind of Reprint 2025-26 underemployment is hidden in contrast to someone who does not have a job and is clearly visible as unemployed. Hence, it is also called disguised unemployment. Now, supposing a landlord, Sukhram, comes and hires one or two members of the family to work on his land. Laxmi s family is now able to earn some extra income through wages. Since you do not need five people to look after that small plot, two people moving out does not affect production on their farm. In the above example, two people may move to work in a factory. Once again the earnings of the family would increase and they would also continue to produce as much from their land. There are lakhs of farmers like Laxmi in India. This means that even if we remove a lot of people from agricultural sector and provide them with proper work elsewhere, agricultural production will not suffer. The incomes of the people who take up other work would increase the total family income. This underemployment can also happen in other sectors. For example there are thousands of casual workers in the service sector in urban areas who search for daily employment. They are employed as painters, plumbers, repair persons and others doing odd jobs. Many of them don t find work everyday. Similarly, we see other people of the service sector on the street pushing a cart or selling something where they may spend the whole day but earn very little. They are doing this work because they do not have better opportunities. 1). meee UNDERSTANDING Economic DEVELOPMENT LET S WORK THESE OUT 1. Complete the table using the data given in Graphs 2 and 3 and answer the question that follows. Ignore if data are not available for some years. TABLE 2.2 SHARE OF PRIMARY SECTOR IN GDP AND EMPLOYMENT Share in Gross Value Added (GVA)