or selling something where they may spend the whole day but earn very little. They are doing this work because they do not have better opportunities. 1). meee UNDERSTANDING Economic DEVELOPMENT LET S WORK THESE OUT 1. Complete the table using the data given in Graphs 2 and 3 and answer the question that follows. Ignore if data are not available for some years. TABLE 2.2 SHARE OF PRIMARY SECTOR IN GDP AND EMPLOYMENT Share in Gross Value Added (GVA) What are the changes that you observe in the primary sector over a span of forty years? 2. Choose the correct answer: Underemployment occurs when people (i) do not want to work 4) (ii) are working in a lazy manner (iii) are working less than what x of doing (iv) are not paid for their work 3. Compare and contrast the chang ndia with the pa m tha as observed for developed countries. What kind o betwee Cc ere desired but did not happen in India? NS 4. Why should we be worried about eremployment? Y Val ployment? How to Create More Employment? From the above discussion, we can see that there continues to be considerable underemployment in agriculture. There are also people who are not employed at all. In what ways can one increase employment for people? Let us look at some of them. Take the case of Laxmi with her two-hectare plot of unirrigated land. The government can spend some money or banks can provide a loan, to construct a well for her family to irrigate the land. Laxmi will then be able to irrigate her land and take a second crop, wheat, during the rabi season. Let us suppose that one hectare of wheat can provide employment to two people for 50 days (including sowing, watering, fertiliser SECTORS OF THE INDIAN ECONOMY yn Reprint 2025-26 Gur Making in Haryana application and harvesting). So, two more members of the family can be employed in her own field. Now suppose a new dam is constructed and canals are dug to irrigate many such farms. This could lead to a lot of employment generation within the agricultural sector itself reducing the problem of underemployment. Now, suppose Laxmi and other farmers produce much more than before. They would also need to sell some of this. For this they may be required to transport their products to a nearby town. If the government invests some money in transportation and storage of crops, or makes better rural roads so that mini-trucks reach everywhere several farmers like Laxmi, who now have access to water, can continue to grow and sell these crops. This activity can provide productive employment to not just farmers but also others such as those in services like transport or trade. Laxmi s need is not confined to water alone. To cultivate the land, she also needs seeds, fertilisers, agricultural equipment and pumpsets to draw water. Being a poor farmer, she cannot afford many of these. So, she will have to