activities into organised and unorganised and used the classification to look at employment in the two sectors. What was the most important conclusion that was derived from the classification exercises? What were the problems and solutions that were indicated? Can you summarise the information in the following table? TABLE 2.4 CLASSIFYING ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES Criteria used Most important Problems indicated and conclusion how they can be tackled Primary, Nature Secondary, of activity Organised, Unorganised Tertiary SECTORS IN TERMS OF OWNERSHIP: PUBLIC AND PRIVATE SECTORS Another way of classifying economic activities into sectors could be on the To get such services we have to pay money to these individuals and basis of who owns assets and is responsible for the delivery of services. In the public sector, the government owns most of the assets and provides all the services. In the private sector, ownership of assets and delivery of services is in the hands of private individuals or companies. Railways or post office is an example of the public sector whereas companies like Tata Iron and Steel Company Limited (TISCO) or Reliance Industries Limited (RIL) are privately owned. Activities in the private sector are guided by the motive to earn profits. companies. The purpose of the public sector is not just to earn profits. Governments raise money through taxes and other ways to meet expenses on the services rendered by it. Modern day governments spend on a whole range of activities. What are these activities? Why do governments spend on such activities? Let s find out. There are several things needed by the society as a whole but which the private sector will not provide at a reasonable cost. Why? Some of these need spending large sums of money, which is beyond the capacity SECTORS OF THE INDIAN ECONOMY SSK Sn Reprint 2025-26 of the private sector. Also, collecting money from thousands of people who use these facilities is not easy. Even if they do provide these things they would charge a high rate for their use. Examples are construction of roads, bridges, railways, harbours, generating electricity, providing irrigation through dams etc. Thus, governments have to undertake such heavy spending and ensure that these facilities are available for everyone. There are some activities, which the government has to support. The private sector may not continue their production or business unless government encourages it. For example, selling electricity at the cost of generation may push up the costs of production of goods in many industries. Many units, especially small-scale units, might have to shut down. Government here steps in by producing and supplying electricity at rates which these industries can afford. Government has to bear part of the cost. Similarly, the Government in India buys wheat and rice from farmers at a fair price . This it stores in its godowns and sells at a lower price to consumers through ration shops. You have read about this in the chapter on Food Security in Class IX. The government has to bear some of