in the bracket: (i) Employment in the service sector increased to the same extent as production. (has / has not) (ii) Workers in the sector do not produce goods. (tertiary / agricultural) (iii) Most of the workers in the sector enjoy job security. (organised / unorganised) (iv) A proportion of labourers in India are working in the unorganised sector. (large / small) (v) Cotton is a product and cloth is a product. [natural /manufactured] (vi) The activities in primary, secondary and tertiary sectors are [independent / interdependent] 2. Choose the most appropriate answer. (a) The sectors are classified into public and private sector on the basis of: (i) employment conditions (ii) the nature of economic activity (iii) ownership of enterprises (iv) number of workers employed in the enterprise (b) Production of a commodity, mostly through the natural process, is an activity in sector. (i) primary (ii) secondary (iii) tertiary (iv) information technology (c) GDP is the total value of produced during a particular year. (i) all goods and services ii) all final goods and services (iii (iv all intermediate goods and services ) ) ) ) all intermediate and final goods and services (d) In terms of GVA the share of tertiary sector in 2017-18 is between per cent. i) 20 to 30 (ii) 30 to 40 (iii) 50 to 60 ) 60 to 70 (i (iv SECTORS OF THE INDIAN ECONOMY Reprint 2025-26 3. Match the following: Problems faced by farming sector Some possible measures 1. Unirrigated land (a) Setting up agro-based mills 2. Low prices for crops (b) Cooperative marketing societies 3. Debt burden (c) Procurement of food grains by government 4. No job in the off season (d) Construction of canals by the government ) 5. Compelled to sell their grains to (e) Banks to provide credit with low interest the local traders soon after harvest 4. Find the odd one out and say why. (i) Tourist guide, dhobi, tailor, potter (ii) Teacher, doctor, vegetable vendor, lawyer (iii) Postman, cobbler, soldier, police constable (iv) MTNL, Indian Railways, Air India, Jet Airways, All India Radio 5. A research scholar looked at the working people in the city of Surat and found the following. Place of work Nature of employment | Percentage of working people In offices and factories registered Organised with the government Own shops, office, clinics in marketplaces with formal license People working on the street, construction workers, domestic workers Working in small workshops usually not registered with the government Complete the table. What is the percentage of workers in the unorganised sector in this city? 6. Do you think the classification of economic activities into primary, secondary and tertiary is useful? Explain how. For each of the sectors that we came across in this chapter why should one focus on employment and GVA? Could there be other issues which should be examined? Discuss. Make a long list of all kinds of work that you find adults around you doing for a living. In what way can