Value Added (GVA) in place of the contribution of three sectors towards Gross Domestic Product to be at par with global practices. The GVA measures the contribution of three sectors of an economy after adjusting for taxes and subsidies. You will learn more about the GVA and the difference between GDP and GVA in higher classes. Here we will only understand how goods and services produced in these three sectors primary, secondary and _ tertiary sectors have changed. Historical Change in Sectors Besides, there were also transporters, administrators, army etc. However, at this stage, most of the goods produced were natural products from the primary sector and most people were also employed in this sector. Over a long time (more than hundred years), and especially because new methods of manufacturing were introduced, factories came up and started expanding. Those people who had earlier worked on farms now began to work in factories in large numbers. They were forced to do so as you read in history chapters. People began to use many more goods that were produced in factories at cheap rates. Secondary sector gradually became the most important in total production and employment. Hence, over time, a shift had taken place. This means that the importance of the sectors had changed. In the past 100 years, there has been a further shift from secondary to tertiary sector in developed countries. The service sector has become the most important in terms of total production. Most of the working people are also employed in the service sector. This is the general pattern observed in developed countries. What is the total production and employment in the three sectors in India? Over the years have there been changes similar to the pattern observed for the developed countries? We shall see in the next section. LET S WORK THESE OUT 1. What does the history of developed countries indicate about the shifts that have taken place between sectors? Generally, it has been noted from the histories of many, now developed, countries that at initial stages of development, primary sector was the most 2 . Correct and arrange the important aspects for calculating important sector of economic activity. GDP from this Jumble. To count goods and services we add the numbers that are produced. We count all those that were produced in the last five years. Since we shouldn t leave out anything we add up all these goods and services. As the methods of farming changed and agriculture sector began to prosper, it produced much more food than before. Many people could now take up other activities. There were increasing number 3. of craft-persons and traders. Buying and selling activities increased many times. Discuss with your teacher how you could calculate the total value of a good or service by using the method of value added at each stage. SECTORS OF THE INDIAN ECONOMY x Sn Reprint 2025-26 PRIMARY, SECONDARY AND TERTIARY SECTORS IN INDIA Graph 1 shows the production of goods and Graph