result, a large number of workers are forced to enter the unorganised sector jobs, which pay a very low salary. They are often exploited and not paid a fair wage. Their earnings are low and not regular. These jobs are not secure and have no other benefits. Since the 1990s, it is also common to see a large number of workers losing their jobs in the organised sector. These workers are forced to take up jobs in the unorganised sector with low earnings. Hence, besides the need for more work, there is also a need for protection and support of the workers in the unorganised sector. Pius SS Reprint 2025-26 o> Who are these vulnerable people who need protection? In the rural areas, the unorganised sector mostly comprises of landless agricultural labourers, small and marginal farmers, sharecroppers and artisans (such as weavers, blacksmiths, carpenters and goldsmiths). Nearly 80 per cent of rural households in India are in small and marginal farmer category. These farmers need to be supported through adequate facility for timely delivery of seeds, agricultural inputs, credit, storage facilities and marketing outlets. In the urban areas, unorganised sector comprises mainly of workers in small-scale industry, casual workers in construction, trade and transport etc., and those who work as street vendors, head load workers, garment makers, rag pickers etc. Small-scale industry also needs government s support for procuring raw material and marketing of output. The casual workers in both rural and urban areas need to be protected. We also find that majority of workers from scheduled castes, tribes and backward communities find themselves in the unorganised sector. Besides getting the irregular and low paid work, these workers also face social discrimination. Protection and support to the unorganised sector workers is thus necessary for both economic and social development. _. When factories close down, many once regular workers are found selling goods or pushing a cart or +... doing some other odd job UNDERSTANDING ECONomic DEVELOPMENT LET S RECALL With so many activities taking place around us, one needs to use the process of classification to think in a useful manner. The criterion for classification could be many depending on what we desire to find out. The process of classification helps to analyse a situation. In dividing the economic activities into three sectors primary, secondary, tertiary the criterion used was the nature of activity . On the basis of this classification, we were able to analyse the pattern of total production and employment in India. Similarly, we divided the economic activities into organised and unorganised and used the classification to look at employment in the two sectors. What was the most important conclusion that was derived from the classification exercises? What were the problems and solutions that were indicated? Can you summarise the information in the following table? TABLE 2.4 CLASSIFYING ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES Criteria used Most important Problems indicated and conclusion how they can be tackled Primary, Nature Secondary, of activity Organised, Unorganised Tertiary SECTORS IN TERMS OF OWNERSHIP: PUBLIC