the value of goods and services in the three sectors are calculated, and then added up. Remember, there is one precaution one has to take. Not every good (or service) that is produced and sold needs to be counted. It makes sense only to include the final goods and services. Take, ,. for instance, a farmer who sells wheat to a flour mill for Rs 20 per kg. The mill grinds the wheat and sells the flour to a biscuit company for Rs 25 per kg. The biscuit company uses the flour and things such as sugar and oil to make four packets of biscuits. It sells biscuits in the market to the consumers for Rs 80 (Rs 20 per packet). Biscuits are the final goods, i.e., goods that reach the consumers. Why are only final goods and services counted? In contrast to final goods, goods such as wheat and the wheat flour in this example are intermediate goods. Intermediate goods are used up in producing final goods and services. The value of final goods already includes the value of all the intermediate goods that are used in making the final good. Hence, the value of Rs 80 for the biscuits (final good) already includes the value of flour (Rs 25). Similarly, the value of all other intermediate goods ..BUT | SHOULD BE PAID THE would have been included. To count the value of the flour and FULL VALUE OF THE WHEAT wheat separately is therefore not correct because then we would THAT | FRODUCE be counting the value of the same things a number of times. First as wheat, then as flour and finally as biscuits. a ) ees UNDERSTANDING Economic DEVELOPMENT Reprint 2025-26 The value of final goods and services produced in each sector during a particular year provides the total production of the sector for that year. And the sum of production in the different sectors gives what is called the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of a country. It is the value of all final goods and services produced within a country during a particular year. GDP shows how big the economy is. In India, the mammoth task of measuring GDP is undertaken by a central government ministry. This Ministry, with the help of various government departments of all the Indian states and union territories, collects information relating to total volume of goods and services and their prices and then estimates the GDP. Recently Indian Government began to bring out the contribution of three sectors towards Gross Value Added (GVA) in place of the contribution of three sectors towards Gross Domestic Product to be at par with global practices. The GVA measures the contribution of three sectors of an economy after adjusting for taxes and subsidies. You will learn more about the GVA and the difference between GDP and GVA in higher classes. Here we will only understand how goods and services produced in these three sectors primary, secondary and _ tertiary sectors have changed. Historical Change