shut down. Government here steps in by producing and supplying electricity at rates which these industries can afford. Government has to bear part of the cost. Similarly, the Government in India buys wheat and rice from farmers at a fair price . This it stores in its godowns and sells at a lower price to consumers through ration shops. You have read about this in the chapter on Food Security in Class IX. The government has to bear some of the cost. In this way, the government supports both farmers and consumers. There are a large number of activities which are the primary responsibility of the government. The government must spend on these. Providing health and education facilities for all is one example. We have discussed some of these issues in the first chapter. Running proper schools and providing quality education, particularly elementary education, is the duty of the government. India size of illiterate population is one of the largest in the world. Similarly, we know that nearly half of India children are malnourished and a quarter of them are critically ill. We have read about Infant Mortality Rates. The infant mortality rate of Odisha (36) or Madhya Pradesh (43) is higher than some of the poorest regions of the world. Government also needs to pay attention to aspects of human development such as availability of safe drinking water, housing facilities for the poor and food and nutrition. It is also the duty of the government to take care of the poorest and most ignored regions of the country through increased spending in such areas. SUMMING UP In this chapter we have looked at ways of classifying economic activities into some meaningful groups. One way of doing this is to examine whether the activity relates to the primary, secondary or tertiary sectors. The data for India, for the last thirty years, shows that while goods and services produced in the tertiary sector contribute the most to GDP the employment remains in the primary sector. We have also seen what all can be done for increasing employment opportunities in the country. Another classification is to consider whether people are working in organised or unorganised sectors. Most people are working in the unorganised sectors and protection is necessary for them. We also looked at the difference between private and public activities, and why it is important for public activities to focus on certain areas. RY Ge UNDERSTANDING Economic DEVELOPMENT Reprint 2025-26 EXERCISES 1. Fill in the blanks using the correct option given in the bracket: (i) Employment in the service sector increased to the same extent as production. (has / has not) (ii) Workers in the sector do not produce goods. (tertiary / agricultural) (iii) Most of the workers in the sector enjoy job security. (organised / unorganised) (iv) A proportion of labourers in India are working in the unorganised sector. (large / small) (v) Cotton is a product and cloth is a product. [natural /manufactured] (vi) The activities in primary, secondary