mind 4 : her simpler dress. She was happy that everyone could get some new clothes. LET'S EXPLORE > Draw asimple tree of this family of seven members. > Why do you think Shalini s parents bought clothes for everyone? > What would you have done if you were in Shalini s place? That story was set in Kerala. Let us now travel northeast, to a village in Meghalaya. My name is Tenzing. I love the mountains we live in, though life is sometimes hard. My father runs a small grocery store. After my mother became busy in a local handicraft cooperative, making our _ beautiful traditional fabrics, wood carvings and other items for sale to tourists, my father joined in cleaning the house, taking care of our small vegetable garden 9 Family and Community @ Reprint 2025-26 chapter9.indd 141 & 03-02-2025 05:04:00 | Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy e chapter9.indd 142 and other household chores. Often, he helps my grandmother prepare food for us all. Grandmother always has all sorts of interesting stories to tell me, with humour and wisdom; no one seems to understand people better than her! Grandfather helps me with my homework and takes me to the school bus stop. He is also actively involved in social work in our colony and is always offering his help to others. For example, when there is a power failure in our area, he goes and registers a complaint at the nearby office. When our neighbours house got damaged in a storm, he collected some money from the whole neighbourhood to help with repairs. We are lucky that my parents can take care of our basic necessities like food and clothing. When any special expenses come up, I have often seen that they discuss them together. Mother says that we should always try to save some money for any unexpected needs that may arise in the future. Y THINK ABOUT IT Why does Tenzing s father consult his wife for special expenses? How do you feel about his participation in household chores? What roles do the grandparents fulfil? Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:04:00 | chapter9.indd 143 LET'S EXPLORE > Create a story of a family somewhere in India, where we see some family values practised. Share it with your class either through writing or drawing. > Stage a small drama with all your classmates around two or three families. The play you write could include some challenging situations that the families faced, and show how they are resolved. > Inthe stories of Shalini and Tenzing, we see examples of joint families. What do you think are the aspects of modern living that make some couples opt for a nuclear family (i.e., living apart from older generations or other relatives)? What could be some advantages as well as disadvantages of the two kinds of families? Community Families are connected not only within themselves, but also with other families and the people around them. Such a group of connected