has a role and responsibility towards other members. For instance, parents are responsible for raising their children to become happy individuals and responsible members of the society. But also, as children grow up, they take on more responsibilities in the home to help other family members whether parents or a sister or a brother, etc. Through daily practice, children learn to participate in the life of the household. In many homes, children also learn some of the traditions and practices their family has been following for generations. Reprint 2025-26 9 Family and Community 03-02-2025 05:03:59 | LET S EXPLORE mm Answer these questions and compare your answers with a few classmates: > Who in your family decides what is to be bought from the market? Who cooks food in your home? Who is the oldest person in your family? Who cleans the floor in your home? Who washes utensils in your house? VvuVV vv Who helps you to do your homework? Following our dharma, or doing our duty, has been an important principle of Indian culture. The family is also a school , where children learn important values such as ahimsa, dana (giving), seva (service) and tydga (sacrifice). Individuals in the family often give up their own needs to take care of the family s needs. @ Let us see one such story. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy Shalini lives with her family in a town in Kerala. Her father runs a small business and her mother is a teacher in a nearby school. Shalini has a younger brother. Her grandmother, Acchamma | Reprint 2025-26 chapter9.indd 140 & 03-02-2025 05:02:59 | (father s mother), Chittappa (father s brother or paternal uncle) and her Chitti (aunt or uncle's wife) live with them. They have a daughter, Shalini s cousin, who she calls Chinni. Shalini s uncle has just lost his job and her aunt is a homemaker. The whole family was preparing for the festival of Onam. Acchamma told Shalini s father that his brother was having financial difficulties, so they were not able to buy new clothes for the festival. When Shalini s parents took her and her brother shopping, they bought new clothes not only for themselves, but also for Chittappa, Chitti and Chinni. As a result, Shalini did not get the silk dress she had expected; she had to settle for a simple cotton one. Acchamma explained to Shalini that this is how families support each other and share what they have. Shalini did not mind 4 : her simpler dress. She was happy that everyone could get some new clothes. LET'S EXPLORE > Draw asimple tree of this family of seven members. > Why do you think Shalini s parents bought clothes for everyone? > What would you have done if you were in Shalini s place? That story was set in Kerala. Let us now travel northeast, to a village in Meghalaya. My name is Tenzing. I love the mountains we live in,