Family and Community CHAPTER Love and dharma are the flower and fruit of family life. Tiruvalluvar 1. Why is the family unit The Big ] important? Questions @ . What is a community and what is its role? = 0681CHO9 Family Almost all of us live in a family. The family is the fundamental and most ancient unit of any society. In Indian society today, there are several types of families from joint families to nuclear families. A joint family has several generations living together grandparents, parents, uncles and aunts, chapter9.indd 137 Examples of joint families Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:03:58 | Examples of nuclear families brothers, sisters and cousins. A nuclear family, on the other hand, is limited to a couple and their children, and sometimes one parent and children. LET'S EXPLORE > What types of families do you see in your neighbourhood? List the type with the number of households for each type. > Whattypes are more frequent? Why do you think this is so? > Asaclass activity, compare with your classmates findings and discuss. In English, there are not many terms to describe family relationships; we saw some of them in the first paragraph. Indian languages have many more terms. For example, in Hindi there is bua, tau, tal, chacha, mausi, nana, nani, and many more. Some languages, such as Tamil, also have | different terms for elder brother / sister or younger brother / sister. But what is the word for cousin in an Indian language? In most Indian languages, you will find that there is no such word! That is because cousins are only brothers and sisters . This emphasises the deep bonds among all the children in the family. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy Reprint 2025-26 chapter9.indd 138 & 03-02-2025 05:03:58 | chapter9.indd 139 LET'S EXPLORE > Makealist of all the members of your family you can think of, including a few distant relatives. List their terms in your mother tongue or regional language and try to find the equivalent in English. Two examples are below for Hindi: Term in Hindi mother's brother s daughter Rani ded (cousin) (among other possible meanings) Name Description / term in English father's younger brother (uncle) > Notice how, quite often, a single word in your mother tongue or regional language requires several words in English to give a precise definition. Roles and Responsibilities Relationships among family members are based on love, care, cooperation and interdependence. Cooperation means working together . Each member of the family has a role and responsibility towards other members. For instance, parents are responsible for raising their children to become happy individuals and responsible members of the society. But also, as children grow up, they take on more responsibilities in the home to help other family members whether parents or a sister or a brother, etc. Through daily practice, children learn to participate in the life of the household. In many homes, children also learn some of the traditions and practices