resolved. > Inthe stories of Shalini and Tenzing, we see examples of joint families. What do you think are the aspects of modern living that make some couples opt for a nuclear family (i.e., living apart from older generations or other relatives)? What could be some advantages as well as disadvantages of the two kinds of families? Community Families are connected not only within themselves, but also with other families and the people around them. Such a group of connected people may be called a community (there are other meanings for community , depending on the context). Members of a community come together for various reasons, like celebrating festivals and organising feasts, weddings and other events. In some villages, people come together to support each other with agricultural practices like land preparation, sowing and harvesting. Over time, communities often agreed upon some practices on the use of shared natural wealth and resources such as water, grazing lands and forest produce. This is the case with many tribal communities. To some extent, this remains the case in village communities in rural India today. Such practices we may call them rules , though they were rarely written down have provided communities a secure access to resources. But it also means that all families and Reprint 2025-26 9 Family and Community 03-02-2025 05:04:01 | individuals within the community have specific duties to perform. Otherwise, the community will not function smoothly. DON'T MISS OUT Year after year, the region around the town of Jhabua, in Madhya Pradesh, suffered from an acute water crisis. Following their halma (see facing page) tradition of coming together to support any individual or family in times of crisis, the Bhil community decided to plant thousands of trees in hundreds of villages. The Bhils also dug many trenches to conserve rainwater and created other water harvesting structures. They did not get paid for this work but did it as their duty towards their community and the environment. In the halma tradition, the objective is to serve Mother Earth. In 2019, Shri Mahesh Sharma of the Shivganga movement was honoured with the Padma Shri award for his transformational work with the Bhil communities. During the Chennai floods of 2015, roads turned to rivers and people could no longer move around. Almost all shops were closed and services interrupted. Many private groups, in particular spiritual and religious organisations, cooked large quantities of food and distributed it to people who needed it. There are many more such examples of people coming together to do something for the benefit of the community without expecting anything in return. Have you heard of any? The real-life stories above illustrate community in a rural context. Community is also present in an urban context, although it may function a little differently. Let us see an example from another real-life story. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy SE Reprint 2025-26 chapter9.indd 144 & 03-02-2025 05:04:05 03-02-2025 05:04:10 | chapter9.indd 145 More than 20 years ago, in an