Avoiding harmful substances learn to say NO Some people, including your peers, may tempt, persuade, force or, create pressure on you to consume harmful substances such as tobacco, gutka, cigarettes, beedi, alcohol, or even life-threatening illegal drugs. Since adolescence is marked by curiosity and excitement, adolescents might get influenced by such people and try these substances. These substances are not just harmful to physical and mental health but are also addictive. This means that once people start consuming them, they develop a strong urge to take them again and again. Over time, they start using them regularly. This is called substance abuse. (a) Before (b) After Fig. 6.5: Condition of the lungs before and after prolonged exposure to bidi/cigarette smoke Someone who is addicted today, might have started once with just one time ! Say no to addictive substances the first time and every time! 04-04-2025 04:25:40 Adolescence: A Stage of Growth and Change C) cS he rT) C) 15) < ao U n a] =) x td x = > 2 he = s) Chapter 6.indd 84 Using these substances can cause serious health problems, such as breathing difficulties, memory loss, and damage to the lungs (Fig. 6.5), depending on the substance. To stay healthy, it is important to completely avoid these substances and make healthy choices instead. It is important to remain firm and confident in your decision to say NO . The first step to overcoming addiction is seeking help and support from family and friends, and talking to trusted people, such as parents or teachers. Counselling and medical advice can also be helpful in handling such situations. Remember, your health and your future are in your hands choose wisely! SCIENCE AND SOCIETY Nasha Mukt Bharat Abhiyaan The Nasha Mukt Bharat Abhiyaan was launched by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, Government of India. It intends to reach out to the masses and spread awareness on the issue of avoiding substance abuse through active participation of the youth, women, and the community. The special focus is on the prevention of substance abuse among early-age children. The Government has launched a National De-addiction Helpline 14446, to deal with drug addiction and to help drug addicts. 6.5 The Why Question for Adolescence RR hhh hehehehe dhol dledirhad ted delsdchedagl |We now understand the different changes in adolescence and also know some ways to handle it with a sense of responsibility. But I wonder why these changes occur at this stage of life! Many changes in adolescence, including menstruation and other signs of puberty, are mainly due to hormones certain chemicals produced in our bodies. Hormones play a crucial role in regulating various aspects of growth and development, contributing to the proper functioning of the body. They are produced in different parts of the body and are released at an appropriate time in response to signals from the brain. Some \ hormones influence mood and behaviour. 04-04-2025 04:25:42 Chapter 6.indd 85 By staying informed, seeking support and guidance when