and other signs of puberty, are mainly due to hormones certain chemicals produced in our bodies. Hormones play a crucial role in regulating various aspects of growth and development, contributing to the proper functioning of the body. They are produced in different parts of the body and are released at an appropriate time in response to signals from the brain. Some \ hormones influence mood and behaviour. 04-04-2025 04:25:42 Chapter 6.indd 85 By staying informed, seeking support and guidance when needed, and making healthy decisions, you can build a strong foundation for your life ahead. In a Nutshell (Repeal >, ~ >, ~ >, ~ >, ~ >, ~ \7 ~ >, ~ >, ~ >, ~ >, ~ Adolescence is the period of change from childhood to adulthood. It generally begins around the age of 10 years and usually lasts until 19 years. Adolescence is marked by significant and characteristic physical, biological, and emotional changes. Features that help to distinguish the male from the female but are not directly involved in reproduction are called secondary sexual characteristics. Puberty is the stage in which the body of a child undergoes observable and internal changes to develop into an adult capable of reproduction. Adolescence in girls is also marked by start of the menstrual cycle, during which there is a discharge of blood generally after every 28-30 days, a process called menstruation. Menstruation begins at puberty and generally ends by the age of 45-55 years. Adolescents face several emotional and behavioural changes. Eating a balanced and healthy diet, maintaining good personal hygiene, and participating in physical activities help adolescents to stay healthy. Addictive substances, such as tobacco, alcohol, and drugs, have adverse effects on the body and mind. It is wise to say NO to these substances and stay away from them. Changes that take place in the body during adolescence are primarily controlled by certain chemicals produced in the body. These chemicals are called hormones. Proper guidance and awareness help adolescents manage physical, emotional, and behavioural changes effectively. Let Us Enhance Our Learning (Ra le) 1. Ramesh, an 11-year-old boy, developed a few pimples on his face. His mother told him that this is because of ongoing biological changes in his body. (i) What could be the possible reasons for the development of these pimples on his face? (ii) What can he do to get some relief from these pimples? Adolescence: A Stage of Growth and Change 04-04-2025 04:25:42 2. Which of the following food groups would be a better option for adolescents and why? (i) (ii) 3. Unscramble the underlined word in the following sentences: (i) The discharge of blood in adolescent girls which generally occurs every 28-30 days is nstmnoiaretu. (ii) The hoarseness in the voice of adolescent boys is due to enlarged iceov xob. (iii) Secondary sexual characteristics are natural signs that the body is preparing for adulthood and mark the onset of urtypeb. (iv) We should say NO to lahoclo and srugd as they are addictive.