option for adolescents and why? (i) (ii) 3. Unscramble the underlined word in the following sentences: (i) The discharge of blood in adolescent girls which generally occurs every 28-30 days is nstmnoiaretu. (ii) The hoarseness in the voice of adolescent boys is due to enlarged iceov xob. (iii) Secondary sexual characteristics are natural signs that the body is preparing for adulthood and mark the onset of urtypeb. (iv) We should say NO to lahoclo and srugd as they are addictive. . Shalu told her friend, Adolescence brings only physical changes, like growing taller or developing body hair. Is she correct? What would you change in this description of adolescence? . During a discussion in the class, some of the students raised the following points. What questions would you ask them to check the correctness of these points? (i) Adolescents do not need to worry about behavioural changes. (ii) Ifsomeone tries a harmful substance once, they can stop anytime they want. . Adolescents sometimes experience mood swings. On some days, they feel very energetic and happy, while on other days, they may feel low. What other behavioural changes are associated with this age? | C) cS S LU) C) 15) < o U wn a] -] a4 o f) td s = ~~ 2 he = U WE) . While using a toilet, Mohini noticed that used sanitary pads A P eroh were scattered near the bin. She got upset and shared her feelings with her friends. They discussed the importance Cu) | Wuat Qn NOT SHOULD a om ne Chapter 6.indd 86 04-04-2025 04:25:44 of menstrual hygiene and healthy sanitary habits. What menstrual hygiene and sanitary habits would you suggest to your friends? 8. Mary and Manoj were classmates and good friends. On turning 11, Mary developed a little bulge on the front of her neck. She visited the doctor who gave her medication and asked to take iodine-rich diet. Similarly, a bump was developed on the front of Manoj s neck when he turned 12. However, the doctor told him that it was a part of growing up. According to you, what could be the possible reason for advising Mary and Manoj differently? INNOVATION DISCOVERY ENQUIRY 9. During adolescence, the boys and girls undergo certain physical changes, a few of which are given below. EXARATION (i) Change in voice HOE Adolescence: A Stage of Growth and Change (ii) Development of breasts (iii) Growth of moustache (iv) Growth of facial hair fa (v) Pimples on the face (vi) Growth of hair in the pubic region Ce | Lf. (vii) Growth of hair in armpits Categorise these changes in the table given below: , Physical changes during adolescence Observed only Observed only Common in in boys in girls boys and girls 10. Prepare a poster mentioning the tips for adolescents to live a healthy lifestyle. Chapter 6.indd 87 04-04-2025 04:25:45 History Geography Technology | C) cS S LU) C) 15) < o U wn a] -] a4 o f) td s