6.4.3 Physical activities Regular exercise and physical activities are also very important during adolescence. Do you exercise regularly or participate in games and sports? What kinds of exercises do you do? These activities will keep your body and mind fit and healthy, build up your stamina and boost your mood (Fig. 6.2). o D < rs rr ) < < t= iY) e_ o a iS < o 5) < @ u 4) o s = Chapter 6.indd 81 Fig. 6.2: Physical activities for fitness 04-04-2025 04:25:38 6.4.4 Balanced social life We all live in a society and interact with each other in our day-to-day life. We should all be polite and respectful towards each other (Fig. 6.3). This helps create a favourable and safe environment. Since adolescence is a stage of life marked by new experiences and emotions, we must be thoughtful and responsible while interacting with others whether in person or through social media. This is the time adolescents may feel attracted to their peers, and mimic their behaviour. Today, they often interact with each other online. Respectful Communication Trust utual Respect Mindful Fig. 6.3: Collaborative learning in action Modern technologies have made online platforms available for all to obtain information, make connections, interact, and share information with each other. We should use these platforms responsibly for the collective well-being of all. Sometimes, we, knowingly or unknowingly, use social media platforms carelessly. Seeking guidance from elders and teachers can help use these platforms positively. Fig. 6.4: Cyberbullying SCIENCE AND SOCIETY Cyberbullying involves the use of digital devices such as phones, computers, or online platforms to harass others by sending misleading messages, spreading false rumours, or sharing personal information without consent (Fig. 6.4). However, if someone tries to bully you, it is important not to feel scared or helpless. Rather, handle it wisely and seek help from parents and teachers. Additionally, you should be cautious when uploading any picture online or sharing personal information with strangers. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 Chapter 6.indd 82 04-04-2025 04:25:39 Chapter 6.indd 83 | Activity 6.4: Let us spread awareness | Work in groups to design posters and pamphlets about various aspects of responsible social media behaviour and paste them at designated places in the school. Also, fill in Table 6.4 based on your collective observations. Table 6.4: Dos and don'ts to be followed on social media Dos Don ts ; Do not share personal photos with Be respectful and kind. strangers/ virtual friends. Think before posting. Protect privacy 6.4.5 Avoiding harmful substances learn to say NO Some people, including your peers, may tempt, persuade, force or, create pressure on you to consume harmful substances such as tobacco, gutka, cigarettes, beedi, alcohol, or even life-threatening illegal drugs. Since adolescence is marked by curiosity and excitement, adolescents might get influenced by such people and try these substances. These substances are not just harmful to physical and mental health but are also addictive. This means that once people start consuming them, they