Venkatesh, you have a thin moustache now!! Your voice has also changed! Let us try to understand this interesting conversation between Venkatesh and Devyani. [Activity 6.1: Let us discuss | + Take ajar and some paper slips. + Write down the changes you can notice among students as they go from Grades 5 to 8. These could be related to height, strength, behaviour, or any other aspect. Please avoid writing names on the slips. You have become so tall, Devyani! 04-04-2025 04:25:27 = 0 ee oe oN ep _ A . ~s + Fold the slips and place them in the jar. + Mix all the slips received from the students in the class and unfold the collected slips one by one. Based on the information on the slips, discuss the changes with the students in the class. What were the most commonly observable changes among students, as mentioned on the slips? List these in Table 6.1. Table 6.1: Most common changes during growing up S.No. Changes Your observations 1. Height 2. Weight and strength 3. Appearance o D < rs rr ) < < t= iY) e_ o a iS < @ 5) < @ u 4) o < 4. Have you also experienced some of these changes? If yes, then it is because you are also reaching this stage gradually. This stage starts around 10 years of age and can continue up to the age of 19. It is usually a stage of development between childhood and adulthood, and is called adolescence. While analysing Table 6.1, you might have noticed the following: Increase in height From birth, our body undergoes continuous growth and development including an increase in height. However, the increase in height becomes more prominent during adolescence. Changes in body structure, weight gain, and strength As boys grow, it might be seen that along with growing taller, they gain weight, their shoulders might become a bit broader, and their chests may get wider. Girls also undergo changes in height and weight, and other body changes like development of breasts. Chapter 6.indd 75 04-04-2025 04:25:30 Changes in voice In adolescent boys, the growth of the voice box leads to a voice that sounds hoarse. The voice box is a structure in our throat that helps us to speak. The growth may be seen as a bump in the throat region and is called the Adam s apple. However, it is not Adam's / Noticeable in every individual. The voice box also apple grows in adolescent girls but it is not as big as in the boys, leading to only slight changes in voice. Appearance of hair in different parts of body Both boys and girls experience the growth of hair in different parts of their bodies, such as the armpits and pubic region. Boys often develop facial hair, which later grows into a moustache and a beard as they move towards adulthood. Some boys may also develop chest hair and back hair, though few boys may have