of chemistry. Did you know that vitamin B12 is required for the proper functioning of the human body? Like ; most vitamins, it cannot be made in the , & human body and has to be obtained from the food we eat. Discuss the sources of vitamin B12 with your teacher. 6.4.2 Personal hygiene Besides nutrition, personal hygiene is also crucially important during adolescence. Maintaining body hygiene, particularly in the armpits and the pubic region, may protect us from potential infections. For girls, maintaining proper hygiene during menstruation is essential for both comfort and health. Menstrual hygiene can be maintained using items such as sanitary pads (Fig. 6.1) and | reusable cloth pads designed for this purpose. The government also attempts to provide these products free of charge or at a low price to improve the menstrual hygiene of girls and women. As a society, we should all make efforts to ensure the availability of necessary facilities in schools and public places to promote menstrual hygiene. Collectively, we should move forward, reducing any stigma around sanitary pads and helping in menstrual hygiene. It is important to dispose of used sanitary pads properly by wrapping them in newspaper and disposing inside a dustbin. This is to ensure community health and environmental cleanliness. These days, biodegradable sanitary pads are also available that \ are environment-friendly. wm Fig. 6.1: Sanitary pad C) cS Hd rT) C) 15) < ao U n a] =) x td x = > 2 he = s) SN ie) Chapter 6.indd 80 04-04-2025 04:25:36 o, ~ SCIENCE AND SOCIETY To support menstrual hygiene, the government has introduced several initiatives Menstrual Hygiene Scheme (MHS): Under this scheme by the Government of India, sanitary pads are provided free of charge or at a reduced price to adolescent girls in rural areas. Awareness programmes are also conducted to educate girls about menstrual hygiene and health. Rashtriya Kishor Swasthya Karyakram (RKSK): It aims to improve the overall health of adolescents, including menstrual health and hygiene. It encourages peer education, where older students help younger ones learn about these topics. Suvidha Sanitary Napkin Initiative: Under this initiative, biodegradable sanitary pads are provided at affordable prices through Jan Aushadhi Kendras. The initiative aims to improve access to menstrual hygiene products for women and adolescent girls. State-Level Initiatives: Various state governments have their own programmes, such as the Shuchi Scheme in Karnataka and free sanitary napkin schemes in states like Tamil Nadu and Odisha. These programmes aim to distribute free sanitary pads in government schools. 6.4.3 Physical activities Regular exercise and physical activities are also very important during adolescence. Do you exercise regularly or participate in games and sports? What kinds of exercises do you do? These activities will keep your body and mind fit and healthy, build up your stamina and boost your mood (Fig. 6.2). o D < rs rr ) < < t= iY) e_ o a iS < o 5) < @ u 4) o s = Chapter 6.indd 81 Fig.