have explored the diverse behavioural changes in adolescents. This is because adolescence is often marked by stronger emotions than childhood. These emotions might affect adolescents behaviour like taking up/joining social initiatives to support the needy and the disadvantaged, or developing deeper interest in new areas. Understanding how our emotions influence our behaviour and actions, can help us make better choices and respond to situations thoughtfully. 04-04-2025 04:25:33 Chapter 6.indd 79 6.4 Making Adolescence a Joyful Experience The journey of adolescence is a unique experience. Heightened curiosity and excitement during this stage of life give adolescents a new viewpoint towards almost everything around them. Good habits, thoughtful decisions, and small actions can have a powerful positive impact on the overall well-being of adolescents. Let us know about them! 6.4.1 Meeting nutritional needs In Grade 6 chapter Mindful Eating: A Path to a Healthy Body , you learnt about the need for a healthy diet. Since adolescence is a period of growth and development marked by several changes in the body, a nutritious diet is of utmost importance. For proper growth, and to perform well on the playground, we need proteins and carbohydrates! Not only that, we also need an adequate amount of fats, vitamins, and minerals as well! [Activity 6.3: Let us list | Based on the locally available foods, fill Table 6.3 with the healthy food sources, nutrients present in them and how these nutrients can help our growth and development. Table 6.3: Food sources, nutrients present in them, and functions of _these nutrients Food Nutrients we get Functions of these sources from them nutrients Milk, millets, curd, Calcium, proteins, fats To help optimal bone cheese, and paneer growth To help proper growth, gain strength, and improve levels of energy Proteins Spinach, kidney beans, , and dried fruits like ! To help in the formation raisins, and figs a of blood o D < rr ) < < t= iY) e_ o a S < @ 5) < @ u 4) o < 04-04-2025 04:25:34 J SCIENCE AND SOCIETY Adolescents, especially girls, may sometimes suffer from blood-related health problem(s) because of a deficiency of iron or vitamin B12 in the body. + Find out about such health problem(s). * How can we manage iron deficiency in our body? * Find out about government schemes aimed to prevent such deficiencies. KNOW A SCIENTIST Dorothy Hodgkin was a brilliant scientist who studied the structure of vitamin B12. In 1964, she became the third woman to win the Nobel Prize in the field of chemistry. Did you know that vitamin B12 is required for the proper functioning of the human body? Like ; most vitamins, it cannot be made in the , & human body and has to be obtained from the food we eat. Discuss the sources of vitamin B12 with your teacher. 6.4.2 Personal hygiene Besides nutrition, personal hygiene is also crucially important during adolescence. Maintaining body hygiene, particularly in the armpits and the pubic region, may protect us from potential