adolescent girls is the onset of the menstrual cycle. It recurs generally every 28-30 days and is more commonly known as the period . Many healthy girls may have longer or shorter menstrual cycles ranging from 21-35 days. The menstrual cycle is an important natural process and is one of the signs of good reproductive health. The phase of the cycle when blood discharge occurs from the body is referred to as menstruation. It may last for three to seven days. Some girls may feel pain or discomfort in the lower abdomen during these days. Usually, by the age of 45-55, menstruation stops naturally, marking the end of the reproductive capability in a woman s life. Breaking myths about menstruation There are many wrong beliefs about menstruation that often lead to unnecessary fear, shame, or even guilt. These beliefs have given rise to certain myths and taboos. Among such myths and taboos, physical isolation of menstruating girls is unfortunately still quite prevalent. Menstruation is a natural process, and such myths have no scientific basis. By encouraging a scientific outlook towards menstruation, we can help society appreciate the need to promote good reproductive health of women and contribute positively towards a healthier lifestyle for women. o D < rr ) < < t= iY) e_ o a S < @ 5) < @ u 4) o < 04-04-2025 04:25:33 C) cS he rT) C) 15) < ao U n a] =) x td x = > 2 he = s) Chapter 6.indd 78 Adolescence is not just about physical changes or changes associated with reproductive capability but also about emotional and behavioural changes. Let us discuss them! 6.3 Emotional and Behavioural Changes in Adolescents [Activity 6.2: Let us list | Take a moment to think if there are any changes in your emotions or behaviour or that of your classmates and friends in the past one or two years. These changes may be exciting, confusing, or both. Let us list some emotional changes in Table 6.2 along with their probable effects on behaviour and ways for positive growth and development. Table 6.2: Emotional changes, their probable effects on behaviour, and ways for positive growth and development Keyemotional _ probable effects on Ways for positive growth changes behaviour and development Mood svi Engage in varied Self-exploration and involvement State een activities like music, in activities that may lead to dance, or sports creativity and innovation Strong emotions Increased sensitivity Compassion, involvement in Any other social work While discussing Table 6.2, you may have explored the diverse behavioural changes in adolescents. This is because adolescence is often marked by stronger emotions than childhood. These emotions might affect adolescents behaviour like taking up/joining social initiatives to support the needy and the disadvantaged, or developing deeper interest in new areas. Understanding how our emotions influence our behaviour and actions, can help us make better choices and respond to situations thoughtfully. 04-04-2025 04:25:33 Chapter 6.indd 79 6.4 Making Adolescence a Joyful Experience The journey of adolescence