it is not as big as in the boys, leading to only slight changes in voice. Appearance of hair in different parts of body Both boys and girls experience the growth of hair in different parts of their bodies, such as the armpits and pubic region. Boys often develop facial hair, which later grows into a moustache and a beard as they move towards adulthood. Some boys may also develop chest hair and back hair, though few boys may have no significant hair growth. Variations in and timing of appearance of hair growth is completely normal. Changes in facial skin: emergence of pimples Another common occurrence during the adolescent years is a skin condition called acne, in which small, reddish pimples appear. These are commonly visible on the face. Acne occurs due to an increase in oily secretions from the skin during adolescence that can clog the skin pores and lead to infections. While acne is a condition, pimples are a manifestation of it. A key point to remember Whether it is a change in height, voice, or facial hair, it is important to recognise that the timing, nature, and extent of these changes vary among individuals. These variations are completely normal. Each person experiences adolescence at his or her own pace, and its duration also varies from one person to another. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 Chapter 6.indd 76 04-04-2025 04:25:32 Chapter 6.indd 77 Now, we have understood some of the changes that take place during adolescence, particularly those that are easily observable. Some of these characteristic changes, like change in voice, the growth of facial and chest hair in boys, and the development of breasts in girls are not directly involved in the process of reproduction. However, these characteristic changes help distinguish males from females. For this reason, they are called secondary sexual characteristics. Secondary sexual characteristics are natural signs that the body is preparing for adulthood. They mark the onset of puberty. Puberty is the stage in which the body of an adolescent undergoes external and internal changes to develop into an adult capable of reproduction. 6.2 Changes that Indicate Reproductive Capability Adolescence is marked not only by observable changes but also by internal changes that are not visible from the outside. One such change is the maturation of various parts involved in the process of reproduction. Both boys and girls experience such changes gradually, and these changes are a natural part of the process of growing up. An important internal change associated with adolescent girls is the onset of the menstrual cycle. It recurs generally every 28-30 days and is more commonly known as the period . Many healthy girls may have longer or shorter menstrual cycles ranging from 21-35 days. The menstrual cycle is an important natural process and is one of the signs of good reproductive health. The phase of the cycle when blood discharge occurs from the body is referred to as menstruation. It may last for three to seven