7 Adolescence: y A Stage of Growth ; and Change The journey of a plant generally begins with the germination of a seed. With proper nourishment, the seed becomes a sapling and matures into a young plant. This journey is marked by some specific changes. Some of the visible changes are an increase in its height, the * appearance of more leaves, and the development of flowers, fruits, errrees and new seeds. From these seeds, new plants emerge. It is quite unlikely that a seedling will develop the capabilities to produce its own seeds immediately after germination. It needs to grow and reach maturity to become capable of producing seeds. Similarly, animals also need to grow and reach maturity before they can reproduce. Some animals lay eggs that hatch into young ones, while others, like humans, directly give birth to young ones. In both cases, the young ones gradually grow in size and develop over time. Se vor ones PUD ELLY e esOrmones Health hanges Menstruze giene Ve | C) cS he LU) C) 15) < o U wn a] -] a4 o f) td s = ~~ 2 he = U Chapter 6.indd 74 The journey of life of a human can be divided into different stages infancy, childhood, adolescence, adulthood, and old age. Each person experiences these stages at their own pace, and the duration of each stage may vary from one individual to another. From infancy to adulthood, our bodies undergo various changes. Until around 10-12 years of age, most changes are related to height and weight. After this, other noticeable changes begin to occur, marking the onset of adolescence. This is a period of rapid growth and development, typically occurring between the ages of 10-19. During adolescence, the body prepares for adulthood. Humans, like most other living beings, can not reproduce immediately after their birth. Their bodies need to grow and reach a stage of maturity to be able to reproduce. As humans grow and develop, they experience significant physical, emotional, and behavioural changes, along with the ability to reproduce. Some of these changes may be quite clearly observable, while others occur internally and may go unnoticed. In this chapter, you will explore adolescence, understand its importance, and learn howto handle it witha sense ofresponsibility. 6.1 Growing With Age: The Teenage Years Wap Rel ht helical dalled rl dade Add dedi hd della dadedialihodrtartagly During the summer vacation, Venkatesh visited his grandparents. As he entered the house, his 12-year-old cousin, Devyani came running to greet him. Venkatesh, you have a thin moustache now!! Your voice has also changed! Let us try to understand this interesting conversation between Venkatesh and Devyani. [Activity 6.1: Let us discuss | + Take ajar and some paper slips. + Write down the changes you can notice among students as they go from Grades 5 to 8. These could be related to height, strength, behaviour, or any other aspect. Please avoid writing names on the slips. You have become so tall, Devyani!