1062CH15 PROBABILITY The theory of probabilities and the theory of errors now constitute a formidable body of great mathematical interest-and.of great practical importance. R.S. Woodward 14.1 Probability A Theoretical Approach Let us consider the following situation : Suppose a coin is tossed at random. We know, in advance, that the coin can only land in one of two possible ways either head up or tail up (we dismiss the possibility of its landing on its edge, which may be possible, for example, if it falls on sand). We can reasonably assume that each outcome, head or tail, is as likely to occur as the other. We refer to this by saying that the outcomes head and tail, are equally likely. For another example of equally likely outcomes, suppose we throw a die once. For us, a die will always mean a fair die. What are the possible outcomes? They are 1, 2, 3, 4,5, 6. Each number has the same possibility of showing up. So the equally likely outcomes of throwing a die are 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6. Reprint 2025-26 PROBABILITY 203 Are the outcomes of every experiment equally likely? Let us see. Suppose that a bag contains 4 red balls and 1 blue ball, and you draw a ball without looking into the bag. What are the outcomes? Are the outcomes a red ball and a blue ball equally likely? Since there are 4 red balls and only one blue ball, you would agree that you are more likely to get a red ball than a blue ball. So, the outcomes (a red ball or a blue ball) are not equally likely. However, the outcome of drawing a ball of any colour from the bag is equally likely. So, all experiments do not necessarily have equally likely outcomes. However, in this chapter, from now on, we will assume that all the experiments have equally likely outcomes. In Class IX, we defined the experimental or empirical probability P(E) of an event E as Number of trials in which the event happened P(E) = (F) Total number of trials The empirical interpretation of probability can be applied to every event associated with an experiment which can be repeated a large number of times. The requirement of repeating an experiment has some limitations, as it may be very expensive or unfeasible in many situations. Of course, it worked well in coin tossing or die throwing experiments. But how about repeating the experiment of launching a satellite in order to compute the empirical probability ofits failure during launching, or the repetition of the phenomenon of an earthquake to compute the empirical probability of a multistoreyed building getting destroyed in an earthquake? In experiments where we are prepared to make certain assumptions, the repetition of an experiment can be avoided, as the assumptions help in directly calculating the exact (theoretical) probability. The assumption of equally likely outcomes (which is valid in many experiments, as in the two examples above, of a