of hearts (v) a spade (vi) the queen of diamonds Five cards the ten, jack, queen, king and ace of diamonds, are well-shuffled with their face downwards. One card is then picked up at random. (i) What is the probability that the card is the queen? (i) Ifthe queen is drawn and put aside, what is the probability that the second card picked up is (a) an ace? (b) a queen? 12 defective pens are accidentally mixed with 132 good ones. It is not possible to just look at a pen and tell whether or not it is defective. One pen is taken out at random from this lot. Determine the probability that the pen taken out is a good one. (i) A lot of 20 bulbs contain 4 defective ones. One bulb is drawn at random from the lot. What is the probability that this bulb is defective? (ii) Suppose the bulb drawn in (1) is not defective and is not replaced. Now one bulb is drawn at random from the rest. What is the probability that this bulb is not defective ? A box contains 90 discs which are numbered from | to 90. If one disc is drawn at random from the box, find the probability that it bears (1) a two-digit number (ii) a perfect square number (iii) anumber divisible by 5. Reprint 2025-26 216 MATHEMATICS 19. A child has a die whose six faces show the letters as given below: ls} Le] fel} eI} J The die is thrown once. What is the probability of getting (i) A? (ii) D? 20*. Suppose you drop a die at random on the rectangular region shown in Fig. 14.6. What is the probability that it will land inside the circle with diameter 1m? 3m 2m Fig. 14.6 21. A lot consists of 144 ball pens of which 20 are defective and the others are good. Nuri will buy a pen if it is good, but will not buy if it is defective. The shopkeeper draws one pen at random and gives it to her. What is the probability that (i) She will buy it? (ii) She will not buy it ? 22. Refer to Example 13. (i) Complete the following table: (ii) A student argues that there are 11 possible outcomes 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,9, 10, 11 and 12. Therefore, each of them has a probability Th: Do you agree with this argument? Justify your answer. 23. A game consists of tossing a one rupee coin 3 times and noting its outcome each time. Hanif wins if all the tosses give the same result i.e., three heads or three tails, and loses otherwise. Calculate the probability that Hanif will lose the game. 24. Adie is thrown twice. What is the probability that (i) 5 will not come up either time? (11) 5 will come up at least once? [Hint : Throwing a die twice and throwing two dice simultaneously are treated as the same experiment]