compute the empirical probability ofits failure during launching, or the repetition of the phenomenon of an earthquake to compute the empirical probability of a multistoreyed building getting destroyed in an earthquake? In experiments where we are prepared to make certain assumptions, the repetition of an experiment can be avoided, as the assumptions help in directly calculating the exact (theoretical) probability. The assumption of equally likely outcomes (which is valid in many experiments, as in the two examples above, of a coin and of a die) is one such assumption that leads us to the following definition of probability of an event. The theoretical probability (also called classical probability) of an event E, written as P(E), is defined as P(E) = Number of outcomes favourable to E bs Number of all possible outcomes of the experiment where we assume that the outcomes of the experiment are equally likely. We will briefly refer to theoretical probability as probability. This definition of probability was given by Pierre Simon Laplace in 1795. Reprint 2025-26 204 MATHEMATICS Probability theory had its origin in the 16th century when an Italian physician and mathematician J.Cardan wrote the first book on the subject, The Book on Games of Chance. Since its inception, the study of probability has attracted the attention of great mathematicians. James Bernoulli (1654 1705), A. de Moivre (1667 1754), and Pierre Simon Laplace are among those who made significant contributions to this field. Laplace s Theorie Analytique des Probabilit s, 1812, is considered to be the greatest contribution by a single person to the theory of probability. Pierre Simon Laplace In recent years, probability has been used extensively in (1749 1827) many areas such as biology, economics, genetics, physics, sociology etc. Let us find the probability for some of the events associated with experiments where the equally likely assumption holds. Example | : Find the probability of getting a head when a coin is tossed once. Also find the probability of getting a tail. Solution : In the experiment of tossing a coin once, the number of possible outcomes is two Head (H) and Tail (T). Let E be the event getting a head . The number of outcomes favourable to E, (i.e., of getting a head) is 1. Therefore, Number of outcomes favourable to E 1 P(E) = P (head) = ) (head) Number of all possible outcomes 2 Similarly, if F is the event getting a tail , then P(F) = P(tail) = ; (Why ?) Example 2 : A bag contains a red ball, a blue ball and a yellow ball, all the balls being of the same size. Kritika takes out a ball from the bag without looking into it. What is the probability that she takes out the (1) yellow ball? (ii) red ball? (iti) blue ball? Solution : Kritika takes out a ball from the bag without looking into it. So, itis equally likely that she takes out any one of them. Reprint 2025-26 PROBABILITY 205 Let Y be