BSS60 R "BSSOON a POOED object is fully or partially immersed in a liquid, it experiences an Chapter 5.indd 76 6/28/2025 3:09:52 PM upward force which is equal to the weight of the liquid it displaces. This is known as Archimedes Principle. If the weight of a liquid displaced by an object is smaller than the weight of the object, the object will sink in the liquid. If the weight of the liquid displaced is equal to the weight of the object, the object will float in the liquid. Ever heard of ... There are some rocks which can float on water. z One such rock is Pumice, which is formed during a volcanic eruptions. When lava with lots of gas and & water vapour cools quickly, it traps tiny bubbles of A force is push or pull on an object resulting from the object s interaction with another object. The SI unit of force is newton and its symbol is N. P) Forces can act with or without contact. Muscular force and frictional force are some of the examples of contact forces. Magnetic force, gravitational force, and electrostatic force are non-contact forces. Force can change an object s speed, direction of its motion, or both. Force can change the shape of an object. @ The force which comes into play when an object moves or tries to move over another surface, is called force of friction or simply friction. It acts in a direction opposite to the direction in which the object is moving or trying to move. @ The force exerted by a magnet on another magnet or a magnetic material is called magnetic force. @ The force exerted by a charged body on another charged body or uncharged body is called an electrostatic force. @ The force with which the Earth attracts objects towards itself, is called the gravitational force. It is always an attractive force. @ The force with which the Earth pulls an object towards itself is called the weight of the object. The SI unit of weight is newton (N). The mass of an object remains unchanged whereas its weight may vary from place to place. @ When an object is placed in a liquid, the force applied by a liquid on an object in the upward direction is known as upthrust or buoyant force. Keep the curiosity alive 1. Match items in Column A with the items in Column B. Column A (Type of force) Column B (Example) (i) Muscular force (a) A cricket ball stopping on its own just before touching the boundary line (ii) Magnetic force (b) A child lifting a school bag Gii) Frictional force (c) A fruit falling from a tree (iv) Gravitational force (d) Balloon rubbed on woollen cloth attracting hair strands (v) Electrostatic force (e) Acompass needle pointing North Prepare some questions based on your learnings so far ... Chapter 5.indd 77 6/28/2025 3:10:00 PM Chapter 5.indd 78 . State whether the following statements are True or