table are two objects interacting with each other. Think of all the actions listed in Table 5.1. How many objects are involved in each of the actions? Do you notice that forces result only when two objects are interacting in some way or the other? From these examples, we can infer that at least two objects must interact for a force to come into play. A force is a push or pull on an object resulting from the object s interaction with another object. The SI unit of force is newton (written with a small n ) and its symbol is N. Chapter 5.indd 65 6/28/2025 3:08:52 PM A step further When you pushed the table with your hand, did you feel a force on your hand too? The moment you stopped pushing, the force on your hand disappeared. Whenever two objects interact, each object experiences a force from the other. As soon as the interaction ceases, the two objects no longer experience the force. 5.4 What Are the Different Types of Forces? 5.4.1 Contact forces In many situations, we find that to apply a force on an object, physical contact is necessary between our body and the object. This contact can be direct, such as using our hands or other body parts, or indirect, such as using a stick or rope. Forces of this type which act only when there is physical contact between the objects are called contact forces. Muscular force An example of contact force is muscular force. When we perform any physical activity, such as walking, running, lifting, pushing, jumping, or stretching, the force is caused by the action of muscles in our body. The force resulting due to the action of muscles is known as muscular force. Muscular force occurs when muscles contract and elongate while doing any activity. Animals, birds, fish, and insects use muscular forces for movement and survival. Fig. 5.3: Use of muscular force by living beings uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade # BSS60 R "BSSOON a POOED Chapter 5.indd 66 6/28/2025 3:08:58 PM \HOOOO NOON \H0006 revi) HH0000 SM) Chapter 5 Exploring Forces ) 6 Humans used the muscular force of some animals to carry out many tasks for a long time. Fig. 5.4: Use of muscular force of animals to assist with human tasks Ever heard of ... Muscular force plays an important role in many functions inside our body too. This force helps us chew food and push it through the alimentary canal during the process of digestion. The expansion and contraction of our heart muscles allows the blood to circulate in our body a process essential for survival. Friction A ball rolling on a flat ground stops on its own after some time. If we stop pedalling our bicycle | contact force? on a flat road, it slows down and comes to a stop. If the road is rough, it stops sooner than on a smoother road. You must have come across many such experiences. What causes