The expansion and contraction of our heart muscles allows the blood to circulate in our body a process essential for survival. Friction A ball rolling on a flat ground stops on its own after some time. If we stop pedalling our bicycle | contact force? on a flat road, it slows down and comes to a stop. If the road is rough, it stops sooner than on a smoother road. You must have come across many such experiences. What causes the change in the speed of objects in such situations? We have learnt earlier that a force is essential to change the speed of an object. However, in all these situations no force appears to be acting on the objects, yet their speed gradually decreases and they come to a stop after some time. Is it possible that some force is indeed acting on them? Which force is that? | Activity 5.3: Let us investigate e Take an object with a flat base (such as an empty lunch box/ geometry box/ a notebook) and place it on a table or floor. e Gently push it and observe. Does it stop after travelling some distance? Is there a force acting on it which brings it to rest? e Now repeat by pushing the object in the opposite direction. Does it stop again after travelling some distance? Chapter 5.indd 67 6/28/2025 3:09:05 PM On pushing, the object stops after sliding a certain distance. This must be due to a force acting between the surfaces of the sliding object and the table or floor which are in contact. This force must be acting on the object ina direction opposite to its direction of motion. This force is what brings the object to a stop. The force that comes into play when an object moves or tries to move over another surface is called the force Fig. 5.5: Friction acts between of friction or simply friction. Friction always acts in a two surfaces and opposes the girection opposite to the direction in which the object is motion of the object. : . Lee moving or trying to move. The force of friction is a contact force since it arises due to two surfaces in contact. Friction arises due to the irregularities in the two surfaces in contact. Even surfaces which appear smooth, havea large number of minute irregularities (Fig. 5.6). When placed in contact, the irregularities of two surfaces lock into each other and oppose any effort to move one surface over the other. Does this mean that the force of friction will be greater if the surfaces are rough? Fig. 5.6: Friction between two surfaces due to irregularities Activity 5.4: Let us explore e Try Activity 5.3 again, but this time place the same object on different surfaces, such as glass, cloth, wood, ceramic tile, and sand. e Does the object stop after travelling the same distance as in Activity 5.3? e Does the object stop at the same distance on all surfaces?