it such that the like poles of the two magnets face each other. Does the second magnet stay floating above the first magnet? e Try pushing the second magnet down gently. Do you feel a force on it? e Now, reverse the poles of both the magnets. Does the second magnet still remain floating? We find that a magnet can exert force on another magnet without being in contact with it. The force exerted by a magnet on another magnet or a magnetic material is called magnetic force. Since a magnet can exert a force from a distance without being in contact it is called a non-contact force. Are there more such forces which act from a distance? Fig. 5.7: Force between two ring magnets 6/28/2025 3:09:10 PM Electrostatic force | Activity 5.6: Let us experiment e Take a plastic scale or a plastic straw, a piece of polythene, and small pieces of paper. e Rub plastic scale/straw vigorously with polythene. e Do not touch the rubbed part with your hand or any metal object. e Now, bring it close to the small pieces of paper placed on a table, taking care not to touch the paper pieces (Fig. 5.8). Do you notice something surprising? = Fig. 5.8: Charged plastic scale attracting small paper pieces The paper pieces get pulled towards the plastic scale/straw and stick to it when it is brought close to paper pieces. Why does this happen? When two objects of certain materials are rubbed together, electrical charges build up on their surfaces. These charges are called static charges as they do not move by themselves. The object that acquires static charges is said to be a charged object. A charged object attracts, that is, exerts a force on uncharged objects made of certain materials, such as small pieces of paper. This force comes into play even when the bodies are not in contact. Let us do another activity with objects made of different materials. | Activity 5.7: Let us experiment e Take two balloons, a length of thread, and a woollen cloth. e Inflate two balloons and hang them in such a way that @ they do not touch each other as shown in Fig. 5.9a. e Rub both balloons with the woollen cloth and release (a) them. Be careful not to touch the rubbed balloons with your fingers. What do you observe? We observe that the balloons move away from each other as if they are repelling each other (Fig. 5.9b). e Now bring the woollen cloth used for rubbing (b) the balloons close to one of the rubbed balloons. Fig. 5.9: (a) Two uncharged What happens? balloons; (b) Two charged They move towards each other as if they are attracting balloons repelling each other gach other. What do we infer from these observations? uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade # BSS60 R "BSSOON a POOED Chapter 5.indd 70 6/28/2025 3:09:16 PM Chapter 5.indd 71 \HOOOO NOON \H0006 revi) HH0000 SM) Chapter 5 Exploring Forces