therefore, always necessary to look carefully at the spring balance (or any other instrument) you are about to use. Let us now learn how to measure weight using a spring balance. | Activity 5.12: Let us measure e Take a spring balance and a few objects. Keep in mind that the objects should not be heavier than the maximum value of weight the spring balance can measure, otherwise it may get ; damaged. e Suspend the objects one by one from the hook (Fig. 5.14). Read iv the scale for weight carefully and record your observations in the Table 5.2. Mover y TTT 1 i qin Table 5.2: Measuring weight using a spring balance Weight (N) Pencil Box 2. Partially filled water bottle Fig. 5.14: Object suspended from a spring balance uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade # BSS60 R "BSSOON a POOED 6/28/2025 3:09:39 PM Chapter 5.indd 74 \HOOOO NOON \H0006 revi) HH0000 SM) Chapter 5 Exploring Forces ) 7 You can repeat Activities 5.10 to 5.12 for the mass scale shown on the left side on the spring balance (Fig. 5.13) to measure the mass of an object. A step further The mass of an object can be measured indirectly by measuring its weight (using a spring balance) or by comparing its weight with the weight of an object of a known mass (using a beam balance). Since the weight of an object remains almost the same everywhere on the Earth, so for all practical purposes it is acceptable to weigh an object to find its mass. As we have learnt earlier (in the chapter Materials Around Us in Curiosity, Grade 6), mass is the amount of matter in an object and is measured in grams (g) or kilograms (kg). Its value remains the same at every place. Weight, on the other hand, is the gravitational force with which the Earth (or another planet) pulls an object. Since gravitational force can vary very slightly from place to place on the Earth (and can be very different on different planets), weight can change, but mass does not. A step further The gravitational force of different planets on an object is different. Thus, the weight of an object is different on different planets, as shown in the following table, even though its mass remains the same. [ Planet _| earth | Moon} Mars [venus [Jupiter | Whatis the difference between weight and mass? Mass of the object 1kg 1kg 1kg 1kg 1kg Weight of 10 N 1.6N 3.8 N 9N A step further In everyday life, particularly for the goods we commonly use, we are more interested in the amount of matter in an object (its mass), rather than the force applied by the Earth upon it (its weight). However, though while the units of mass are used, instead of the term mass, the term weight is typically used. For example, it is said that the weight of the wheat bag is 10 kg. But in scientific use, this is