woollen cloth used for rubbing (b) the balloons close to one of the rubbed balloons. Fig. 5.9: (a) Two uncharged What happens? balloons; (b) Two charged They move towards each other as if they are attracting balloons repelling each other gach other. What do we infer from these observations? uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade # BSS60 R "BSSOON a POOED Chapter 5.indd 70 6/28/2025 3:09:16 PM Chapter 5.indd 71 \HOOOO NOON \H0006 revi) HH0000 SM) Chapter 5 Exploring Forces ) We found that the two similarly charged /poes it mean that there are two kinds of electrical charges? balloons repel each other whereas a charged balloon and the woollen cloth (with which the balloon was rubbed) attract each other. Does this indicate that the charge on the balloon is of a different kind from the charge on the woollen cloth? Since the balloons were charged in the same way, we can say that they have acquired similar charges. As the similarly charged balloons repelled each other, we can infer that similar (like) charges repel each other. Both the rubbing object and the rubbed object get charged but they acquire opposite kind of charges. Their attraction shows that opposite kind (unlike) of charges attract each other. The two kinds of static charges are said to be positive and negative . The force exerted by a charged body on another charged body or an uncharged body is called electrostatic force. It is a non-contact force. A step further When the charges move, they constitute an electric current in an electrical circuit. It is the same current which makes a lamp glow or generates a heating effect or a magnetic effect. Gravitational force | Activity 5.8: Let us observe e Take a ball and throw it vertically upwards. Does it come down? e Now throw it again, but this time harder. Does it still fall back down to the ground? Think about different situations around you where any object thrown up in any direction, finally falls or comes back to the ground or floor. Fig. 5.10: Some objects falling towards the Earth 6/28/2025 3:09:21 PM Why do all the objects fall towards the Earth? Is there any force which acts on them? What exerts this force? Since all the objects fall towards the Earth, it means the Earth attracts (pulls) them. The force with which the Earth attracts objects towards itself is called the gravitational force. The gravitational force exerted by the Earth is also called force of gravity or simply gravity. Since the gravitational force | | \ acts without contact with the object @\ it attracts, it is a non-contact force. Gravitational force is always an attractive force, unlike magnetic force or electrostatic force, which can either be attractive or repulsive. You might have noticed that when an object is dropped from a height, it takes a straight vertical path downwards before touching the ground (Fig. 5.11a). When an object is thrown vertically upwards, the object moves up straight, slows