Exploring Forces 0877CHOS Probe and ponder e Why does it feel harder to pedal a bicycle when going uphill than on flat ground? e Why is it easier to slip on a wet surface? e Why do we feel light or like we are floating just after our swing reaches its highest point and begins to come down? e Share your questions Chapter 5.indd 62 6/28/2025 3:08:44 PM | Chapter 5.indd 63 \HOOOO NOON \H0006 revi) HH0000 SM) Chapter 5 Exploring Forces ) It was a windy day. Sonali and Ragini were excited to go cycling. Their summer vacation had just begun, and they wanted to explore the beautiful landscapes around their village. After pumping air into their bicycle tyres, they set off. As they rode through the village, the wind rushed past them. Oh no! The wind is pushing me hard! said Ragini. Smiling, Sonali replied, We are riding against the wind. We must push our pedals harder to move faster. Their ride took them up a long path to a hilltop. Some parts of the road were rough where they found it hard to pedal, while other parts were smoother. When they reached the top and were enjoying the view, they heard thunder and saw flashes of lightning at a distance. Even though it looked beautiful, they decided to head back immediately. On the way back, while passing a herd of sheep, they pressed their bicycle bells and turned the handles to change direction. As they were coming down the slope of the hill, they realised that their bicycles were moving down at a great speed even though they were not pedalling! Sonali yelled, It s thrilling! It seems something is pulling us downhill, what could it be? 5.1 What Is a Force? Let us try to experience the push and the pull. | Activity 5.1: Let us explore e Take a large cardboard box. e Try moving the box in as many different ways as you can think of. (b) Fig. 5.1: Moving a box in different ways (a) Pushing; (b) Pulling; (c) Lifting (pulling up), and carrying Did you move the box in any other way than shown in Fig. 5.1? In all the ways that you might have used to move the box, you had to apply a push or pull to the box. Generally, the push or pull applied on an object is called force in science. 6/28/2025 3:08:45 PM 5.2 What Can a Force Do to the Bodies on Which It Is Applied? We experience push or pull in our daily lives all the time, often without even realising it. Let us recall some of these experiences and analyse them. | Activity 5.2: Let us analyse e Think of situations where a force (push or pull) is applied and list them in Table 5.1. e Analyse each situation and write the effect of the force in Table 5.1. Some situations and their effects are already listed for you. Table 5.1: Different actions and