We experience push or pull in our daily lives all the time, often without even realising it. Let us recall some of these experiences and analyse them. | Activity 5.2: Let us analyse e Think of situations where a force (push or pull) is applied and list them in Table 5.1. e Analyse each situation and write the effect of the force in Table 5.1. Some situations and their effects are already listed for you. Table 5.1: Different actions and their effects Your friend holding Pull Stopping or decreasing your moving bicycle the speed of the bicycle from behind to stop it 2. Hitting a moving ball Push Changing the direction with a bat of a moving ball 3. Pressing an inflated Push Change in shape of balloon the balloon What do you conclude from these examples? Does a force cause a moving object to stop? Can it change speed, or direction of motion, or change the shape of an object? Fig. 5.2: Applying force on objects uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade # BSS60 R "BSSOON a POOED Chapter 5.indd 64 6/28/2025 3:08:48 PM \HOOOO NOON \H0006 revi) HH0000 SM) Chapter 5 Exploring Forces ) 6 In everyday life, we come across many situations where a force is applied, for example, opening a drawer, stretching a rubber band, a fielder stopping a ball, kicking a football, applying brakes on a moving bicycle, rolling a chapati, or turning the steering handle of an autorickshaw. What effect can the application of force have on objects? The force applied on an object may e make an object move from rest. e change the speed of an object if it is moving. e change the direction of motion of an object. e bring about a change in the shape of an object. e cause some or all of these effects. Does this mean __ that whenever there is a change in speed or direction, or change in shape, a force is acting on the object? Yes, none of these take place without the action of force. A step further Suppose an object is at rest. Does it mean that no force is acting on this object? It means that the forces acting on the object are balancing one another. You will learn about balanced forces in higher grades. 5.3 Are Forces an Interaction Between Two or More Objects? When you push a table, your hand is one object applying force on another object the table. Here, we say that your hand and the table are two objects interacting with each other. Think of all the actions listed in Table 5.1. How many objects are involved in each of the actions? Do you notice that forces result only when two objects are interacting in some way or the other? From these examples, we can infer that at least two objects must interact for a force to come into play. A force is a push or pull on an object resulting from the object s