that is, the weight of different objects is different. Can we use the spring to measure the weight of an object? Fig. 5.12: (a) A hanging spring; (b) Two different objects hung from the spring A step further A spring balance is a simple device used to measure weight (force). It consists of a spring fixed at one end, with a hook attached at the other end. When we hang an object from the hook, the spring stretches, and the amount of stretching gives the weight of the object. There is a scale on the balance which is marked to show the weight (force) in newton. Usually, there is also another scale to show the corresponding values of mass in gram (g). These values have been marked with the assumption that the spring balance is used on the Earth, with the Earth s gravitational force attracting the object. Let us learn to measure the weight using a spring balance. But first, let us familiarise ourselves with a spring balance the way we did with thermometer earlier (in the chapter Temperature and Its Measurement in Curiosity, Grade 6). | Activity 5.10: Let us observe e Lookat the spring balance shown in Fig. 5.13 carefully. What is the maximum weight it can measure? The maximum weight it can measure is 10 N. Thus, this scale has a range of Oto 10 N. Chapter 5.indd 73 6/28/2025 3:09:29 PM ; Let us now try to find the smallest value of weight that ous} can be measured by the spring balance. S | Activity 5.11: Let us calculate e Look atthe spring balance shown in Fig. 5.13 and note down the following: o How much is the weight difference indicated between the two bigger marks? The weight difference indicated between 0 and 01 N or between 01 N and 02 N is1N. o Howmany divisions (shown by smaller marks) are there between these two bigger marks? Fig. 5.13: A spring There are 5 divisions between these marks. @ a and c ese up o Howmuchweight does one small division indicate? Oy ws scate epee yuu s To _ 1N One small division can read 3 = 0.2 N. So, the smallest value that the spring balance can read is 0.2 N. Now using this method, calculate the smallest value of weight that can be measured with the spring balance given to you. Your schoollaboratory may have spring balances for which the range and the value of the smallest division may be different. It is, therefore, always necessary to look carefully at the spring balance (or any other instrument) you are about to use. Let us now learn how to measure weight using a spring balance. | Activity 5.12: Let us measure e Take a spring balance and a few objects. Keep in mind that the objects should not be heavier than the maximum value of weight the spring balance can measure, otherwise it may get ; damaged. e Suspend the objects one by one