Since the gravitational force | | \ acts without contact with the object @\ it attracts, it is a non-contact force. Gravitational force is always an attractive force, unlike magnetic force or electrostatic force, which can either be attractive or repulsive. You might have noticed that when an object is dropped from a height, it takes a straight vertical path downwards before touching the ground (Fig. 5.11a). When an object is thrown vertically upwards, the object moves up straight, slows down, _ stops momentarily at the top, and then Fig. 5.11: (a) Dropping an object from a height; takes a straight vertical path (b) Throwing an object vertically upwards downwards (Fig. 5.11b). While going up, the speed of the object goes on decreasing till the object comes to a stop, its direction of motion changes and while coming down the speed goes on increasing. We say that the object undergoes a vertical motion when it moves in a vertical direction under the influence of the gravitational force. Does the Earth pull every object with equal force? 5.5 Weight and Its Measurement The force with which the Earth pulls an object towards itself is called the weight of the object. The weight measures how strongly an object is pulled by the Earth. Since the weight is a force, it is measured in the same unit as that of force. Therefore, SI unit of weight is also newton (N). uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade # BSS60 R "BSSOON a POOED Chapter 5.indd 72 6/28/2025 3:09:25 PM \HOOOO NOON \H0006 revi) HH0000 SM) Chapter 5 Exploring Forces ) 7 Let us now try to find out if the Earth pulls every object with equal force. Activity 5.9: Let us explore MTT iy ith Wht e Take a spring and a few objects of different masses, such as a pencil box, a tiffin box, and a small stone. e Hang one end of the spring froma nail. Fromthe other (a end, hang an object and observe the spring. Does the spring stretch? e Now hang the other objects, one by one and notice the stretch in the spring each time. Is the stretch caused by * each object the same? When an object is hung from a spring, the spring J\ stretches due to the force applied on the object by the Earth. EP We find that the stretch caused in the spring is different , ise for different objects. This indicates that the Earth pulls ) COS different objects with different forces, that is, the weight of different objects is different. Can we use the spring to measure the weight of an object? Fig. 5.12: (a) A hanging spring; (b) Two different objects hung from the spring A step further A spring balance is a simple device used to measure weight (force). It consists of a spring fixed at one end, with a hook attached at the other end. When we hang an object from the hook, the spring stretches, and the