A step further In everyday life, particularly for the goods we commonly use, we are more interested in the amount of matter in an object (its mass), rather than the force applied by the Earth upon it (its weight). However, though while the units of mass are used, instead of the term mass, the term weight is typically used. For example, it is said that the weight of the wheat bag is 10 kg. But in scientific use, this is not correct and it is important to use the correct terms with their correct units, even if every day language is more casual. Chapter 5.indd 75 6/28/2025 3:09:45 PM 5.6 Floating and Sinking While taking out water from If we place some objects on water, some of . them float, while others fall to the bottom. | @ bucket filled with water The gravitational force of the Earth is | Using a mug, do you notice acting on all objects, then why don t all| that the mug feels lighter objects fall to the bottom? when it is inside water? Let us try to understand this. | Activity 5.13: Let us investigate e Take an empty plastic bottle (with its lid closed tightly) anda bucket full of water. e Push the bottle in the water (Fig. 5.15). Do you feel an upward push? Release the bottle. Does it bounce up? You would have felt an upward push and the bottle bounces back to the surface of the water. This indicates that water applies a force on the bottle in the upward direction. In fact, all liquids apply a similar force. The force applied by a liquid on an object in the upward direction is known as upthrust or buoyant force. When an object is placed in a liquid, the gravitational force due Fig. 5.15: Plastic bottle to the Earth acts on it downwards. But a buoyant force is applied in water on it by the liquid in the upward direction. If the gravitational force is more than the buoyant force, the object sinks, but if the two forces are equal, the object floats. One of the factors on which the buoyant force depends upon, is the density of the liquid. You will learn about density in a later chapter of this book. gas inside. This creates a light, porous rock filled with air pockets which is less dense than water and floats on it. Archimedes, a famous Greek scientist, discovered that when an Te Textbook of Science for Grade # BSS60 R "BSSOON a POOED object is fully or partially immersed in a liquid, it experiences an Chapter 5.indd 76 6/28/2025 3:09:52 PM upward force which is equal to the weight of the liquid it displaces. This is known as Archimedes Principle. If the weight of a liquid displaced by an object is smaller than the weight of the object, the object will sink in the liquid. If the weight of the liquid displaced is equal to the weight of