Does this mean that the force of friction will be greater if the surfaces are rough? Fig. 5.6: Friction between two surfaces due to irregularities Activity 5.4: Let us explore e Try Activity 5.3 again, but this time place the same object on different surfaces, such as glass, cloth, wood, ceramic tile, and sand. e Does the object stop after travelling the same distance as in Activity 5.3? e Does the object stop at the same distance on all surfaces? For different surfaces, the object stops after moving different distances so we can say that the force of friction depends upon the nature of the surfaces in contact. Friction is greater on rough surfaces. A step further Does the force or friction act only if the objects are moving on solid surfaces? What about objects moving through liquids and gases? Air, water, and other liquids also exert force of friction on the objects moving through them. Hence the objects, such as aeroplanes, ships, boats, or high-speed trains are designed with specific shapes to reduce the force of friction due to the air or water around them. uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade # BSS60 R "BSSOON a POOED Chapter 5.indd 68 6/28/2025 3:09:06 PM Chapter 5.indd 69 \HOOOO NOON \H0006 revi) HH0000 SM) Chapter 5 Exploring Forces ) 6 Is it essential for an object applying force on another object to always be in contact with it? 5.4.2 Non-contact forces There are forces whose effect can be experienced even if the objects are not in contact. These forces are called non-contact forces. Let us learn about non-contact forces. Magnetic force Do you remember learning about magnets in the chapter Exploring Magnets in Curiosity, Grade 6? We learnt that a magnet attracts objects made of magnetic materials. When two magnets are brought close to each other, like poles (North North, South-South) repel each other while unlike poles (North-South) attract each other. In an earlier chapter of this book, we also learnt about electromagnets which behave like magnets. Attraction and repulsion between objects are also a form of push and pull, that is, a force. Can you recall that a magnet could exert force on another magnet or a magnetic material without being in contact with it? | Activity 5.5: Let us test e Take two ring magnets and a wooden stick. e While holding the stick in a vertical position over a wooden table, insert one ring magnet onto the stick (Fig. 5.7). e Now insert the second ring magnet above it such that the like poles of the two magnets face each other. Does the second magnet stay floating above the first magnet? e Try pushing the second magnet down gently. Do you feel a force on it? e Now, reverse the poles of both the magnets. Does the second magnet still remain floating? We find that a magnet can exert force on another magnet without being in contact with it. The force exerted by a magnet on another magnet