cricket ball stopping on its own just before touching the boundary line (ii) Magnetic force (b) A child lifting a school bag Gii) Frictional force (c) A fruit falling from a tree (iv) Gravitational force (d) Balloon rubbed on woollen cloth attracting hair strands (v) Electrostatic force (e) Acompass needle pointing North Prepare some questions based on your learnings so far ... Chapter 5.indd 77 6/28/2025 3:10:00 PM Chapter 5.indd 78 . State whether the following statements are True or False. (i) A force is always required to change the speed of motion of an object. (ii) Due to friction, the speed of the ball rolling on a flat ground increases. (iii) There is no force between two charged objects placed at a small distance apart. . Two balloons rubbed with a woollen cloth are brought near each other. What would happen and why? . When you drop a coin in a glass of water, it sinks, but when you place a bigger wooden block in water, it floats. Explain. . Ifaballis thrown upwards, it slows down, stops momentarily, and then falls back to the ground. Name the forces acting on the ball and specify their directions. (i) During its upward motion (ii) During its downward motion (iii) At its topmost position . A ball is released from the point P and moves along an inclined plane and then along a horizontal surface as shown in the Fig. 5.16. It comes to stop at the point A on the horizontal surface. Think of a way so that when the ball is released from the same point P, it stops (i) before the point A (ii) after crossing the point A. Fig. 5.16 . Why do we sometimes slip on smooth surfaces like ice or polished floors? Explain. . Is any force being applied to an object in a non-uniform motion? . The weight of an object on the Moon becomes one-sixth of its weight on the Earth. What causes this change? Does the mass of the object also become one-sixth of its mass on the Earth? Shouldn't it Reflect on the questions framed by your friends and try to answer ... Cee 6/28/2025 3:10:06 PM Chapter 5.indd 79 \HOOOO NOON \H0006 revi) HH0000 SM) Chapter 5 Exploring Forces ) 10. Discover, design, and debate Three objects 1, 2, and 3 of the same size and shape but made of different materials are placed in the water. 1 They dip to different depths as shown in Fig. 5.17. If the weights of the three objects 1, 2, and 3 are Wy W and w,, respectively, then (i) W,=W, =Ww, (ii) w,> Ww, > Ww, (iii) Ww, > W,>W, (iv) w,> Ww, >w, Collect objects made of different materials, such as plastic, wool, silk, rubber, polythene sheet, paper, and metals. Rub one material with another and check if it attracts small pieces of paper or not, that is, whether it gets charged or not. Record your observations in a systematic manner and