region may have ample water resources but is still facing water scarcity? Many of our cities are such examples. Thus, water scarcity may be an outcome of large and growing population and consequent greater demands for water, and unequal access to it. A large population requires more water not only for domestic use but also to produce more food. Hence, to facilitate higher food-grain production, water resources are being over-exploited to expand irrigated areas for dry-season agriculture. Irrigated agriculture is the largest consumer of water. Now it is needed to revolutionise the agriculture through developing drought resistant crops and dry farming techniques. You may have seen in many television advertisements that most farmers have their Ue sit Sasa WA 25 Veh, sitea atta aat are eer A ae ar ats are Fat Fat Gat sit 114 Ah, site anfties aut art eat Sor wife act feet errr HY ear arava agar Bi Ser A ret at Saereray Bite Wah ST H arpa aaa Hema 4 BMA Hh SHrcor Haat ar set aat-arel Ff asi A agent Bag F wen arent rae at H are were at aay Sor AH fore ort at ait H Sta Fi A st ger areor F eat W weia ara, fra ea afer waters SH gre st Frafira at wena FI Water, Water Everywhere, Not a Drop to Drink: After a heavy downpour, a boy collects drinking water in Kolkata. Life in the city and its adjacent = districts was paralysed as incessant overnight rain, meaning a record 180 mm, flooded vast area and = disrupted traffic. a A Kashmiri earthquake survivor carries water in the snow in a devastated village. Fig. 3.1: Water Scarcity Reprint 2025-26 own wells and tube-wells in their farms for irrigation to increase their produce. But have you ever wondered what this could result in? That it may lead to falling groundwater levels, adversely affecting water availability and food security of the people. Post-independent India witnessed intensive industrialisation and urbanisation, creating vast opportunities for us. Today, large industrial houses are as commonplace as the industrial units of many MNCs (Multinational Corporations). The ever-increasing number of industries has made matters worse by exerting pressure on existing freshwater resources. Industries, apart from being heavy users of water, also require power to run them. Much of this energy comes from hydroelectric power. Moreover, multiplying urban centres with large and dense populations and urban lifestyles have not only added to water and energy requirements but have further aggravated the problem. If you look into the housing societies or colonies in the cities, you would find that most of these have their own groundwater pumping devices to meet their water needs. Not surprisingly, we find that fragile water resources are being overexploited and have caused their depletion in several of these cities. Do you know? Atal Bhujal Yojana (Atal Jal) is being implemented in 8220 water stressed Gram Panchayats of 229 administrative blocks / talukas in 80 districts of seven states, viz. Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka,