water? Archaeological and historical records show that from ancient times we have been constructing sophisticated hydraulic structures like dams built of stone rubble, reservoirs or lakes, embankments and canals for irrigation. Not surprisingly, we have continued this tradition in modern India by building dams in most of our river basins. Hydraulic Structures in Ancient India In the first century B.C., Sringaverapura near Allahabad had sophisticated water WATER RESOURCES Reprint 2025-26 en! $ \ } harvesting system channelling the flood Multi-purpose projects, launched after water of the river Ganga. Independence with their integrated water * During the time of Chandragupta Maurya, resources management approach, were thought dams, lakes and irrigation systems were of as the vehicle that would lead the nation to extensively built. development and progress, overcoming the * Evidences of sophisticated irrigation works ; ; ; have also been found in Kalinga, A dam is a barrier across flowing water that (Odisha), Nagarjunakonda (Andhra obstructs, directs or retards the flow, often Pradesh), Bennur (Karnataka), Kolhapur creating a reservoir, lake or impoundment. (Maharashtra), etc. Dam refers to the reservoir rather than the structure. Most dams have a section called a spillway or weir over which or through which h . it is intended that water will flow either Inthe 14 Century, the tank in Hauz Khas, intermittently or continuously. Dams are @ Delhi was constructed by Iltutmish for \ e classified according to structure, intended supplying water to Siri Fort area. purpose or height. Based on structure and Source: Dying Wisdom, CSE, 1997. the materials used, dams are classified as timber dams, embankment dams or masonry dams, with several subtypes. According to e the height, dams can be categorised as large dams and major dams or alternatively as low dams, medium height dams and high dams. handicap ofits colonial past. Jawaharlal Nehru proudly proclaimed the dams as the temples of modern India ; the reason being that it would integrate development of agriculture and the village economy with rapid industrialisation and growth of the urban economy. Inthe 11 Century, Bhopal Lake, one of the largest artificial lakes of its time was built. ee 7 = ~Activity Fig. 3.2: Hirakud Dam Find out more about any one traditional What are dams and how do they help us method of building dams and irrigation works. in conserving and managing water? Dams were traditionally built to impound rivers and @ rainwater that could be used later to irrigate We have sown the crops in Asar agricultural fields. Today, dams are built not We will bring Bhadu in Bhadra just for irrigation but for electricity generation, water supply for domestic and industrial Floods have swollen the Damodar uses, flood control, recreation, inland The sailing boats cannot sail navigation and fish breeding. Hence, dams are now referred to as multi-purpose projects where the many uses of the impounded water Reduce the floods a little are integrated with one another. For example, in the Sutluj-Beas river basin, the Bhakra Nangal project water is being used both