to harvest rainwater, groundwater, river water and flood water in keeping with the local ecological conditions and their water needs. In hill and mountainous regions, people built diversion channels like the guls or kuls of the Western Himalayas for agriculture. Rooftop rainwater harvesting was commonly FLOODS Basic Safety Precautions To Be Taken : practised to store drinking water, particularly in Rajasthan. In the flood plains of Bengal, people developed inundation channels to irrigate their fields. In arid and semi-arid regions, agricultural fields were converted into rain fed storage structures that allowed the water to stand and moisten the soil like the khadins in Jaisalmer and Johads in other parts of Rajasthan. In the semi-arid and arid regions of Rajasthan, particularly in Bikaner, Phalodi and Barmer, almost all the houses traditionally had underground tanks or tankas for storing drinking water. The tanks could be as large as a big room; one household in Phalodi had a tank that was 6.1 metres deep, 4.27 metres long and 2.44 metres wide. The tankas were part of the welldeveloped rooftop rainwater harvesting THE RIDE OF HIS LIFE Listen to radio/TV for the latest weather bulletins and flood warnings. Pass on the information to others. Make a family emergency kit which should include; a portable radio/transistor, torch, spare batteries, a first aid box along with essential medicines, ORS, dry food items, drinking water, matchboxes, candles and other essential items. Keep hurricane lamp, ropes, rubber tubes, umbrella and bamboo stick in your house. These could be useful. Keep your cash, jewellery, valuables, important documents etc. in a safe place. if there is a flood, move along with your family members and cattle to safe areas like relief camps, evacuation centres, elevated grounds where you can take shelter. Turn off power and gas connections before leaving your house. 8 <0 ROAR hatcopter rescues a woman and he chi trom the village of Mamarashien's Hinges cestret In aft Ti caspee wey rotant ie nena ouretaanotiees Bete pera AO IAP hetcopter rescons # worker who was bigger the Roodeters of the Taw ver in Juemns on Tharscioy Heavy rain drowns Kolkata During floods Don't enter into flood waters; it could be dangerous. Don't allow children to play in or near flood waters. Stay away from sewerage line, gutters, drains, culverts etc. Be careful of snakes; snakebites are common during floods. Stay away from electric poles and fallen power-lines to avoid electrocution. Don t use wet electrical appliances - get them checked before use. Eat freshly cooked and dry food. Always keep your food covered. Use boiled and filtered drinking water. Keep all drains, gutters near your house clean. Stagnation of water can breed vector/water-borne diseases .In case of sickness, seek medical assistance. Use bleaching powder and lime to disinfect the surroundings. PSR pak Ay Ae ML PRU NE 2 waver Exprom Par Igee and Jo couned by 3 serievel depresiinn came mba sete ss dempane fe city ratte traim were ory with thei ast animate pups shop Gerrit Crees