Hey Pinky, did you see those awesome T.V. reports on floods in Assam? My God! What You already know that three-fourth of the earth s surface is covered with water, but only a small proportion of it accounts for freshwater that can be put to use. This freshwater is mainly obtained from surface run off and ground water that is continually being renewed and recharged through the hydrological cycle. All water moves within the hydrological cycle ensuring that water is a renewable resource. You might wonder that if three-fourth of the world is covered with water and water is a renewable resource, then how is it that countries and regions around the globe suffer from water scarcity? Why is it predicted that by 2025, nearly two billion people will live in absolute water scarcity? havoc they have created it has destroyed and swept away everything in its path. Yes, Chintu, I did. Isn't it strange that water can give life and take life as well. What would we do without water? We need water to drink, cook our food, wash our clothes and wash ourselves as well. My father was telling me that in his factory they need a lot of water for a number of things. Did you know that they even need water for cooling the machines? In fact, the factory runs on the power supplied by the hydel power plant. Now, I can understand why through the ages we humans have chosen to live near water courses along the rivers and other water sources like springs, lakes, ponds and oases. WATER SCARCITY AND THE NEED FOR WATER CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT Given the abundance and renewability of water, it is difficult to imagine that we may suffer from water scarcity. The moment we speak of water shortages, we immediately associate it with regions having low rainfall or those that are drought prone. We instantaneously visualise the deserts of Rajasthan and women balancing many matkas (earthen pots) used for collecting and storing water and travelling long distances to get water. True, the availability of water resources varies over space and time, mainly due to the variations in seasonal and annual precipitation, but water scarcity in Reprint 2025-26 most cases is caused by over-exploitation, excessive use and unequal access to water among different social groups. Where is then water scarcity likely to occur? As you have read in the hydrological cycle, freshwater can be obtained directly from precipitation, surface run off and groundwater. Is it possible that an area or region may have ample water resources but is still facing water scarcity? Many of our cities are such examples. Thus, water scarcity may be an outcome of large and growing population and consequent greater demands for water, and unequal access to it. A large population requires more water not only for domestic use but also to produce more food. Hence, to facilitate higher food-grain production, water resources are being over-exploited to expand irrigated areas for dry-season agriculture. Irrigated agriculture is