will bring Bhadu in Bhadra just for irrigation but for electricity generation, water supply for domestic and industrial Floods have swollen the Damodar uses, flood control, recreation, inland The sailing boats cannot sail navigation and fish breeding. Hence, dams are now referred to as multi-purpose projects where the many uses of the impounded water Reduce the floods a little are integrated with one another. For example, in the Sutluj-Beas river basin, the Bhakra Nangal project water is being used both for Let the boats sail on your surface hydel power production and irrigation. (This popular Bhadu song in the Damodar valley Similarly, the Hirakud project in the e region narrates the troubles faced by people Mahanadi basin integrates conservation of oe the to the pooding of Damodar river known water with flood control. as the river of sorrow.) CONTEMPORARY INDIA II Oh! Damodar, we fall at your feet Bhadu will come a year later Reprint 2025-26 In recent years, multi-purpose projects and large dams have come under great scrutiny and opposition for a variety of reasons. Regulating and damming of rivers affect their natural flow causing poor sediment flow and excessive sedimentation at the bottom of the reservoir, resulting in rockier stream beds and poorer habitats for the rivers aquatic life. Dams also fragment rivers making it difficult for aquatic fauna to migrate, especially for spawning. The reservoirs that are created on the floodplains also submerge the existing vegetation and soil leading to its decomposition over a period of time. Do you know? Sardar Sarovar Dam has been built over the Narmada River in Gujarat. This is one of the largest water resource projects of India covering four states Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and Rajasthan. The Sardar Sarovar project would meet the requirement of water in drought-prone and desert areas. Sardar Sarovar Project will provide irrigation facilities to 18.45 lakh hectare of land, covering 3112 villages in 15 districts of Gujarat. It will also irrigate 2,46,000 hectare of land in the strategic desert districts of Barmer and Jalore in Rajasthan and 37,500 hectare in the tribal hilly tract of Maharashtra through lift. About 75 per cent of the command area in Gujarat is drought prone while entire command in Rajasthan is drought prone. Assured water supply will soon make this area drought proof. Source: Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Ltd. https://www.sardarsarovardam. org/ Ironically, the dams that were constructed to control floods have triggered floods due to sedimentation in the reservoir. Moreover, the big dams have mostly been unsuccessful in controlling floods at the time of excessive rainfall. Activity Collect information about floods occurred in different parts of the country due to heavy rainfall in recent times. These floods have not only devastated life and property but also caused extensive soil erosion. Sedimentation also meant that the flood plains were deprived of silt, a natural fertiliser, further adding on to the problem of land degradation. It was also observed that the multipurpose projects induced earthquakes, caused water-borne diseases and pests and pollution