of bamboo, divert water to the plant site where it is distributed into branches, again made and laid out with different forms of bamboo pipes. The flow of water into the pipes is controlled by manipulating the pipe positions. Fig 3.7 Activity Picture 4: Ifthe pipes pass a road, they are taken high above the land. Picture 5 and 6 Reduced channel sections and diversion units are used at the last stage of water application. The last channel section enables water to be dropped near the roots of the plant. 1. Collect information on how industries are polluting our water resources. 2. Enact with your classmates a scene of water dispute in your locality. CONTEMPORARY INDIA II Reprint 2025-26 EXERCISES 1. Multiple choice questions. (i) Based on the information given below classify each of the situations as suffering from water scarcity or not suffering from water scarcity . (a) Region with high annual rainfall. (b) Region having high annual rainfall and large population. (c) Region having high annual rainfall but water is highly polluted. (d) Region having low rainfall and low population. (ii) Which one of the following statements is not an argument in favour of multipurpose river projects? (a) Multi-purpose projects bring water to those areas which suffer from water scarcity. (b) Multi-purpose projects by regulating water flow helps to control floods. (c) Multi-purpose projects lead to large scale displacements and loss of livelihood. (d) Multi-purpose projects generate electricity for our industries and our homes. (iii) Here are some false statements. Identify the mistakes and rewrite them correctly. (a) Multiplying urban centres with large and dense populations and urban lifestyles have helped in proper utilisation of water resources. (b) Regulating and damming of rivers does not affect the river s natural flow and its sediment flow. (c) Today in Rajasthan, the practice of rooftop rainwater water harvesting has gained popularity despite high water availability due to the Indira Gandhi Canal. 2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words. (i) Explain how water becomes a renewable resource. (ii) What is water scarcity and what are its main causes? (iii) Compare the advantages and disadvantages of multi-purpose river projects. 3. Answer the following questions in about 120 words. (i) Discuss how rainwater harvesting in semi-arid regions of Rajasthan is carried out. (ii) Describe how modern adaptations of traditional rainwater harvesting methods are being carried out to conserve and store water. Water RESOURCES Pk Reprint 2025-26