Always keep your food covered. Use boiled and filtered drinking water. Keep all drains, gutters near your house clean. Stagnation of water can breed vector/water-borne diseases .In case of sickness, seek medical assistance. Use bleaching powder and lime to disinfect the surroundings. PSR pak Ay Ae ML PRU NE 2 waver Exprom Par Igee and Jo couned by 3 serievel depresiinn came mba sete ss dempane fe city ratte traim were ory with thei ast animate pups shop Gerrit Crees Artes} Kanes lee ping (in reads weer eragey with few Expeess Vets EMU and Circular rasbeay services eseadten peg ere Collect information about flood prone areas of the country WATER RESOURCES Reprint 2025-26 system and were built inside the main house or the courtyard. They were connected to the sloping roofs of the houses through a pipe. Rain falling on the rooftops would travel down the pipe and was stored in these underground tankas . The first spell of rain was usually not collected as this would clean the roofs and the pipes. The rainwater from the subsequent showers was then collected. Cen (a) Recharge through Hand Pump (b) Recharge through Abandoned Dugwell Rooftop rainwater is collected using a PVC pipe e Filtered using sand and bricks Underground pipe takes water to sump for immediate usage e Excess water from the sump is taken to the well Water from the well recharges the underground e Take water from the well (later) Fig 3.3: Rooftop Rainwater Harvesting : \26- CONTEMPORARY INDIA II Are you a water harvester? This monsoon, join us in counting the raindrops Fig. 3.4 The rainwater can be stored in the tankas till the next rainfall making it an extremely reliable source of drinking water when all other sources are dried up, particularly in the summers. Rainwater, or palar pani, as commonly referred to in these parts, is considered the purest form of natural water. Many houses constructed underground rooms adjoining the tanka to beat the summer heat as it would keep the A kul leads to a circular village tank, as the above in the Kaza village, from which water is released as and when required. Fig 3.5: Traditional method of rainwater harvesting Reprint 2025-26 e . Interesting Fact Rooftop rainwater harvesting is the most common practice in Shillong, Meghalaya. It is interesting because Cherapunjee and Mawsynram situated at a distance of 55 km. from Shillong receive the highest rainfall in the world, yet the state capital Shillong faces acute shortage of water. Nearly every household in the city has a rooftop rainwater harvesting structure. Nearly 15-25 per cent of the total water requirement of the household comes from rooftop water harvesting. Activity Find out other rainwater harvesting systems existing in and around your locality. room cool. Today, in western Rajasthan, sadly the practice of rooftop rainwater harvesting is on the decline as plenty of water is available due to the perennial Indira Gandhi Canal, though some houses still maintain the tankas since they do not like