at the time of excessive rainfall. Activity Collect information about floods occurred in different parts of the country due to heavy rainfall in recent times. These floods have not only devastated life and property but also caused extensive soil erosion. Sedimentation also meant that the flood plains were deprived of silt, a natural fertiliser, further adding on to the problem of land degradation. It was also observed that the multipurpose projects induced earthquakes, caused water-borne diseases and pests and pollution resulting from excessive use of water. Irrigation has also changed the cropping pattern of many regions with farmers shifting to water intensive and commercial crops. This has great ecological consequences like salinisation of the soil. Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana has been started which ensures access to some means to protective irrigation for all agricultural farms in the country, thus bringing much desired rural prosperity. Some of the broad objectives of this programme are to enhance the physical access of water on the farm and expand cultivable area under assured irrigation (har khet ko pani), improve on-farm water use efficiency to reduce wastage and increase availability both in duration and extent, irrigation and other water saving technologies (per drop more crop) and introduce sustainable water conservation practices, etc. Do you know? Do you know that the Krishna-Godavari dispute is due to the objections raised by Karnataka and Andhra _ Pradesh governments? It is regarding the diversion of more water at Koyna by the Maharashtra government for a multipurpose project. This would reduce downstream flow in their states with adverse consequences for agriculture and industry. Activity Make a list of inter-state water disputes. WATER RESOURCES Reprint 2025-26 & " | 68 E nex AFGHANISTAN 36 N INDIA MAJOR RIVERS AND DAMS CHINA CT'ie2Et') Tsangpo R. Kota Barrag Rana Pratap-Saga' Gandhi Sagar { ae Taya Konar@._ Sardar Sarovar Narmada R. Hirakud ARABIAN BAY OF SEA BENGAL 16 & Nagarjuna Sagar P =< ns , Tungabhadra 4 ae ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS LAKSHADWEEP (INDIA) (ON) 0 200 400 600 km * 4 e ee} ss 2 8N INDIAN 76 88 92 E % India: Major Rivers and Dams \ 24 Contemporary INDIA II Reprint 2025-26 RAINWATER HARVESTING Many thought that given the disadvantages and rising resistance against the multipurpose projects, water harvesting system was a viable alternative, both socioeconomically and environmentally. In ancient India, along with the sophisticated hydraulic structures, there existed an extraordinary tradition of water-harvesting system. People had in-depth knowledge of rainfall regimes and soil types and developed wide ranging techniques to harvest rainwater, groundwater, river water and flood water in keeping with the local ecological conditions and their water needs. In hill and mountainous regions, people built diversion channels like the guls or kuls of the Western Himalayas for agriculture. Rooftop rainwater harvesting was commonly FLOODS Basic Safety Precautions To Be Taken : practised to store drinking water, particularly in Rajasthan. In the flood plains of Bengal, people developed inundation channels to irrigate their fields. In arid and semi-arid regions,