agricultural years). 5. Net sown area- the physical extent of land on which crops are sown harvested is known as net sown area. Area sown more than once in an agricultural year plus net sown area is known as gross cropped area. Lanpb USE PaTTeERN IN INDIA The use of land is determined both by physical factors such as topography, climate, soil types as well as human factors such as population density, technological capability and culture and traditions etc. Reprint 2025-26 General land use categories 1960-61 General land use categories 2019-20 Reporting Area: 100 Per cent 18.11% 6.23% 3.73% 3.50% @ Forest @ Barren and unculturable waste land @ Area under non-agricultural uses M@ Permanent pasture and grazing land Area under misc. tree crops and groves @ Culturable waste land {)} Fallow other than current fallow Current fallow {) Net sown area Source : Directorate of Economics and Statistics, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers Welfare, Government of India, 2023 Fig. 1.4 Total geographical area of India is 3.28 million sq km. Land use data, however, is available only for 93 per cent of the total geographical area because the land use reporting for most of the north-east states except Assam has not been done fully. Moreover, some areas of Jammu and Kashmir occupied by Pakistan and China have also not been surveyed. Activity afd _J Try to do a comparison between the two pie charts (Fig. 1.4 ) given for land use and find out why the net sown area and the land under forests have changed from 1960-61 to 2019-20 very marginally. The land under permanent pasture has also decreased. How are we able to feed our huge cattle population on this pasture land and what are the consequences of it? Most of the other than the current fallow lands are either of poor quality or the cost of cultivation of such land is very high. Hence, these lands are cultivated once or twice in about two to three years and if these are included in the net sown area then the percentage of NSA in India comes to about 54 per cent of the total reporting area. The pattern of net sown area varies greatly from one state to another. It is over 80 per cent of the total area in Punjab and Haryana and less than 10 per cent in Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Manipur and Andaman Nicobar Islands. e ) Find out reasons for the low proportion of y net sown area in these states. \ = Forest area in the country is far lower than the desired 33 per cent of geographical area, as it was outlined in the National Forest Policy (1952). It was considered essential for | maintenance of the ecological balance. The } livelihood of millions of people who live on the i RESOURCES AND DEVELOPMENT Reprint 2025-26 fringes of these forests depends upon it. A part of the land is termed as waste land and land put to other non-agricultural uses. Waste