wr @ Can you identify and name the various items / used in making life comfortable in our villages \ and towns. List the items and name the material used in their making. Everything available in our environment which can be used to satisfy our needs, provided, it is technologically accessible, economically feasible and culturally acceptable can be termed as Resource . Physical Environment (Nature) Human bat Beings NQ Fig. 1.1: Interdependent relationship between nature, technology and institutions Technology Institutions ) ) The process of transformation of things available in our environment involves an interactive relationship between nature, technology and institutions. Human beings interact with nature through technology and create institutions to accelerate their economic development. Do you think that resources are free gifts of nature as is assumed by many? They are not. Resources are a function of human activities. Human beings themselves are essential components of resources. They transform material available in our environment into resources and use them. These resources can be classified in the following ways (a) (b) On the basis of origin biotic and abiotic On the basis of exhaustibility - renewable and non-renewable (c) On the basis of ownership - individual, community, national and international (d) On the basis of status of development potential, developed stock and reserves. RESOURCES cy--> Natural Renewable Non-Renewable | Continuous or flow e.g. wind, water Biological Natural Wildlife Vegetation (Forests) q a: Recyclable e.g. metals Human Structures and institutions Quantity and Quality Non Recyclable e.g. Fossil fuels Fig. 1.2: Classification of resources Reprint 2025-26 DEVELOPMENT OF RESOURCES Resources are vital for human survival as well as for maintaining the quality of life. It was believed that resources are free gifts of nature. As a result, human beings used them indiscriminately and this has led to the following major problems. e Depletion of resources for satisfying the greed of a few individuals. e Accumulation ofresources in few hands, which, in turn, divided the society into two segments i.e. haves and have nots or rich and poor. e Indiscriminate exploitation of resources has led to global ecological crises such as, global warming, ozone layer depletion, environmental pollution and land degradation. Activity 1. Imagine, if the oil supply gets exhausted one day, how would this affect our life style? 2. Plana survey in your colony/village to | investigate people s attitude towards recycling of the domestic/agricultural wastes. Ask questions about : (a) What do they think about resources they use? (b) What is their opinion about the wastes, and its utilisation? (c) Collage your results. An equitable distribution of resources has become essential for a sustained quality of life and global peace. If the present trend of resource depletion by a few individuals and countries continues, the future of our planet is in danger. Therefore, resource planning is essential for sustainable existence of all forms of life. Sustainable existence is a component of sustainable development. CONTEMPORARY INDIA II Sustainable development a Sustainable economic development means development should take place without damaging the