the evening. I take my dog for a walk in the evening. Itake my dog for a walk in the evening. Statements and exclamatory sentences usually end with a falling tone. Listen to the teacher read these sentences aloud and repeat it with the correct intonation. a Very well. We shall go to the king. Yes, yes, it is! Now, practise by saying the following sentences with the correct intonation. Good day, kind sirs. We regret to inform you that we do not know where it is. You describe it perfectly! You shall come with me to face the King! WIT AND WISDOM POORVI Let us write I You have observed that the kutcha road leading to your colony is in a very bad condition due to heavy rains. The potholes are dangerous for people and can lead to accidents. They also serve as a breeding ground for mosquitoes as there is stagnant water all around. Write a letter of complaint to the Commissioner, Municipal Corporation or the Sarpanch, Gram Panchayat to look into the matter and take necessary action. Follow the format of a formal letter and draft the letter with the help of cues given below. Paragraph 1: state the I would like to bring to your attention... purpose of writing and the I am writing to draw your attention issue towards... Paragraph 2: give details The problems that we face are... and consequences of the ... ls causing inconvenience as... problem As a result... Consequently... Paragraph 3: give Firstly, I would like to suggest... suggestions and request for Secondly... swift action I request you to look into this matter and... I look forward to your prompt response... I Staging a play requires creativity, organisation, and teamwork. Steps involved in staging a play: 1. Choose a play that suits your requirement of theme, duration, number of actors, and available resources. 2. Choose a director, a stage manager, a light and sound incharge, a props manager, a costume designer, and a makeup artist. 3. Hold auditions and decide the roles. 4. Read the script and plan stage movements, and positions for each scene. 5. Make a schedule for rehearsal. 6. Work on the set design (backdrop) and make or collect the required props. 7. Design or gather appropriate costumes. 8. Plan makeup and hairstyles to suit the play s time period. 9. Check light and sound arrangements. 10. Hold a dress rehearsal including sound and light effects. 11. Promote the event through posters and pamphlets. 12. Organise the backstage with labelled props, costumes, and actors entrances or exits. 13. Present the play to the audience. Now, present the enactment of the play Wisdom Paves the Way with the help of the steps you have just read. Ensure you use the correct intonation and sentence stress. I -_ Stories related to wit and wisdom have always fascinated the readers. Go to the library and read the stories associated with the following. Vikramaditya and Betal Tenali Rama Gopal the Jester Panchatantra