s accusation. 5. Shiv Datt reveals that the camel is blind in its right eye as it had only aie chewed on the leaves on the left side of the road. 6. Dev Datt explains his observation about the camel s pain and careful movement. 7. Har Datt clarifies how he knew that the camel has a short tail. 8.The merchant accuses the four men of knowing a lot about his missing camel. f Let us think and reflect _ I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow. 1. DEV DaTT : Ten days are but a short spanin the grand scheme of things. We may still have many more roads to wander before we find employment befitting all four of us. RAM DatT : Jf only we could secure an audience with the King of Ujjain. Iam confident he would recognise our talents and appoint us to his service. SHIV DATT : J share your belief. Dev DATT : Indeed, we ought to be united in this hope. That is why we press on towards Ujjain. HAR DatTT : (Pausing thoughtfully) Gaining an audience with the King is no simple task. We need to devise a strategy. (i) Identify the false statement from the two given below and rectify it. \) A. Dev Datt believes that finding employment is an easy task. ~ (GP B. Ram Datt is confident that the King would recognise ' \ their talents. (ii) What does Ram Datt s confidence in gaining the King s recognition tell us about him? (iii) Complete the sentence given below with the correct option from those given. In the line, That s why we press on towards Ujjain , the phrase press on refers to POORVI (iv) 2. KING walking with heavy steps moving forward with determination slowing down frequently for rest GB OW PS stopping briefly to save time Har Datt says, We need to devise a strategy. What can be inferred about Har Datt s character from his statement? A. He is doubtful of their abilities and wants to give up. B. He is eager to rush into the palace without preparation. C. He is cautious and thoughtful, preferring to plan ahead. D. He relies on others to make decisions for the group. (To the four men) You have demonstrated remarkable intelligence and the ability to see beyond the obvious. Such minds are rare and highly valued in my court. I extend to you the honour of becoming my advisers. Your counsel shall guide my decisions, and your wisdom shall be a beacon for my kingdom. What do you say to my offer? RaM DatT: (Stepping forward) Your Highness, it is an honour we had (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) not dared to dream of. Select the option that is true for both Assertion (A) and Reason (R). (A): The Merchant left the court feeling humbled and ashamed. (R): The King commanded that the four wise men join his court. A. Both (A) and