THe WIT THAT Won HEartTs Let us do these activities before we read. I Select qualities of a person who uses wit from the box given below. ann nnn nO , : Wise serious clever powerful humorous ; ; stubborn courageous observant charming creative , punctual confident energetic ' Now, discuss reasons for your choice of qualities. II Work in pairs and answer the riddles that are given below. Share the answers with your classmates and teacher. I can be a friend or a foe, depending on how you use me. I can bring both joy or pain. What am I? What is always in front of you but can t be seen? What has to be shared before you can keep it? | Note: You will find the answers of these riddles on page 16. 0873CHOI POORVI Discuss in pairs. NN 1. Why are qualities like humour and wit important in a person? e 2. Why do you think kings and queens preferred to have witty people among their courtiers? 3. If you were asked to solve a disagreement between two people, what approach would you take? 4. Have you ever been in a situation where a small misunderstanding led to a big problem? How was it resolved? Let us read The Vijayanagara Empire was renowned for its glory, wealth, and cultural achievements. Among its many illustrious rulers, King Krishnadeva Raya (ruled 1509-29 CE) stood out as a wise and powerful monarch. His reign is often referred to as the Golden Era of the Vijayanagara Empire, a time when art, literature, and architecture flourished. A great patron of learning, Krishnadeva Raya was not only an eminent warrior but also a gifted poet. His works, such as the epic Amuktamalyada and the Sanskrit drama Jambavati Parinayam, are acclaimed even today. TS] _ | a eee We re F Ae S| Ee | aS a eee DM iia tl AD | a io al \ | / Krishnadeva Raya s court was home to eight celebrated poets, collectively known as the Ashtadiggajas. These poets, including Allasani Peddana and Tenali Ramakrishna, enriched the literary tradition with their masterpieces. Tenali Ramakrishna, in particular, was known for his quick wit and humour, earning him a special place in the king s court as both a poet and a witty advisor. His clever solutions to seemingly insurmountable problems made him a beloved figure in the empire s history. Even the wisest rulers face moments of disharmony, and at one such time, the king had a quarrel with his queen, Thirumalambal, over a seemingly trivial matter. For weeks, he did not utter a single word to her, and in his frustration, stopped visiting her altogether. His absence cast a shadow over the palace, and the once cheerful corridors seemed quiet and forlorn. Thirumalambal, distraught and upset, tried her best to resolve the issue but failed. With no other alternative, she decided to seek the help of Tenali Rama, the court s brilliant and witty poet. Rama