Thirumalambal, he began, his voice gentle, I have been foolish. I see now that I overreacted. I let my pride blind me. I m so sorry. The queen, who had longed for this moment, smiled and replied, If you like, we can leave this quarrel behind us. I would very much like to listen to your poem. Rama, who had orchestrated this settlement, felt victorious. The king and the queen later presented him with valuable gifts for his service. The royal couple s bond was restored, and the palace brimmed once again with joy and laughter. Let us discuss I Rectify the following false statements from the text. 1. The queen insulted the king by speaking against the quality of his poem. 2. Tenali Rama immediately went to the king and convinced him to talk to the queen. 3. The courtiers admired the king s poem and praised his literary talent. 4. The ministers in the court were eager to hear Tenali Rama s idea about paddy cultivation. 5. The king never realised his mistake and continued to stay angry with the queen. . Let us think and reflect I Read the extracts and answer the questions that follow. 1. .. The king thought I was disrespecting his poem and stormed off. Since then, he has not spoken to me. If I had known this would happen I would have chosen another day. Help me, please, Rama. Only you can help the king understand. Rama nodded thoughtfully. If you like, I will try my best to resolve this matter, Your Highness. But this needs a well-planned approach and I may need time to find the right strategy. (i) Why does the queen believe that only Tenali Rama can help the king understand? WIT AND WISDOM orchestrated: arranged brimmed: ovegflowed POORVI (ii) What does the queen s statement, If I had known this would happen, I would have chosen another day , suggest about her feelings? A. She is angry at the king for overreacting. B. She regrets the unintended misunderstanding. C. She believes the poem was not worth listening to. D. She is worried that the king might punish her. (iii) How does Tenali Rama s response reflect his wisdom and problem-solving skills? (iv) Fillin the blank by choosing the correct option from those given in the brackets. The king s reaction shows that he is sensitive and (has a lot of faith/takes great pride) in his poetry. That evening, the king approached the queen with a softened expression. Thirumalambal , he began, his voice gentle, I have been foolish. I see now that I overreacted. I let my pride blind me. I m so sorry. The queen, who had longed for this moment, smiled and replied, If you like, we can leave this quarrel behind us. I would very much like to listen to your poem. (i) Complete the following with a suitable explanation. When the king said, I let my pride blind me , he means that__. (ii)