O king! til is sesame; kashta is stick, tilakashta means sticks of sesame plants . Then, displaying the rope Rama said, This is the rope used to tie a buffalo mahisha means buffalo, bandhana means the rope used for tying so, this is tila-kashta-mahisha-bandhana. The king burst out laughing. The poor visitor had become scared hearing such a difficult name. In this way, Rama had taught the arrogant scholar a lesson. II You will once again listen to the woman narrating the story. As you listen, number the events of the story in the correct order of occurrence. Box fe Let us listen (refer to page 23) I You will listen to a presentation about the wonderful Rock Garden of Chandigarh. As you listen, answer the questions in one to three exact words. Hello everyone! The Rock Garden is a spacious open-air exhibition. It is a proof of human creativity with waste materials. This garden was created by Nek Chand, in 1957. This is the _ reason the garden is also known as Nek Chand s Rock Garden. J ~" The garden was featured on an Indian postage stamp in 1983 4 \ and Nek Chand was awarded the Padma Shri a year later. The Rock Garden is spread across a massive 40-acre wonderland. Do you know why I say this? Well, it is because it has several colourful sculptures and mosaic of art pieces. What is unique about the Rock Garden is that it is divided into three distinct phases. Each area reveals a unique collection of installations including terracotta pots, light fixtures, and even broken toilet pots, that have been transformed into extraordinary masterpieces. You will be surprised to know that the borders of the Rock Garden are lined with around 5,000 statues. The Rock Garden is truly a Vly place that celebrates the best from waste. I sincerely recommend - that you visit this extraordinary national treasure. ~ &) i Let us listen (refer to page 42) I You will listen to four people sharing their thoughts on why they enjoy witty characters in stories. As you listen, match statements 1-6 given below to the speakers (i)-(iv). There are two statements you do not need. SPEAKER (i) SPEAKER (il) : SPEAKER (ili): SPEAKER (iv) : : Tlove witty characters because they make serious situations funny! Even when things seem tense, they always havea clever response. Such characters never panic, think fast, and solve problems in the smartest way. I wish I could think that quickly! Witty characters are the best because they make stories exciting. I especially like how they turn ordinary moments into something memorable. It makes me feel like intelligence and humour are just as powerful as strength. I enjoy witty characters because they always have an answer for everything! They use humour instead of fighting, and that s really wonderful. Even in folktales, they prove that smart thinking can win over force. It makes me laugh but also teaches me to stay calm in