46) ~ Na f WIT AND WISDOM 1. The rope tying the bundle of sticks was__. (i) loose (ii) thick (iii) short 2. The scholar is finally referred to as (i) irritable (ii) mischievous (iii) arrogant II You will once again listen to the story. As you listen, number the events of the story in the correct order of occurrence. 2 4 fs) 7 . The great scholar was ashamed because he did not know what to say. . Rama accepted the challenge thrown by the visitor. . Rama had a bundle tied in silk when he came to the palace. . The king laughed at the explanation given by Rama. . The visitor wanted to show his superiority over others in the palace. . Rama showed the work to be a bundle of sticks tied together by a rope. . The king wanted to know more about the work mentioned by Rama. . The court scholars were afraid of the king s anger. Let us speak I While asking questions, it is important to use the appropriate tone to convey the correct meaning. 1. Yes or No questions have a rising tone at the end. Are you coming home? 2. -Wh questions have a falling tone at the end. When will you come home? This rise and fall in tone is called intonation. Now, workin pairs and mark the intonation in the questions given below. Take turns to practise by saying them aloud with the correct intonation. (i) Is this your cat? (ii) What is the name of your cat? (iii) Will you be going to your village? (iv) Why are you going to your village? (v) Is this where you live? POORVI (vi) Where do you live? (vii) Can I meet your parents? (viii) How are your parents? (ix) Do you have any plans for tomorrow? (x) What are you going to do tomorrow? What , Why , When , How , Where , and Who are the words used to ask questions. These words are called question words. Let us use these words and make some questions. While making questions, remember the correct word order. Who is the cleverest character in the story? (Correct) Who the cleverest character is in the story? (Incorrect) Work in pairs and take turns to ask and answer questions about a trip that you are planning. Remember to use the correct intonation while asking these questions. Here are some prompts for you. The destination (Where...) Purpose (Why...) Mode of transport (How...) Duration (When...) Travel companions (Who...) Activities (What...) Now, work in pairs and take turns to ask and answer the questions about witty characters in folktales or stories you have read. Use the correct intonation while asking questions. For example: Your favourite character in the folktale (Who...?) Who is your favourite character in the folktale? 1. The name of the witty character (Who...?) 2. The reason for her/his wit being important in the story (Why...?) 3. The most famous trick or clever