guide my decisions, and your wisdom shall be a beacon for my kingdom. What do you say to my offer? RaM DatT: (Stepping forward) Your Highness, it is an honour we had (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) not dared to dream of. Select the option that is true for both Assertion (A) and Reason (R). (A): The Merchant left the court feeling humbled and ashamed. (R): The King commanded that the four wise men join his court. A. Both (A) and (R) are true, and (R) is the correct explanation of (A). B. Both (A) and (R) are true, but (R) is not the correct explanation of (A). C. (A) is true, but (R) is false. D. (A) is false, but (R) is true. Complete the following sentence by choosing the correct option. The line, See beyond the obvious means that the men had the abilityto_ yj. A. challenge common beliefs with reasoning B. interpret information in traditional ways C. notice details that others might overlook D. predict what is going to happen in the future Complete the following sentence with a suitable reason. Ram Datt described the King s offer as an honour we had not dared to dream of because How does the King s offer to the four men reflect his values as a ruler? S ) we, &): vee II Answer the following questions. 1. What does the dusty road leading to Ujjain tell us about the challenges of the young men s journey? 2. Why did the merchant become suspicious of the four men? What does this tell us about him? 3. How do the four young men s observations about the camel serve as a turning point in the play? 4. Why did the King believe the four young men and not the merchant? 5. How does the capability of the four young men make them suitable to become advisors? 6. Why does the merchant feel ashamed for accusing the four young men of stealing his camel? Explain in your own words. > Let us learn I Complete the sentences by filling in the noun form of the textual words given in the brackets. 1. Some word games need a lot of thought and . (deduce) 2.We need to make close of animals in order to understand their behaviour. (observe) 3. A detailed of the documents shows a lot of errors. (scrutinise) 4.You should not make any false against anyone. (accuse) 5. She was given an award in of her contribution to literature. (recognise) II Match the expressions in Column 1 with their meanings in Column 2. WIT AND WISDOM POORVI 5. erupts in applause (v) meeting or hearing someone 6. grand scheme of things (vi) complete sincerity 7. taken aback (vii) to pause or rest for some time . more than meets the eye (vili) overall plan of life in a larger context Now, make sentences using any five of the expressions from Column 1. III Match the different meanings of face and bear