, he began, his voice gentle, I have been foolish. I see now that I overreacted. I let my pride blind me. I m so sorry. The queen, who had longed for this moment, smiled and replied, If you like, we can leave this quarrel behind us. I would very much like to listen to your poem. (i) Complete the following with a suitable explanation. When the king said, I let my pride blind me , he means that__. (ii) Why does the queen say, If you like, we can leave this quarrel behind us ? (iii) Fillin the blank by choosing the correct option from those given in the brackets. The king acknowledges that his pride clouded his judgement, which shows . (intelligence and courage/maturity and self-awareness) (iv) State any one characteristic that the queen s response to the king s apology shows about her. = ~ II Answer the following questions. 1. Why was the Vijayanagara Empire considered to be in its Golden Era during Krishnadeva Raya s reign? WY) f \ 2. How did Tenali Ramakrishna gain a special place in the king s court? 3. How did the quarrel between the king and the queen affect the palace? 4. What strategy did Tenali Rama use to make the king realise his mistake? WIT AND WISDOM 5. What was the reaction of the courtiers when Tenali Rama introduced his special paddy seeds? , 6. How does the story conclude, and what lesson can be learnt from it? Let us learn I Fill in the blanks and complete the paragraph by choosing suitable expressions from the box given below. cast a shadow murmur swept through the room hush fell over mind raced back stormed off rippled through My mother is quite witty, and her sense of humour always lightens stressful moments. Once, at a family dinner, an argument began over a minor issue, and 1. ___ , making everyone feel uncomfortable. a Just as things were getting serious, she made a clever remark and = : laughter 2. the gathering, making everyone relaxed. The person ; who started the argument 3. . Everyone disapproved of the action anda 4. .My5. to how my mother had saved other situations . like this. Without her, such moments would have 6. over the gatherings. I hope that I grow up to be as witty as my mother. II The writer uses words like roared , murmuzr in the text to indicate the sound produced. Fill in the blanks with suitable sound words from the box given below. You may refer to a dictionary. murmur sighed mumble gasped '_ snickers thud groan rattle | roared whispered 1. As the teacher began the riddle challenge, a of excitement spread through the classroom. 2. Anaya in relief she loved riddles more than solving Mathematics problems. 3. Think carefully, the teacher began to , as she wrote a riddle on the board. 4. When the question was revealed, a few students , realising it wasn