of my camel as if (xi) possibility it stood before you, yet you dare to claim not to have seen it! V Complete the following story with modal verbs in the box given below by using the clues from the functions given within brackets. may must should can I might could need to ] POORVI An old man, known for his wisdom, lived in a small village. One day, a young boy asked him, How 1. (ability) I become wise like you? The old man smiled and said, Wisdom 2. (necessity) be earned through patience. You 3. (suggestion) listen, more than you speak. The boy thought for a while and replied, It 4. (weak possibility) take years, but Ill try. The old man nodded. You 5. (obligation) learn from your mistakes too. Wisdom 6. (possibility) come slowly, but it always arrives for those who seek it. The boy knew he 7. (ability) become wise if he followed the old man s advice. VI Rewrite the following sentences using appropriate modal verbs. You may take clues from the highlighted words. One example has been done for you. 1. It is advisable for you to think before you speak. You should think before you speak. 2. It is unnecessary to worry about things beyond your control. 3. It is not possible for a person to gain experience without taking risks. 4. It is essential to treat others with kindness, even when they disagree with you. 5. It is not allowed to interrupt when someone else is speaking. sO Let us listen I You will listen to four people sharing their thoughts on why they enjoy witty characters in stories. As you listen, match statements 1-6 given below to the speakers (i)-(iv). There are two statements you do not need. (Transcript for teacher on page 48) I I -_ Let us speak The way in which a word is stressed in a sentence can change its meaning. Read the following examples. 1. Look there, friends. (look, not go or do some other action) 2. Look there, friends. (look there, not here or somewhere else) 3. Look there, friends. (is addressing the friends and not anybody else around) Now, work in pairs. Take turns to say the following sentences aloud by stressing on the highlighted words. Share the meanings of the sentences with each other and teacher. Itake my dog for a walk in the evening. I take my dog for a walk in the evening. I take my dog for a walk in the evening. I take my dog for a walk in the evening. Itake my dog for a walk in the evening. Statements and exclamatory sentences usually end with a falling tone. Listen to the teacher read these sentences aloud and repeat it with the correct intonation. a Very well. We shall go to the king. Yes, yes, it is! Now, practise by saying the following sentences with the correct intonation. Good day, kind sirs. We regret to inform you that