of alliteration from the poem. A refrain is a repeated line or phrase that appears in each stanza. Identify the refrain from the poem. Irony is a literary device that emphasises the difference between what is expected and what actually happens. It often involves a situation where the outcome is the opposite of what is expected, creating a surprising or a humorous effect. For example, Mrs. Jones excitement about her garden contrasts with the speaker s disappointment on how ordinary it is. Identify the line(s) from the poem that display(s) situational irony. VII Complete the following sentences appropriately. 1. The word concrete can refer to in Mrs. Jones garden. 2. The title also has a symbolic meaning, as the poem provides a clear or concrete example of Mrs. Jones gardening habits. VIII The title A Concrete Example carries both literal and symbolic I (metaphorical) meaning. Such word play is called a pun. A pun is a figure of speech that uses words with multiple meanings or words that sound alike but have different meanings, creating a humorous effect. Itried arguing with my pencil but it kept making sharp points. (suggests the idea of an actual sharp pencil point and strong argument points) My pencil and I had a disagreement but we finally got to the point. (refers to solving an argument and the pencil s tip) Let us think and reflect Read the given extract and answer the questions that follow. 1. My next-door neighbour, Mrs. Jones, has got a garden full of stones: A crazy path, a lily pond, arockery and, just beyond A sundial with a strange device, which Mrs. Jones thinks rather nice. WIT AND WISDOM (i) What can be inferred about Mrs. Jones s taste in gardening from the description of her garden being full of stones ? , (ii) Identify whether the following statement is true or false. : e The garden serves as a means to reveal more about Mrs. Jones herself. (iii) What does the poet mean by crazy path ? (iv) What does the sundial with a strange device suggest about Mrs. Jones personality? A. She has a fascination with unusual items. B. She prefers traditional garden decorations. C. She is uninterested in her garden s appearance. D. She likes modern and expensive items. II Answer the following questions. 1. How does Mrs. Jones feel about her garden? Support your answer with = : evidence from the poem. ' 2. Why do you think the speaker describes the plants as being so small that they could be planted with a pin? 3. What do we get to know about Mrs. Jones based on her gardening style and her interaction with the speaker? 4. The poem portrays Mrs. Jones ina positive light. Support this statement. 5. What does the poem tell us about the way people think differently about the world around them? & _ Ww! e! Let us learn I Select the appropriate word from the brackets that correctly replaces the underlined