Match the expressions in Column 1 with their meanings in Column 2. WIT AND WISDOM POORVI 5. erupts in applause (v) meeting or hearing someone 6. grand scheme of things (vi) complete sincerity 7. taken aback (vii) to pause or rest for some time . more than meets the eye (vili) overall plan of life in a larger context Now, make sentences using any five of the expressions from Column 1. III Match the different meanings of face and bear with the correct usage in the sentences given in the table below. (n. stands for the word noun and v. stands for the word verb.) words | Meanings |= Sentences 1. (n.) the front part of} (i) Ravi turned to face a person s head from his father, when he the forehead to the was called. chin 2. (v.) to be positioned} (ii) The face of the clock with the face or front was painted red and towards blue. 3. (v.) to deal with} @iii) She has a_ round, a difficult task or smiling face. situation 4. (n.) the front or} (iv) Weshouldbereadyto surface of a thing face life s challenges. 1. (v.) tolerate (i) The trees that I planted in my garden took a long time to bear fruit. 2. (v.) accept (ii) I spotted a bear on a wildlife safari. 3. (n.) a large heavy) (ili) Riya agreed to bear mammal the responsibilities a with confidence. *$ q 4. (v.) produce; give! (iv) Ican t bear the sound a? YS birth to of vehicles honking. WIT AND WISDOM IV Match the highlighted words in the sentences in Column 1 with the functions they express in Column 2. 1. I will gladly pay your fee if (i) expression of you can cure it. disbelief 2. You must have stolen it (ii) imagined and sold it off. (hypothetical) possibility 3. You shall come with me to (iii) moral obligation or face the King! advice 4. How could you possibly (iv) challenge know that? 5. I am confident he would (v) logical conclusion recognise our talents and appoint us to his service. 6. A camel with a long tail (vi) wish or hope would have fended off these pests with ease. 7. They may tell us more than (vii) necessity meets the eye. 8. May your wisdom shine (vili) prediction upon Ujjain and guide us to prosperity. 9. Indeed, we ought to be (ix) willingness united in this hope. 10. We need to devise a (x) command strategy. 11. You speak of my camel as if (xi) possibility it stood before you, yet you dare to claim not to have seen it! V Complete the following story with modal verbs in the box given below by using the clues from the functions given within brackets. may must should can I might could need to ] POORVI An old man, known for his wisdom, lived in a small village. One day, a young boy asked him, How 1. (ability) I become wise