narrated in a logical sequence. Descriptive details are used. Characters and settings are clearly described. The narrator s emotions or thoughts are shared. The essay includes a challenge or a problem or a turning point. 15 POORVI 3. Conclusion The essay ends with an outcome. e A lesson or a message is clearly stated. 4, Writing Style The tone is personal and engaging. First person narration is used (for example, I, my ). 5. Language The essay uses simple and clear language. Grammar, punctuation, and spellings are correctly used. Note: A narrative essay focuses on sharing a personal experience to convey a specific lesson, a reflection, or an idea. It has an introduction, a body, and a conclusion. Now, write a narrative essay based on any one of the situations given below. The Day I Learnt the Value of Teamwork A Small Act of Kindness that Made a Difference Let us explore I Limericks are poems in five lines that have a twist in the last line. Read and enjoy the following limericks and create one on your own. Raju flew his kite in the sky so wide, It soared with grace, full of pride. ee But a crow came along, Singing its song, And now it s the crow on a joyride! II Go to the library and read a story of your choice. Share its theme and the interesting parts of the story with your classmates and teacher. III You must have read stories of wit, humour, and wisdom in your own language or English. Make a list of these stories that you have read on a chart paper. Each student should read at least one new story from the list. Answers: 9199S V 7 aININJ ay, * dUILI, Z SplOM T : } A CONCRETE EXAMPLE Let us do these activities before we read. I Read the names of items you usually find in a garden and write their names against each picture given below. garden hose, sapling, hedge, flower beds, flower pot, pebbles, rockery, fence, vine, wheelbarrow WS Pa ee ve II Work in groups of four. What kind of garden would you like to have? Mention the features that you can include and the reasons for your choice. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. III Read the title of the poem. What comes to your mind when you read the word concrete ? Does it have more than one meaning? Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. POORVI My next-door neighbour, Mrs. Jones, "% has got a garden full of stones: A crazy path, a lily pond, a rockery and, just beyond A sundial with a strange device, which Mrs. Jones thinks rather nice. My next-door neighbour, Mrs. Jones, puts little plants between the stones They are so delicate and small, they don t mean anything at all. I can t think how she gets them in, unless she plants them with a pin. My next-door neighbour, Mrs. Jones, once asked me