with labelled props, costumes, and actors entrances or exits. 13. Present the play to the audience. Now, present the enactment of the play Wisdom Paves the Way with the help of the steps you have just read. Ensure you use the correct intonation and sentence stress. I -_ Stories related to wit and wisdom have always fascinated the readers. Go to the library and read the stories associated with the following. Vikramaditya and Betal Tenali Rama Gopal the Jester Panchatantra Tales WIT AND WISDOM eo oo Let knowledge be the beacon that dispels the darkness of ignorance . SAVITRIBAI PHULE The highest education is that which does not merely give us information but that makes our lifein harmony with all existence . RABINDRANATH TAGORE Vy TRANSCRIPTS Let us listen (refer to page 12) yor I You will listen to a woman narrating a story. As you listen, fill in the blanks for the following sentences given below by selecting the correct options. Hello everybody! Today [ll be narrating a story about a ; quick-witted courtier in the kingdom of Vijayanagara. - scholars in the court of King Krishnadeva Raya. The court scholars ~ did not want to accept the challenge as they were worried of being defeated by the visitor. Besides this, they were also afraid that the king would be angry if they refused to face the scholar. A renowned scholar, proud of his abilities, once visited the . K , kingdom of Vijayanagara. You see, he wanted to challenge the They knew that only the quick-witted Tenali Rama would be able to manage the situation. So, naturally, they asked him for a solution. As expected, Rama told them that he would accept the challenge. The next day, Rama arrived at the palace. Rama and the challenger sat facing each other. There was a bundle wrapped in silk kept near Rama. He placed his hand on the bundle and said to the visitor, Let us start by discussing the merits of tila-kashta-mahisha-bandhana . The visitor was taken aback. He had read thousands of works. But he had never heard of this work. He had no idea what to say. The scholar had to accept his defeat. Ashamed, he quietly left the palace. ~ Now, the king was curious to know about the great work Rama had mentioned. Rama smiled and removed the silk cloth. There was a huge bundle of sticks tied with a thick rope! The king was puzzled and asked for an explanation. >) Rama told him, O king! til is sesame; kashta is stick, tilakashta means sticks of sesame plants . Then, displaying the rope Rama said, This is the rope used to tie a buffalo mahisha means buffalo, bandhana means the rope used for tying so, this is tila-kashta-mahisha-bandhana. The king burst out laughing. The poor visitor had become scared hearing such a difficult name. In this way, Rama had taught the arrogant scholar a lesson. II You will once again listen to the woman