words from the box given below. You may refer to a dictionary. murmur sighed mumble gasped '_ snickers thud groan rattle | roared whispered 1. As the teacher began the riddle challenge, a of excitement spread through the classroom. 2. Anaya in relief she loved riddles more than solving Mathematics problems. 3. Think carefully, the teacher began to , as she wrote a riddle on the board. 4. When the question was revealed, a few students , realising it wasn t as easy as they had expected. 5. Some exchanged ____, wondering if anyone at all would be able to solve it. 6. Just then, Anaya tapped her book on the desk witha small ; deep in thought. J POORVI 7. Ah, I see it now! she said stretching with a , as if it had taken her great effort. 8. Asmall breeze made the windows , adding to the suspense bd Me of the moment. ps 9. So, what s the answer? the students , their voices filled with playful enthusiasm. 10. Leaning forward with a smile, Anaya , sometimes, the trickiest questions have the simplest answers. III As you have learnt, a compound word is formed when two or more 2 @ words are combined to create a new word with a distinct meaning. These * are of three types: closed compounds (sunlight, courtroom), hyphenated compounds (well-planned), and open compounds (paddy seeds). 1. Create new compound words by matching words in Column 1 with those in Column 2. 2. IV Fill in the blanks with the words created in the previous question. Ravi was (i) __ , always speaking calmly even in arguments. He grew up in a lively (ii) _ , where he learned to handle different personalities. His friend Arun, however, was (iii) and often lost his patience. Despite this, Arun admired Ravi s (iv) thinking. One evening, as they passed a (v) , they saw some performers rushing out. Ravi noticed that one of them dropped a (vi) book on the ground. Is this yours? he asked. Oh thank you, young man! the performer smiled. It s a recent purchase from the (vii) round the corner. True to his nature Arun promptly said to Ravi, It s (viii) that it s not from a bakery but bookshop! Ravi smiled and they walked on. Read the sentences from the text and their explanation given in the table below. Sentences from the Tenses Explanation Text 1. If you like, I will try | Simple Present + The condition in the if my best to resolve this | Present Modal clause may or may not matter. be fulfilled. The present tense refers only toa possible future action. 2. If, by chance Simple Past + Past The condition in the something were to go | Modal if clause expresses wrong, our farmers a hypothetical or would suffer. imaginary situation. 3. If 1 had known Past Perfect + would The condition in the if this would happen,I | have +