poem might have felt sorry for stepping on Mrs. Jones flower. When we make a mistake, we must express regret and apologise Ns for our actions. {e) ~ 1. When we apologise to a friend or a family member, we use informal \ language. Take turns to apologise for the following situations and respond to the apology. (i) You have eaten your brother s share of sweets. (ii) You have broken your sister s flower craft. (iii) Youaccidentally spilled ink on your mother s important documents. (iv) You forgot to bring your friend s notebook to the school after borrowing it. POORVI You may use the following phrases given below. Phrases for Apology | Phrases to Respond to Apology mreally sorry...| It s no big deal. Please forgive No problem. me for... Sorry, I didn t These things happen. mean to... 2. When we apologise to someone in authority like a Principal or a teacher in a formal setting, we use formal language. Work in pairs and take turns to apologise for the following situations and respond to the apology. (i) You did not bring an assignment that was due for submission. (ii) You were late to school for the past three days and had to meet the Principal. (iii) You did not submit your project work and were asked to explain. You may use the phrases given below. Phrases for Apology | Phrases to Respond to Apology I m extremely * I accept your apology. sorry for... Please ensure you... I promise it wort happen again. I owe you an I appreciate you saying this, apology for... but... I'll do my best not to repeat it. I really regret... I m glad you realised your I assure you that mistake... this will never happen again. WIT AND WISDOM Let us write You are a member of the Nature Club of your school. Draft a notice informing the students of Grades 6-8 about the inauguration of the Herb Garden. Points to remember: Mention the purpose of writing, date, time, venue, and any other relevant information whom to contact, when, and where. * Use formal language in the third person form. e Write the notice in a box. NAME OF THE ORGANISATION NOTICE Title (Body of the notice) Name Signature Class Let us explore I Amrit Udyan is a garden spread over an expanse of 15 acres around Rashtrapati Bhavan in New Delhi. It has multiple attractions that include a specially curated garden for children called Bal Vatika, a treehouse, nature s classroom, etc. It also has the Bonsai, Herbal-I, Herbal-II, Tactile Garden, Arogya Vanam, and Circular Gardens with a diverse variety of flora and fauna. POORVI Now, find out about popular gardens in your region and share with your classmates and teacher. II A herbarium is a collection of plant samples preserved for long-term study, usually in the form of dried and pressed plants mounted on paper. You may follow the link given below for a virtual tour of Amrit