Jones, "% has got a garden full of stones: A crazy path, a lily pond, a rockery and, just beyond A sundial with a strange device, which Mrs. Jones thinks rather nice. My next-door neighbour, Mrs. Jones, puts little plants between the stones They are so delicate and small, they don t mean anything at all. I can t think how she gets them in, unless she plants them with a pin. My next-door neighbour, Mrs. Jones, once asked me round to see her stones. We stood and talked about a flower for quite a quarter of an hour. Where is this lovely thing? I cried. Youre standing on it, she replied. REGINALD ARKELL WIT AND WISDOM Let us discuss ~(% I Complete the following summary with exact words from the poem. One 7 example has been done for you. Share your answers with your classmates P| and teacher. The poem describes Mrs. Jones, the speaker s next-door neighbour, who has a unique garden filled with 1. . Her garden includes a peculiar 2. _, a pond, and a rockery, along with an unusual 3. that she finds charming. Mrs. Jones plants tiny, 4. plants between the stones, which the speaker thinks must be so small that they are planted with a 5. . One day, Mrs. Jones invites the speaker to see her garden, and they discussa6.___ _ scthat Mrs. Jones treasures. When the speaker asks where the 7. flower is, ! Mrs. Jones says that the speaker hasbeen 8.___ C n it alll along. II Select the correct option to fill in the blanks for the following sentences. 1. The tone of the poem is (i) mocking (ii) humorous Gii) mournful (iv) amusing (v) light-hearted A. (i), Gi), and (iii) B. (i), Gi), and (v) C. (ii), (ili), and (iv) D. (ii), (iv), and (v) 2. The speaker in the poem is __ (i) Mrs. Jones (ii) the poet (iii) a gardener ~) (iv) achild ~ (e 3. The rhyme scheme of the poem is __ . 7 | \ (i) AABBCC (ii) ABABCC (iii) AABCAC (iv) ABBACC POORVI III IV VI Complete the following sentences by choosing the correct answer given in the brackets. 1. The poet uses the word stones in all stanzas in order to emphasise her . (obsession with a stony garden/pride in gardening skills) 2. The poet uses imagery to describe the features of the garden that help readers . (understand Mrs. Jones love for plants/visualise the garden s peculiar nature) Pick examples of alliteration from the poem. A refrain is a repeated line or phrase that appears in each stanza. Identify the refrain from the poem. Irony is a literary device that emphasises the difference between what is expected and what actually happens. It often involves a situation where the outcome is the opposite of what is expected, creating a surprising or a humorous effect. For example, Mrs. Jones excitement about her garden contrasts with the speaker s disappointment on how ordinary