s classroom, etc. It also has the Bonsai, Herbal-I, Herbal-II, Tactile Garden, Arogya Vanam, and Circular Gardens with a diverse variety of flora and fauna. POORVI Now, find out about popular gardens in your region and share with your classmates and teacher. II A herbarium is a collection of plant samples preserved for long-term study, usually in the form of dried and pressed plants mounted on paper. You may follow the link given below for a virtual tour of Amrit Udyan. https://virtualtour.rashtrapatibhavan.gov.in/ Now, collect some fallen flowers and i leaves from your neighbourhood. Place ra them in folds of a newspaper carefully f and put a pile of books on them. After one week, take them out and use them to make a card, wall hanging or any other artwork. A sample has been given for your reference. III Read and enjoy the poem. A Sea of Foliage A sea of foliage girds our garden round, But not a sea of dull unvaried green, Sharp contrasts of all colours here are seen; ra The light-green graceful tamarinds abound / on Amid the mango clumps of green profound, of And palms arise, like pillars gray, between; And o er the quiet pools the seemuls lean, Red red, and startling like a trumpet s sound. But nothing can be lovelier than the ranges Of bamboos to the eastward, when the moon Looks through their gaps, and the white lotus changes Into a cup of silver. One might swoon Drunken with beauty then, or gaze and gaze On a primeval Eden, in amaze. TORU DUTT WIspDoM PAVEs THE Way Let us do these activities before we read. I Why do we seek advice of the elderly in our family? Share your thoughts with your classmates and teacher. II Knowledge is about learning facts and information, while wisdom is about using that knowledge with good judgement. Work in pairs. Read the following situations and classify each one as either knowledge or wisdom . One example has been done for you. 1. Riya s understanding of plant care helped her grow a healthy vegetable garden in her backyard. 2. Mr. Kumar values time with family over chasing wealth. 3. Karuna s expertise in computer programming helped her develop a successful app. 4.Rohan understood the value of time management and created a timetable to complete his assignments systematically. 5. Ramesh chose to forgive his friend for a misunderstanding. 6. Ms. Vaijayanthi delivered a lecture on Indian Classical music at the cultural festival. III Observe the picture carefully. What do you think might have happened? Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. POORVI beautified tapestries: heavy decorative fabrics woven with pictures or patterns resolute: determined bustling: busy Let us read Characters THE KING OF UJJAIN : FOUR YOUNG MEN THE MERCHANT TWO SENTRIES SETTING a young King Ram Datt, Shiv Datt, Har Datt, and Dev Datt A road leading to Ujjain, visible in the distance. Later, the King s court, adorned with rich tapestries, tall pillars,