by a pain in its belly, trying to spare itself further suffering with every step. : (Marvelling) Extraordinary! You have not seen the camel, yet you know it intimately. Your reasoning is flawless and speaks of wisdom that goes beyond mere sight. (Turning to the Merchant) Your accusations are baseless and misguided. These are men of wisdom, not thieves. Go, and continue your search for your camel, and be mindful of whom you accuse in the future. (The Merchant, chastened and embarrassed, bows deeply and exits, his face red with shame.) : (To the four men) You have demonstrated remarkable intelligence and the ability to see beyond the obvious. Such minds are rare and highly valued in my court. I extend to you the honour of becoming my advisers. Your counsel shall guide my decisions, and your wisdom shall be a beacon for my kingdom. What do you say to my offer? : (Stepping forward) Your Highness, it is an honour we had not dared to dream of. : Weare humbled and deeply grateful for your trust in our abilities. WIT AND WISDOM fended off: 4 guarded against 4 insight: a clear/deep understanding sound: healthy intimately: ina detailed way flawless: perfect chastened: felt Sorry counsel: advice beacon: guiding light eo ~ &) POORVI wy HAR DATT : To serve a wise and just ruler like yourself is a privilege we accept with all our hearts. DEV DATT : We shall dedicate ourselves to your service, offering our insights and counsel in all matters you see fit. KING : (Rising from his throne) Then let it be known across the kingdom that four new advisers stand by my side. May your wisdom shine upon Ujjain and guide us to prosperity. (The court erupts in applause as the King steps down to greet his new advisers. The four men stand proud and humbled, their journey fulfilled in a manner they had never anticipated.) CURTAIN Let us discuss I Arrange the following events in order of their occurrence from Scene II of the play. One example has been done for you. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. 1. The King makes the four young men his advisers, impressed by their skills. (8) WIT AND WISDOM 2. Ram Datt explains how he infers from the tracks that the camel is lame. = ( ZI 3. The King asks the merchant to clearly state his accusation. ar) 4. The King praises the young men for their observations and dismisses wae . the merchant s accusation. 5. Shiv Datt reveals that the camel is blind in its right eye as it had only aie chewed on the leaves on the left side of the road. 6. Dev Datt explains his observation about the camel s pain and careful movement. 7. Har Datt clarifies how he knew that the camel has a short tail. 8.The merchant accuses the four men of knowing a lot about his missing camel. f Let us think and reflect _