condition in the if my best to resolve this | Present Modal clause may or may not matter. be fulfilled. The present tense refers only toa possible future action. 2. If, by chance Simple Past + Past The condition in the something were to go | Modal if clause expresses wrong, our farmers a hypothetical or would suffer. imaginary situation. 3. If 1 had known Past Perfect + would The condition in the if this would happen,I | have + Past Participle clause describes what would have chosen the speaker would have another day. done (differently) if the past situation had been different and it is impossible to rectify it in the present. In sentence 1 if you like is the subordinate clause (if clause) and I will try my best to resolve this matter is the main clause. Identify the subordinate and main clauses in sentences 2 and 3. WIT AND WISDOM POORVI 1 Now, match the subordinate clauses (if clauses) in Column 1 with the ) 7 appropriate main clauses in Column 2 to make complete sentences. \ (i) IfI had a magic wand, A. We will go to the theatre. (ii) Ifit rains tomorrow, B. I would sneak into the secret room. (iii) If you had listened carefully, C. I would give myself wings. (iv) If you finish your homework, | D. The boys would have woken up on time. (v) IfI were invisible, E. We will stay indoors and play board games. (vi) If the alarm had rung, F. You. would have _ solved the puzzle. / &) - V Complete the following sentences appropriately with either the main : J, . ~ clause or the subordinate clause (if clause). / 1. Your teacher will be unhappy if 2. They would have caught the train if 3. if you continue to stay up late every night. 4. If she knew the answer, 5. if she had studied harder. 6. If I had a million rupees, Complete the following sentences. One example has been done for you. 1. If I were a tree, I would play with the wind and talk to the birds. 2. If I were the Head Teacher of my school, 3. If I were a bird, 4. If I were a magician, = 5. If 1 had studied harder, 2 @ i Let us listen I You willlisten to awoman narrating astory. As you listen, fill in the blanks in the following sentences by selecting the correct options. (Transcript for teacher on page 46) ~ Na f WIT AND WISDOM 1. The rope tying the bundle of sticks was__. (i) loose (ii) thick (iii) short 2. The scholar is finally referred to as (i) irritable (ii) mischievous (iii) arrogant II You will once again listen to the story. As you listen, number the events of the story in the correct order of occurrence. 2 4 fs) 7 . The great scholar was ashamed because he did not know what to say. . Rama