small that they could be planted with a pin? 3. What do we get to know about Mrs. Jones based on her gardening style and her interaction with the speaker? 4. The poem portrays Mrs. Jones ina positive light. Support this statement. 5. What does the poem tell us about the way people think differently about the world around them? & _ Ww! e! Let us learn I Select the appropriate word from the brackets that correctly replaces the underlined word in the sentences from the text. 1. A sundial with a strange device, (unusual, peculiar, new, rare, external) 2. ... Which Mrs. Jones thinks rather nice. (pleasant, superior, agreeable, gentle, charming) 3. They are so delicate... (delicious, fragile, dainty, graceful, weak) 4. Where is this lovely thing? I cried. (exclaimed, wept, shouted, announced, whispered) POORVI II The sundial is referred to as a device in the poem. Work in pairs to infer the meaning of device . Share your thoughts with your classmates and teacher. Now, match the type of instruments in Column 1 with their definitions in Column 2. Column 3 shows one example of each type of instrument. Add more examples in Column 3. 1. implement (i) something thatis | spade, knife electrical and is used to do work in the house 2. tool something small hammer that is mechanical or electronic 3. equipment something that cricket bat, helmet, works on being batting gloves, etc. moved by hand 4. appliance aset of necessary | mixer grinder items for a particular purpose 5. gadget something used by | mobile phone, laptop hand to make or repair III Complete the table by making new words in Column 1 using the hints given in Column 2. Replace the first letter of the given word to create new words. One example has been done for you. WIT AND WISDOM length of wire in a circle sheets to wrap food items Let us listen I You will listen to a presentation about the wonderful Rock Garden of Chandigarh. As you listen, answer the following questions using one to three exact words from the presentation. (Transcript for teacher on page 47) 1. Where was Nek Chand s Rock Garden featured? 2. What kind of sculptures does the Rock Garden have? 3. How is the Rock Garden divided? 4, Name any one thing that has been transformed into a piece of art in the Rock Garden. 5. Approximately, how many _ statues border the Rock Garden? Let us speak I The speaker of the poem might have felt sorry for stepping on Mrs. Jones flower. When we make a mistake, we must express regret and apologise Ns for our actions. {e) ~ 1. When we apologise to a friend or a family member, we use informal \ language. Take turns to apologise for the following situations and respond to the apology. (i) You have eaten your brother s share of sweets. (ii) You have broken your sister s flower craft. (iii) Youaccidentally spilled ink