x - axis. Why? What are the coordinates of the origin O? It has zero distance from both the axes so that its abscissa and ordinate are both zero. Therefore, the coordinates of the origin are (0, 9). In the examples above, you may have observed the following relationship between the signs of the coordinates of a point and the quadrant of a point in which it lies. (i) Ifa point is in the 1st quadrant, then the point will be in the form (+, +), since the 1st quadrant is enclosed by the positive x - axis and the positive y - axis. (ii) Ifa point is inthe 2nd quadrant, then the point will be in the form (-, +), since the 2nd quadrant is enclosed by the negative x - axis and the positive y - axis. (iii) Ifa point is in the 3rd quadrant, then the point will be in the form (-, ), since the 3rd quadrant is enclosed by the negative x - axis and the negative y - axis. (iv) Ifa point is in the 4th quadrant, then the point will be in the form (+, ), since the 4th quadrant is enclosed by the positive x - axis and the negative y - axis (see Fig. 3.13). Reprint 2025-26 52 MATHEMATICS ve Fig. 3.13 Remark : The system we have discussed above for describing a point in a plane is only a convention, which is accepted all over the world. The system could also have been, for example, the ordinate first, and the abscissa second. However, the whole world sticks to the system we have described to avoid any confusion. EXERCISE 3.2 1. Write the answer of each of the following questions: (i) What is the name of horizontal and the vertical lines drawn to determine the position of any point in the Cartesian plane? (ii) What is the name of each part of the plane formed by these two lines? (ii) Write the name of the point where these two lines intersect. 2. See Fig.3.14, and write the following: (i) The coordinates of B. (ii) The coordinates of C. (i) The point identified by the coordinates ( 3, 5). Reprint 2025-26 COORDINATE GEOMETRY 53 (iv) The point identified by the coordinates (2, 4). (v) The abscissa of the point D. (vi) The ordinate of the point H. (vil) The coordinates of the point L. (viii) The coordinates of the point M. Y 3.3 Summary In this chapter, you have studied the following points : 1. To locate the position of an object or a point in a plane, we require two perpendicular lines. One of them is horizontal, and the other is vertical. The plane is called the Cartesian, or coordinate plane and the lines are called the coordinate axes. The horizontal line is called the x -axis, and the vertical line is called the y - axis. Reprint 2025-26 10. 11. MATHEMATICS The coordinate axes divide the plane into four parts