placing two such lines perpendicular to each other on a plane, and locating points on the plane by referring them to these lines. The perpendicular lines may be in any direction such as in Fig.3.6. But, when we choose (a) (b) (c) Fig. 3.6 Reprint 2025-26 COORDINATE GEOMETRY these two lines to locate a point in a plane in this chapter, one line will be horizontal and the other will be vertical, as in Fig. 3.6(c). These lines are actually obtained as follows : Take two number lines, calling them X 'X and YY. Place X'X horizontal [as in Fig. 3.7(a)] 4 and write the numbers on it just as the same thing with Y'Y except that Y Y is vertical, not horizontal [Fig. 3.7(b)]. Combine both the lines in such a way that the two lines cross each other at their zeroes, or origins (Fig. 3.8). The horizontal line X'X is called the x - axis and the vertical line YY is called the y - axis. The point where X X and Y Y cross is called the origin, and is denoted by O. Since the positive numbers lie on the directions OX and OY, OX and OY are called the positive directions of the x - axis and the y-axis, respectively. Similarly, OX and OY are called the negative directions of the x - axis and the y - axis, respectively. ~ ie) lay] hg ~ a a a a a written on the number line. We do Origin 0 1 2 3 4 5 (a) (b) Fig. 3.7 Y Positive y -axis Negative x -axis Positive x -axis 12 3 4 5 6 Negative y -axis Reprint 2025-26 48 MATHEMATICS You observe that the axes (plural of the word Y axis ) divide the plane into four parts. These four parts are called the guadrants (one fourth part), numbered I, II, HJ and IV anticlockwise from OX (see Fig.3.9). So, the plane consists of the axes and these quadrants. We call the plane, the Cartesian x O plane, or the coordinate plane, or the xy-plane. The axes are called the coordinate axes. Quadrant II Quadrant I Quadrant HI Quadrant IV Y Fig. 3.9 Now, let us see why this system is so basic to mathematics, and how it is useful. Consider the following diagram where the axes are drawn on graph paper. Let us see the distances of the points P and Q from the axes. For this, we draw perpendiculars PM on the x - axis and PN on the y - axis. Similarly, we draw perpendiculars QR and QS as shown in Fig. 3.10. Fig.3.10 You find that (1) The perpendicular distance of the point P from the y - axis measured along the positive direction of the x - axis is PN = OM = 4 units. (ii) The perpendicular distance of the point P from the x - axis measured along the positive direction of the y - axis is PM =