axis and PN on the y - axis. Similarly, we draw perpendiculars QR and QS as shown in Fig. 3.10. Fig.3.10 You find that (1) The perpendicular distance of the point P from the y - axis measured along the positive direction of the x - axis is PN = OM = 4 units. (ii) The perpendicular distance of the point P from the x - axis measured along the positive direction of the y - axis is PM = ON = 3 units. Reprint 2025-26 CoorDINATE GEOMETRY 49 (iti) The perpendicular distance of the point Q from the y - axis measured along the negative direction of the x - axis is OR = SQ = 6 units. (iv) The perpendicular distance of the point Q from the x - axis measured along the negative direction of the y - axis is OS = RQ = 2 units. Now, using these distances, how can we describe the points so that there is no confusion? We write the coordinates of a point, using the following conventions: (i) The x - coordinate of a point is its perpendicular distance from the y - axis measured along the x -axis (positive along the positive direction of the x - axis and negative along the negative direction of the x - axis). For the point P, it is + 4 and for Q, it is 6. The x - coordinate is also called the abscissa. (ii) The y - coordinate of a point is its perpendicular distance from the x - axis measured along the y - axis (positive along the positive direction of the y - axis and negative along the negative direction of the y - axis). For the point P, it is + 3 and for Q, it is 2. The y - coordinate is also called the ordinate. (iti) In stating the coordinates of a point in the coordinate plane, the x - coordinate comes first, and then the y - coordinate. We place the coordinates in brackets. Hence, the coordinates of P are (4, 3) and the coordinates of Q are ( 6, 2). Note that the coordinates describe a point in the plane uniquely. (3, 4) is not the same as (4, 3). Example 1 : See Fig. 3.11 and complete the following statements: (i) (ii) (iil) (iv) The abscissa and the ordinate of the point Bare and ___, respectively. Hence, the coordinates of Bare(_ _, _). The x-coordinate and the y-coordinate of the point M are and , respectively. Hence, the coordinates of M are(__, _). The x-coordinate and the y-coordinate of the point L are and , respectively. Hence, the coordinates of Lare(_, _). The x-coordinate and the y-coordinate of the point S are and , respectively. Hence, the coordinates of Sare(__, _). Reprint 2025-26 50 MATHEMATICS Fig. 3.11 Solution: (i) Since the distance of the point B from the y - axis is 4 units, the x - coordinate or abscissa of the point