of a point in a plane. His method was a development of the older idea of latitude and longitude. In honour of D scartes, the system used for describing the position of a point in a plane is also known as the Cartesian system. Ren D scartes (1596 -1650) Fig. 3.4 EXERCISE 3.1 1. How will you describe the position of a table lamp on your study table to another person? 2. (Street Plan) : A city has two main roads which cross each other at the centre of the city. These two roads are along the North-South direction and East-West direction. Reprint 2025-26 46 MATHEMATICS All the other streets of the city run parallel to these roads and are 200 m apart. There are 5 streets in each direction. Using 1cm = 200 m, draw a model of the city on your notebook. Represent the roads/streets by single lines. There are many cross- streets in your model. A particular cross-street is made by two streets, one running in the North - South direction and another in the East - West direction. Each cross street is referred to in the following manner : If the 2" street running in the North - South direction and 5" in the East - West direction meet at some crossing, then we will call this cross-street (2, 5). Using this convention, find: (1) how many cross - streets can be referred to as (4, 3). (i) how many cross - streets can be referred to as (3, 4). 3.2 Cartesian System You have studied the number line in the chapter on Number System . On the number line, distances from a fixed point are marked in equal units positively in one direction and negatively in the other. The point from which the distances are marked is called the origin. We use the number line to represent the numbers by marking points on a line at equal distances. If one unit distance represents the number 1 , then 3 units distance represents the number 3 , 0 being at the origin. The point in the positive direction at a distance 7 from the origin represents the number 7 The point in the negative direction at a distance 7 from the origin represents the number r. Locations of different numbers on the number line are shown in Fig. 3.5. One unit One unit distance distance we Origin we 5 4 3 2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 +5 Fig. 3.5 Descartes invented the idea of placing two such lines perpendicular to each other on a plane, and locating points on the plane by referring them to these lines. The perpendicular lines may be in any direction such as in Fig.3.6. But, when we choose (a) (b) (c) Fig. 3.6 Reprint 2025-26 COORDINATE GEOMETRY these two lines to locate a point in a plane in this chapter, one line will be horizontal and the other will be vertical, as in Fig. 3.6(c). These lines are actually