know exactly where the dot is! (a) (b) Fig. 3.2 For this purpose, we fixed the position of the dot by specifying its distances from two fixed lines, the left edge of the paper and the bottom line of the paper [Fig.3.2 (b)]. In other words, we need two independent informations for finding the position of the dot. Now, perform the following classroom activity known as Seating Plan . Activity 1 (Seating Plan) : Draw a plan of the seating in your classroom, pushing all the desks together. Represent each desk by a square. In each square, write the name of the student occupying the desk, which the square represents. Position of each student in the classroom is described precisely by using two independent informations: (i) the column in which she or he sits, (ii) the row in which she or he sits. If you are sitting on the desk lying in the 5" column and 3" row (represented by the shaded square in Fig. 3.3), your position could be written as (5, 3), first writing the column number, and then the row number. Is this the same as (3, 5)? Write down the names and positions of other students in your class. For example, if Sonia is sitting in the 4" column and 1* row, write S(4,1). The teacher s desk is not part of your seating plan. We are treating the teacher just as an observer. Reprint 2025-26 COORDINATE GEOMETRY 45 71 1 | tT Tt TT T shows teacher s desk S shows Sonia s desk Columns IT sa Fig. 3.3 In the discussion above, you observe that position of any object lying in a plane can be represented with the help of two perpendicular lines. In case of dot , we require distance of the dot from bottom line as well as from left edge of the paper. In case of seating plan, we require the number of the column and that of the row. This simple idea has far reaching consequences, and has given rise to a very important branch of Mathematics known as Coordinate Geometry. In this chapter, we aim to introduce some basic concepts of coordinate geometry. You will study more about these in your higher classes. This study was initially developed by the French philosopher and mathematician Ren D scartes. Ren D scartes, the great French mathematician of the seventeenth century, liked to lie in bed and think! One day, when resting in bed, he solved the problem of describing the position of a point in a plane. His method was a development of the older idea of latitude and longitude. In honour of D scartes, the system used for describing the position of a point in a plane is also known as the Cartesian system. Ren D scartes (1596 -1650) Fig. 3.4 EXERCISE 3.1 1. How will you describe the position of a table lamp on your study table to another person? 2. (Street Plan) : A city has two main