COORDINATE GEOMETRY 0962CHO3 CHaPTER 3 What s the good of Mercator s North Poles and Equators, Tropics;Zones and Meridian Lines? So the Bellman would cry; and crew would reply * They are merely conventional signs! LEWIS CARROLL, The Hunting of the Snark 3.1 Introduction You have already studied how to locate a point on a number line. You also know how to describe the position of a point on the line. There are many other situations, in which to find a point we are required to describe its position with reference to more than one line. For example, consider the following situations: I. In Fig. 3.1, there is a main road running in the East-West direction and streets with numbering from West to East. Also, on each street, house numbers are marked. To look for a friend s house here, is it enough to know only one reference point? For instance, if we only know that she lives on Street 2, will we be able to find her house easily? Not as easily as when we know two pieces of information about it, namely, the number of the street on which it is situated, and the house number. If we want to reach the house which is situated in the 2 street and has the number 5, first of all we would identify the 2 street and then the house numbered 5 on it. In Fig. 3.1, H shows the location of the house. Similarly, P shows the location of the house corresponding to Street number 7 and House number 4. WwW Street 2 Reprint 2025-26 nA BWN 44 MATHEMATICS II. Suppose you put a dot on a sheet of paper [Fig.3.2 (a)]. If we ask you to tell us the position of the dot on the paper, how will you do this? Perhaps you will try in some such manner: The dot is in the upper half of the paper , or It is near the left edge of the paper , or It is very near the left hand upper corner of the sheet . Do any of these statements fix the position of the dot precisely? No! But, if you say The dot is nearly 5 cm away from the left edge of the paper , it helps to give some idea but still does not fix the position of the dot. A little thought might enable you to say that the dot is also at a distance of 9 cm above the bottom line. We now know exactly where the dot is! (a) (b) Fig. 3.2 For this purpose, we fixed the position of the dot by specifying its distances from two fixed lines, the left edge of the paper and the bottom line of the paper [Fig.3.2 (b)]. In other words, we need two independent informations for finding the position of the dot. Now, perform the following classroom activity known as Seating Plan . Activity 1 (Seating Plan) : Draw a plan of the seating