plate or mirror. >, ~ What conclusion do you draw from your observations? This activity suggests that a shiny surface or a mirror changes the direction of light that falls upon it. This change in direction of light by a mirror is called the reflection of light. Let us try to understand the reflection of light by a mirror. [ Activity 11.6: Let us experiment Thin slit Take a plane mirror with stand, a torch, a comb, a sheet of white paper, and a strip of black paper. Using the black paper, close all openings of the comb, except for one to make a thin slit. Spread a white paper on a table, hold the comb perpendicular to the sheet of paper and shine the torch light on the slit. Adjust the comb and torch slightly till you see a thin beam of light along the paper which has passed through the slit (Fig. 11.9a). Now, place the mirror in the path of the light beam while keeping the comb steady (Fig. 11.9b). What do you observe? The path of the light beam is changed after falling on the mirror. The reflection of light occurs at the mirror. (a) Plane mirror >, ~ In a mirror, I can also see my face. Is that also due to the Ss t) GS Ls oO )) . ) < uu Lal [-] 3 = > u <= i} U (b) Fig. 11.9:(@ A light beam (b) Reflection of 1 in a plane mirror reflection of light? Chapter 1l.indd 160 4/3/2025 4:56:33 PM Chapter 1l.indd 161 11.6 Images Formed in a Plane Mirror Look into the mirror. Do you see your face in it? What you see is a reflection of your face in the mirror. We also see reflections of other objects that are in front of the mirror. Let us try to find out more about this. | Activity 11.7: Let us experiment | * Take a plane mirror and a pen or some other object. + Place the pen in front of the mirror as shown in Fig. 11.10. pen is placed behind the mirror. The pen which appears behind the mirror is the image of the pen formed by the mirror. The pen itself is the object. + Now, move the pen to different positions in front of the mirror and compare the sizes of the images of the pen at each position. Are the two sizes the same? The image formed by a plane mirror is of the same size as the object. + Again, move the pen to different positions in front of the mirror and observe if the image is upright at each position. Does the tip of the pen appear on top at each position? An upright image is called erect. An image formed by a plane mirror is erect. + Now, place a screen vertically behind the mirror. Move it around. Do you get the image on the screen? Repeat this by placing the