pipe Chapter 1l.indd 155 4/3/2025 4:56:28 PM /\ Caution Use a laser only under teachers supervision. Avoid using high-power lasers for this activity; a low-power laser { pointer is sufficient. Never point the laser beam directly at anyone s eyes, as it can cause serious eye damage. Pass a _ laser beam through a beaker filled with water in which a drop of milk is added to make the laser beam easily visible. What do you observe? Do you see that the beam of laser light inside water follows a straight path? However, light can sometimes even bend around corners! This is something you will learn in the higher grades. Translucent, and geen fansiucent, and Opaque Materials On al a a a a Aa hel What happens when an object J gitferent materials in the path of comes in the path of light? light and find out. * Collect objects made of different materials. Also, you will need a torch. 11.3 Light through Transparent, Let us place objects made of Ss i) f 5 Light will pass o Transparent/ . 3 Material =n SETH fully/partially/not at all G ipa My prediction My observation U n S Cardboard x 8 Paper E; Glass Fo Fs Tracing paper wn < Thick cloth S Ds -* LS Chapter 1l.indd 156 4/3/2025 4:56:30 PM + List the materials of the objects in Table 11.1 and classify them into transparent, translucent, and opaque (In the chapter Materials Around Us in the Grade 6 Science textbook Curiosity you learnt to classify materials into transparent, translucent, and opaque, depending on how you could see through them). Go to a dark room, turn on the torch, and place mat i) j it at such a position that you get a spot of light , from the torch on a wall. Or you may place a cardboard screen as shown in Fig. 11.6 and get the spot of light on it. . i. . Fig. 11.6: Passing light We will now conduct this activity in two through different materials parts prediction and observation. e Predict what will happen if you hold an object in front of the light coming out of the torch. Would you continue to see the spot of light on the screen? Note your prediction in Table 11.1. e Now, actually place the object between the torch and the screen. Does light pass through the object? Note your observation in Table 11.1. + Repeat this for all the objects. Was your observation the same as your prediction? What conclusions could you draw? Light passes almost completely through transparent materials. Light passes partially through translucent materials. Light does not pass through opaque materials. >, ~ Light: Shadows and Reflections What happens when an opaque object blocks the path of light? 11.4 Shadow Formation What did you see on the screen in Activity 11.3 when an opaque object was placed in the path of light? Did you See a dark patch on the wall? Why was this dark