lamps are modern light sources that consume much less power, are brighter and last longer than traditional lamps. This not only reduces electricity bills but is also better for environment. Recognising their advantages, the Indian government has made substantial efforts to promote the use of LED lamps nationwide. At their end of life, LED lamps must be appropriately disposed or recycled, and not thrown in the garbage. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 Chapter 1l.indd 154 4/3/2025 4:56:26 PM 11.2 Does Light Travel in a Straight Line? Ne ie eee nae ae ee eee Eee F Let us do an activity to try to find out. | Activity 11.1: Let us investigate | + Take three matchboxes and make a hole in the inner tray of each matchbox, exactly at the same position. Arrange these three matchboxes in a straight line. Make sure that all three holes are exactly at the same height and are in a line as shown Fig. 11.4: Matchbox activity in Fig. 11.4. light through holes Place a torch light on one side of the matchboxes, ensuring that its lamp is at the height of the holes. Place acardboard (screen) on the other side of the matchboxes and obtain a bright spot on it. (You may need to slightly adjust the heights of boxes.) Move one of the matchboxes slightly to aside or up and down. Are you able to obtain the light spot on the screen now? When all the three holes are not in the same line, we could not obtain the light spot on the screen. These observations suggest that light travels in a straight line. >, ~ Light: Shadows and Reflections >, ~ >, ~ >, ~ Can we somehow check it in some other way? I have an idea. Let us try to see the candle flame through a bent pipe! Should we also try out this idea? | Activity 11.2: Let us explore | /\ Caution Use a lighted candle under adult supervision only. Take a long hollow pipe of some flexible material and align it so that you can see the candle flame as shown in Fig. 11.5a. + Now, bend the pipe and try to see the candle flame again (Fig. 11.5b). Can you still see it? You could see the candle flame through a straight pipe but not through a bent pipe. This shows that light travels in a straight line. (b) Fig. 11.5: Viewing candle flame through (a) a straight pipe (b) a bent pipe Chapter 1l.indd 155 4/3/2025 4:56:28 PM /\ Caution Use a laser only under teachers supervision. Avoid using high-power lasers for this activity; a low-power laser { pointer is sufficient. Never point the laser beam directly at anyone s eyes, as it can cause serious eye damage. Pass a _ laser beam through a beaker filled with water in which a drop of milk is added to make the laser beam easily visible. What do you observe? Do you see