In the Western Ghat region of Maharashtra, Keshav spends : yw & part of his summer vacation at his friend Jatin s grandparents village. Having lived in a big city, he finds the forests, fresh air, sounds of gushing streams, and chirping birds a novel experience. However, for Keshav, the most fascinating sight is the ele dance of hundreds of fireflies at night, flashing their lights in a wonderful performance. Jatin s grandparents explain that fireflies are seasonal insects and they use light to communicate. Unfortunately, Keshav also learns the number of fireflies is decreasing due to light pollution, reduced forest cover, and excessive tourism. At the end of their vacation, Keshav and Jatin board an evening bus back to their city. As the bus winds through the hilly roads, Keshav watches the moonlit landscape and the beams from the headlights of passing vehicles flashing by. He is reminded of the many poems and songs about moonlight, and wonders does the Moon actually produce its own light? Did we not learn in the chapter Beyond Earth in the Grade 6 Science textbook Curiosity that all other objects in our solar system shine only by reflecting the light of the Sun? Is moonlight just reflected sunlight? Which objects give off their own light? While thinking, he notices something strange light seems to move in a straight line! a ~~ 7 oS 7 Chagtemtanes. 11.1 Sources of Light Qe i tg The Sun gives out or emits its own light and is the main source of natural light on the Earth. Stars, lightning, natural fire, and certain animals also emit their own light (Fig. 11.1). In ancient times, humans learnt to create fire the earliest form of artificial lighting. With time, they learnt to create such as animal fat, oil, | 4 electricity and different kinds of electric light sources, most of the lighting needs of humans Fig. 11.1: Some natural sources of light lighting (Fig. 11.3). do not emit their own light are called non-luminous objects. The Moon is a non-luminous object. It does not emit its own light. It just reflects the light emitted Fig. 11.2: Fire as a source fire using different fuels, wax, and gas (Fig. 11.2). are now met by electric Objects that emit their own light are x by the Sun that falls on it. of artificial light With the invention of called luminous objects. Objects that iL a a , = Fig. 11.3: Some sources of electric light SCIENCE AND SOCIETY Light Emitting Diode (LED) lamps are modern light sources that consume much less power, are brighter and last longer than traditional lamps. This not only reduces electricity bills but is also better for environment. Recognising their advantages, the Indian government has made substantial efforts to promote the use of LED lamps nationwide. At their end of life, LED lamps must be appropriately disposed or recycled, and not thrown in the garbage. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 Chapter 1l.indd 154 4/3/2025 4:56:26