Open side (a) Screen Open side (b) \e Open side (c) Fig. 11.13: A sliding pinhole camera Light: Shadows and Reflections 4/3/2025 4:56:36 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 Chapter 1l.indd 164 \ DY ER.) Apinhole camera gives an upside down image. On the other hand, ~ there is lateral inversion in the image formed by a mirror but it is = Gs) not upside down. We will learn more about this in higher grades. 11.8 Making Some Useful Items a et After having learnt that light travels in a straight line and is reflected by mirrors, it is time to create some useful items based on this learning. Mirror 2 (c) (a) Fig. 11.15: A kaleidoscope 11.8.1 Periscope We can make a simple periscope by placing two plane mirrors in a Z-shaped box as shown in Fig. 11.14. Reflection from two mirrors enables us to see objects that are not visible directly. Periscopes are used in submarines, tanks, or by soldiers to see outside their bunkers. You may use it to look ahead when standing behind taller friends. 11.8.2 Kaleidoscope Get three rectangular plane mirror strips of equal width and join them together in a triangular manner as shown in Fig. 11.15a. You may use three strips of thick reflective paper instead of mirrors. Fix these in a circular tube of thick chart paper (Fig. 11.15b). On one end of the tube, fix a transparent plastic sheet using a rubber band or an adhesive tape. Place several broken pieces of coloured bangles or beads on this (Fig. 11.15c), and cover it with a tracing paper using a rubber band or an adhesive tape. When you peep through the open side, you view a beautiful pattern (Fig. 11.15d). Even if you leave both sides of the kaleidoscope open and 4/3/2025 4:56:38 PM Chapter 1l.indd 165 point it towards a tree or other objects, you see beautiful patterns. An interesting feature of the kaleidoscope is that one always gets to see a different pattern every time the kaleidoscope is turned about. Since there are 3 mirrors, and multiple images (due to reflections of reflections), many interesting patterns are formed. Designers and artists often use kaleidoscopes to get ideas for new patterns. In a Nutshell Oe eed Objects that emit their own light are called luminous objects. >, ~ >, ~ Light travels in a straight line. >, ~ Light passes almost completely through transparent materials. Light passes partially through translucent materials. Light does not pass through opaque materials. A shadow is formed when light is blocked by an object. Opaque objects form darker shadows. Translucent objects make lighter shadows. Some transparent objects can create faint shadows. The change in the direction of light by a mirror is called reflection of light. >, ~ >, ~ >, ~ The image formed by a plane mirror is of the same size as the object, is erect, cannot be obtained on a screen, and is laterally inverted. >, ~ A pinhole