A shadow is formed when light is blocked by an object. Opaque objects form darker shadows. Translucent objects make lighter shadows. Some transparent objects can create faint shadows. The change in the direction of light by a mirror is called reflection of light. >, ~ >, ~ >, ~ The image formed by a plane mirror is of the same size as the object, is erect, cannot be obtained on a screen, and is laterally inverted. >, ~ A pinhole camera creates an inverted image of an object on a screen. Let Us Enhance Our Learning a dd Std 1. Which of the following are luminous objects? Mars, Moon, Pole Star, Sun, Venus, Mirror 2. Match the items in Column A with those in Column B. Column A Column B Pinhole camera Blocks light completely Opaque object The dark region formed behind the object Transparent object Forms an inverted image Shadow Light passes almost completely through it Light: Shadows and Reflections 4/3/2025 4:56:39 PM e Rekha Patrick e 3. Sahil, Rekha, Patrick, and Qasima are trying to observe the candle flame through the pipe as shown in i Fig. 11.16. Who can see the flame? . Look at the images shown in Fig. 11.17 and select the correct image showing the shadow formation of the boy. Qasima Fig. 11.16 (a) (b) (c) (a) Fig. 11.17 5. The shadow of a ball is formed on a wall by placing the ball in front of a fixed torch as shown in Fig. 11.18. In scenario (i) the ball is closer to the torch, while in scenario (ii) the ball is closer to the wall. Choose the most accurate representation of the (ii) - @ shadows formed in both scenarios . from the options provided (a and b). . Based on Fig. 11.18, match the position of the torch in Column A with the Fig. 11.18 characteristics of the ball s shadow in Column B. Column A Column B If the torch is close to the ball The shadow would be smaller If the torch is far away The shadow would be larger If the ball is removed from the Two shadows would appear set-up on the screen Ss i) cS i] Ls LU) )) . ] < U n Lal [-) tod = > wu [-) <= = U If two torches are present in the A bright spot would appear set-up on the left side of the ball on the screen Chapter 1l.indd 166 4/3/2025 4:56:40 PM 7. Suppose you view the tree shown in Fig. 11.19 through a pinhole camera. Sketch the outline of the image of the tree formed in the pinhole camera. 8. Write your name on a piece of paper and hold it in front of a plane mirror such that the paper is parallel to the mirror. Sketch the image. What difference do you notice? Explain the reason for the difference. Fig. 11.19 9. Measure the length of your shadow at 9 AM, 12 PM, and