same size as the object. + Again, move the pen to different positions in front of the mirror and observe if the image is upright at each position. Does the tip of the pen appear on top at each position? An upright image is called erect. An image formed by a plane mirror is erect. + Now, place a screen vertically behind the mirror. Move it around. Do you get the image on the screen? Repeat this by placing the screen in front of the mirror. The image formed by a plane mirror cannot be obtained on a screen. | Activity 11.8: Let us experiment | * Stand in front of a plane mirror and look at your image (Fig. 11.11). Notice how far it appears to be from the mirror. Now, stand close to the mirror. Is the image also closer to the mirror? Stand at different distances from the mirror and notice how far the image appears to be from the mirror in each case. >, ~ >, ~ What do you see in the mirror? It appears as if a similar alll Fig. 11.10: Image of a pen in a plane mirror Light: Shadows and Reflections i Do you find any relation between your distance from the Fig. 11.11: Observing one s mirror and the distance of your image from the mirror? own image in a mirror 4/3/2025 4:56:34 PM You might have noticed that when you stand close to the plane mirror, the image also appears to be close to the mirror. The image appears to be far from the mirror when you stand far from the plane mirror. * Raise your left arm. Which arm does your image raise? + Touch your right ear. Which ear does your image touch? You find that your left appears right in your image and your right appears left in your image. This type of perceived left-right reversal is called lateral inversion. There is lateral inversion in the images formed by a plane mirror. Oh! Now I realise why SASAAIUAMA is written on an ambulance. It reads AMBULANCE when viewed from the rear-view mirrors of the vehicle ahead of the ambulance. FASCINATING FACTS When mirrors were invented is not known. Earlier, mirrors were made by polishing stone or metal. When glass mirrors started being made, the art of making metal mirrors got lost gradually. However, it still survives, for example, in Kerala, where Aranmula Kannadi, a unique metal surface mirror has been made for centuries. Can we see an image of an object only in a mirror or are there some other ways as well? 11.7 Pinhole Camera A pinhole camera is a device in which the light rays from an object pass through a tiny hole (a pinhole) and form an image on a screen. Ss oO GS Ss oO oO 1 ) i<j WU Lal (-) 3 = > un (>) <= i} U Chapter 1l.indd 162 4/3/2025 4:56:35 PM Chapter 1l.indd 163 [Activity 11.9: Let us