prediction? What conclusions could you draw? Light passes almost completely through transparent materials. Light passes partially through translucent materials. Light does not pass through opaque materials. >, ~ Light: Shadows and Reflections What happens when an opaque object blocks the path of light? 11.4 Shadow Formation What did you see on the screen in Activity 11.3 when an opaque object was placed in the path of light? Did you See a dark patch on the wall? Why was this dark patch formed? We now know that light travels in a straight line. So, when an opaque object is placed in its path, light is blocked. The dark patch, where light does not reach, is the shadow. Fig. 11.7: Shadows around us Chapter 1l.indd 157 4/3/2025 4:56:31 PM Ss oO GS Ss oO oO 1 ) i<j WU Lal (-) 3 = > un (>) <= i} U Chapter 1l.indd 158 We have noticed shadows of ourselves and other objects around us when we are in the Sun or under a light (Fig. 11.7). Also, you might have had fun making different shapes with shadows sometime. Do translucent and transparent objects create shadows or not? Did you notice that in Activity 11.3? Opaque objects form darker shadows. Translucent objects make lighter shadows. Even some transparent objects can create faint shadows! Let us learn more about shadows. [Activity 11.4: Let us explore { Collect some opaque objects of different shapes and sizes. Repeat Activity 11.3, but this time, carry out the actions mentioned in the first column of Table 11.2. + Observe the shape and size of the shadow on the screen for each of the actions. Did the shadow form in all cases? Was the shape and size of the shadow the same as the object? + Record your observations in the second column of Table 11.2. Table 11.2: Observation of shadows Observations regarding shadow >, >, + Action The screen is removed. The object is removed. The torch is switched off. The object is moved closer to the screen, keeping the torch and the screen fixed. The object is moved closer to the torch, keeping the torch and the screen fixed. The object is tilted, keeping the torch and the screen fixed. The colour of the object is changed. What conclusions do you draw from this activity? What do we need to observe a shadow? Does the colour of the shadow change when the colour of the object is changed? Shadows are formed when an object blocks light from falling on a screen. We need a source of light, an opaque object, and a screen 4/3/2025 4:56:31 PM to observe a shadow. The walls, floor, ground, or any other surface acts as a screen for observing shadows in our daily life. The shape, size, and sharpness of the shadow depend on the position of the object relative to the light source and the screen. The shadows may give information about the object or we may not be able to guess