Chapter 2.indd 27

Understanding
the Weather

[a
Lu
_
o.
<
U

A change in the weather is sufficient to create
the world and oneself anew.

Marcel Proust, French novelist

How can we measure and
monitor the weather around us?

How do weather predictions

help us prepare for events like

heavy rain, storms, drought and aes
heat waves?

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Chapter 2.indd 28

Weather and its Elements

You wake up one winter morning and shiver. You reach for
thick clothes to keep yourself warm. In the summer, you choose
clothes that keep you cool and comfortable. You are responding
to your body s signals; your body is sensing the weather.

What is weather?

Weather is a state of
the Earth s atmosphere
at a particular time and
place. But what is an
atmosphere? In simple
terms, it is the layer of
gases that surround
some planets in the
case of our Earth, we
call these gases air . The
Earth s atmosphere may

Fig. 2.2 be compared to a cake
with several layers. The layer closest to the surface of the Earth is
called the troposphere , and that is where all land-based plants
and animals (including humans!) live and breathe. It is also
where almost all weather phenomena, which we will explore in
this chapter, take place. The troposphere extends to a height of
6 to 18 kilometres from the ground; it is less thick at the poles
(where the cold air contracts) and thicker in the tropical zone
(where the warmer air expands). You will study more about the
other layers in your Science classes.

We use many words to describe the weather hot, cold, rainy,
cloudy, humid, snowy, windy, and so on. They describe the
different ways in which we experience the elements of weather.

LET S EXPLORE

What are some of the words in your local language that you
use to describe the weather? Hot, cold, warm, chilly, crisp,
pleasant, and so on, are commonly used terms in English.

08-04-2025 12:42:20

Chapter 2.indd 29

The elements of weather are:

= Temperature: How hot or cold the atmosphere is.

= Precipitation: Any form of water, such as rain, snow, sleet
or hail, that falls from the sky.

= Atmospheric Pressure: The weight of the air above us, felt
on the Earth s surface.

= Wind: The movement of air, including its speed
and direction.

= Humidity: The amount of water vapour in the air.

Y THINK ABOUT IT

Let us imagine that Krishnan from Chennai is speaking with
Amir in Kashmir. Krishnan tells Amir that it has become
chilly in Chennai after it rained the previous night. Amir asks
him how cold it is. How will Krishnan explain to Amir how
cold it is? After all, what is cold for Krishnan may be quite
pleasant for Amir!

As you can see, it would be difficult for Krishnan to convey his
sense of chillness to Amir unless there is a commonly agreed way
to measure the temperature. It is the same with other elements
of the weather. In this chapter, we will learn how we measure
the weather using common standards.

LET'S EXPLORE

What do you think could be some other reasons to measure
the weather more precisely? (Hint: Think how knowing the
weather a few hours or a few days in advance would help you
plan some activities.)

From early times, humans have closely observed Nature and
learnt to read her signals to forecast the weather. Observing birds
flying low, ants carrying eggs, squirrels gathering nuts, frogs
croaking loudly, or even the opening and closing of pine cones,
provided valuable information about coming rain or storms. This
knowledge has been passed down from generation to generation.
Even today, in many parts of India, people use traditional ways
to predict the weather, especially the arrival of the monsoon.

Sleet:

Frozen or partly

frozen rain.

Hail:
Small, hard

balls of ice that

fall from the
sky like rain.

Water vapour:
Water vapour

is water in
gaseous
instead of
liquid form.

Forecast:
To predict
or find
out in
advance
(in our
case, the
weather).

India and the World: Land and the People

2 - Understanding the Weather

 

08-04-2025 12:42:20

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Meteorology:
Meteorology
is the
systematic
study of
weather and
its evolution.
This study

is the basis
for weather
forecasting.

Chapter 2.indd 30

Observing Nature s clues

Fig. 2.3.1. Ants shifting their eggs to

higher ground is a natural behaviour
that indicates an expected change in
the weather, especially heavy rain.

Fig. 2.3.2. A frog
croaking in a forest of
the Western Ghats, in

expectation of rain.

Fig. 2.3.3. The opening and closing of pine
cones are natural mechanisms driven by
environmental humidity. Pine cones close
in humid conditions to protect their seeds,
and open in dry conditions to release them,
ensuring they spread in favourable weather.

 LET'S EXPLORE

Talk to elders in your neighbourhood and ask them how they
predict the weather. What signs do they observe? Document
any sayings in your regional language that refer to weather
prediction.

In the last few centuries, scientists have worked out methods to
measure and monitor the elements of the weather with great

| precision. Based on those inputs, meteorologists try to predict
how the weather will behave in a particular region after a few
hours or a few days, or even a few weeks. How do they do it? Do
they just look up at the sky and guess? No, they ve got some cool
gadgets, a few of which we will now look at.

08-04-2025 12:42:23

Weather Instruments

a) Temperature

LET'S REMEMBER

In your Grade 6 Science textbook, Curiosity, you read about
different types of thermometers used for measuring the
temperature the clinical thermometer and the laboratory
thermometer. You also learnt about temperature scales.
One of them is the Celsius scale; another is the Fahrenheit
scale. If, for instance, we have a cool temperature of 15
degrees Celsius (noted as 15 C), it is the same as 59 degrees
Fahrenheit (noted as 59 F). |

Fig. 2.4.1. Snow melts Fig. 2.4.2. Cloudy weather it s
quickly when it s warm. getting cold.

India and the World: Land and the People

2 - Understanding the Weather

Fig. 2.4.3. In winter, Fig. 2.4.4. Curd takes longer
coconut oil turns solid. to set in cold weather.

Chapter 2.indd 31 08-04-2025 12:42:26

Ambient:

Of the
immediate
surroundings.

Statistics:
The technique
of gathering
and analysing
information
or data in
order to be
able to detect
patterns,
understand

events or make

predictions.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Chapter 2.indd 32

There are several types of thermometers. Some simply measure
the ambient temperature; others record the maximum and
minimum temperatures during a day. Thermometers often use a
coloured liquid which expands when the temperature increases.
However, more and more, digital thermometers are preferred as
they are more precise and can record more data.

Indeed, temperature recordings can be used to collect some
useful statistics, including:

= Range of temperature or the maximum temperature minus
the minimum temperature during a particular period of
time (usually 24 hours).

= Mean daily temperature or the maximum temperature
plus the minimum temperature of the day divided by two.

DON T MISS OUT

> The India Meteorological Department
was set up in 1875. Its motto is adityat
jayate vrishti, which means, From the
sun arises rain. The phrase comes from
the ancient text Manusmriti, and the
complete sentence reads, From the sun
arises rain, from rain comes food, and
from food, living beings originate. 

> Canyouthink ofa reason why rain arises
from the sun?

LET'S EXPLORE

> Here s a chart of the temperatures of a city in Madhya

Pradesh. What is the maximum temperature recorded in

the week shown here? What is the minimum? Calculate
the range.

08-04-2025 12:42:27

Chapter 2.indd 33

28.02.2025

01.03.2025

02.03.2025

03.03.2025

04.03.2025

05.03.2025

06.03.2025

> Remember the conversation between Krishnan and Amir?
If Krishnan said it was 20 C in Chennai and he was feeling
a little cold, he and Amir would have a measure they
could understand. What do you think Amir s reaction to

Krishnan s statement might be?

b) Precipitation

If the news says that a particular
place received 30 mm of rainfall in
a day, what does it mean? How is
rainfall measured?

The amount of rainfall is measured
with the help of an instrument called
arain gauge (Fig. 2.6). When it rains,
the water falls into a funnel and is
collected in a cylinder. A scale is
attached to the cylinder to measure
the depth of rainwater collected.
For example, when the height of the
water collected is 5 mm, we say that
the area received 5 mm of rainfall.

collecting
funnel

measuring
scale

measuring
tube

India and the World: Land and the People

2 - Understanding the Weather

Fig. 2.6. Rain gauge

08-04-2025 12:42:27

LET'S EXPLORE

Make a rain gauge as shown in the diagram above. Place the
rain gauge in an open area, away from objects that might
obstruct rain. Ensure that the rain gauge is on a flat surface
and will not tilt or topple with the wind. Using the measuring
scale, record the amount of rainwater collected at the same
time every day, for a month. (If there is snow, allow it to
melt before taking the measurement.) Calculate the average
rainfall for every week in that month and comment on the
variation from week to week.

c) Atmospheric pressure

Our bodies are quite aware of temperature and rainfall. But you
may also have experienced that the weather sometimes feels
 heavy , as before a thunderstorm. This is related to atmospheric
pressure, which is the pressure exerted by the weight of the air
above and around us.

The atmospheric pressure is higher near the sea coast and
lower as we go higher up into the mountains. When you climb a
mountain, the air gets thinner than in the plain below. As a result,
the air pressure is lower, and there is less oxygen available for

lower
pressure
(cooler air)

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Fig. 2.7

Chapter 2.indd 34 08-04-2025 12:42:29

your lungs to take in. With less oxygen getting into your blood,
your body has to work harder to keep you moving! That s why
people sometimes feel breathless, dizzy or tired at high altitudes.

This does not mean that the atmospheric pressure is always high
in the plains below or on the coast. In fact, it sometimes drops
dramatically, resulting in what meteorologists call a depression 
or low-pressure system , which can sometimes develop into a
storm or even a cyclone.

Y THINK ABOUT IT

Why do you think it would be important to measure
atmospheric pressure? Who are the people most likely to use
such measurements?

The instrument used to measure atmospheric pressure is called
a barometer. As with thermometers, there are several types
of barometers. The unit they display is generally the millibar
(abbreviated as mb). The normal atmospheric pressure at the
sea coast is around 1013 mb; a pressure below 1000 mb indicates
a depression.

Y THINK ABOUT IT

Chapter 2.indd 35

People who journey to places
at a high altitude are advised
to make pauses on the way to
allow the body to acclimatise.
Our army personnel serve
in high-altitude places like
Khardung la in Ladakh, which
is over 5600 metres above sea
level. It is hard to imagine
how they live and work in
places where the oxygen level
is so low the atmospheric
pressure there is generally , <a
about 650 millibars! Fig. 2.8

Acclimatise:

Adjust to a

new climate

or new
condition

India and the World: Land and the People

2 - Understanding the Weather

 

08-04-2025 12:42:30

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Chapter 2.indd 36

vy THINK ABOUT IT

ad) Wind

Wind is the movement of air from areas of high pressure to
areas of low pressure. Speed and direction are two important
factors when we describe the wind.

Have you seen seeds like these flying in the wind? What
would happen to the seeds if there was no wind?

Fig. 2.9

The wind is an important element of the weather. Its direction
and speed help in weather forecasting. Besides, air pilots
and sailors need to be aware of wind data, as the wind has a
great influence on flying or sailing. Farmers also use the wind
direction to predict where rain might come from. Also, a greater
wind speed will cause the soil to dry faster.

So, how do we measure this direction and speed? A wind vane
(or weather vane) has a rotating arm with a pointer at one end
and a tail at the other. When the wind blows, the tail is pushed,
and the pointer turns in the direction of the wind. It responds
even to a light breeze.

08-04-2025 12:42:33

Chapter 2.indd 37

Fig. 2.10. Left: Wind vane on the tarmac. Right: Anemometer

This wind vane on the tarmac is called a wind sock . It gives
pilots an indication of the direction of the wind during take-off
and landing. Similar socks are used in industries that release
ash or gases.

The simplest instrument to measure the wind direction and
speed is the anemometer. It has three or four metal cups that
rotate on a vertical shaft when the wind blows the stronger
the wind, the faster the rotation. A meter attached at the bottom
counts how many times the anemometer spins in a certain
period of time and calculates the wind speed in kilometres per
hour (km/h).

e) Humidity

Humidity is the last element of the weather on our list. It refers
to the amount of water vapour present in the air. It also depends
on factors like temperature, wind, pressure and location.

LET S EXPLORE

Where do you think humidity is likely to be more, Kochi or
Jaipur? You might guess that Kochi has higher humidity than
Jaipur because it is located near the sea. But how will we know
for sure? If we had to compare the humidity level between
Kochi and Mangaluru, how would we do it? Discuss with your
classmates.

India and the World: Land and the People

2 - Understanding the Weather

08-04-2025 12:42:33

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Chapter 2.indd 38

We can answer these questions more precisely by learning how
to measure humidity.

Before we move forward, we need to remember our Science
lesson from Grade 6 about the states of water. This will help us
to understand how humidity is measured.

LET'S REMEMBER

> When water evaporates, it causes a cooling effect.

> Ifthe amount of water in the air is already high (more
humidity), water evaporates slowly. That is typically the
case on a rainy day.

Humidity of the air is measured as relative humidity: air that
would contain absolutely no water vapour (which is impossible
in natural conditions) is rated at 0%, while air saturated with
water vapour will have a humidity of 100%. In practice, dry
weather has a relative humidity range between 20% and 40%,
while humid weather usually falls between 60% and 80% relative
humidity.

Y THINK ABOUT IT

If the humidity in Delhi is at 52% while in Kochi it is 84%, in
which of the two places are wet clothes likely to dry faster?
And where are you likely to sweat more, assuming the
temperature is the same in both places?

But how do we measure such numbers? This is done through an
instrument called a hygrometer. Again, there are several types
of hygrometers, depending on the principle they are based on.
The measurement of humidity is of great importance in many
industrial processes, such as food processing. Museums also
monitor humidity as they need to maintain a dry environment
to preserve their exhibit.

08-04-2025 12:42:34

Weather Stations

As you can see, we need several
instruments to measure the weather at
a particular place and time. A weather
station brings all these instruments
together, making it easy to measure
and track the weather. Readings of all
the measurements are taken at regular
intervals, which helps in mapping and
forecasting the weather.

Fig. 2.11

An automated weather station

An Automated Weather Station (AWS) is a self-operating
system that uses various sensors to measure and record weather
data, such as temperature, humidity, wind speed and direction, |
precipitation, and atmospheric pressure. Such stations are
widely used in fields like agriculture, aviation, navigation,
environmental monitoring, and so on, providing accurate
and timely weather information without the need for human
intervention.

DON'T MISS OUT

In 2023, the National Disaster
Management Authority set
up an AWS at a glacial lake of
Sikkim at an altitude of more
than 4800 metres above sea
level. The AWS provides early
information about upcoming
weather conditions.

Fig. 2.12. AWS ata glacial lake of Sikkim
Predicting the Weather

Meteorologists collect data using these instruments over
long periods of time. They study the data and use scientific

India and the World: Land and the People

2 - Understanding the Weather

 

Chapter 2.indd 39 08-04-2025 12:42:34

methods to try and predict the weather. Such predictions are
very important nowadays, as climate change makes extreme
weather, such as droughts, floods, cyclones, etc., more frequent.

E

a

nN

Cc)

fs

Oo _ +

z =~ Fog | Heat Wave

[e)

o .

P ie Heavy Rain J Cold Wave

To

Cc @:

s @ very Heavy Rain } Cold Day SUBDIVISION COLOUR
E ae : :

= > Extremely Heavy Rain wa Ground Frost || No Warning

 

8 wes Heavy Snow ' * Strong Surface Winds || Watch (Be Updated)
n

[o))

= i i i Alert (Be Prepared
5 rd Hailstorm 9 Thunder & Lightning || ( pared)
a

Fe oe Dust Storm Pp Hot and Humid |_| Warning (Take Action)

Fig. 2.13. India: weather warning for India on 19 May 2024

Chapter 2.indd 40 08-04-2025 12:42:38

Chapter 2.indd 41

Accurate predictions help us to be ready for such events. They
also enable local governments to mobilise resources and prepare
for any disasters. For example, if stormy weather is expected at
sea, fishermen are warned about venturing out in their boats, or
an entire coastal area might have to be evacuated if a cyclone is
expected.

LET'S EXPLORE

Discuss, in pairs, different situations in which weather
predictions are helpful. Make a list, and after you have
completed it, share it and discuss it with the pair sitting next
to you. How many different categories of situations have you
been able to identify?

Look carefully at the map of India above. This map was issued
by the India Meteorological Department on 19 May 2024. Study
the icons and connect them to the conditions shown on the map.

LET'S EXPLORE

> What do you observe happening on that day? What are
the various weather conditions that the IMD is alerting
people to?

> Which states have warning signs?

> Which parts of India are likely to be free from severe
weather?

> Whichstates are likely to face heat wave conditions?
> What are the causes for warning in Tripura and
Lakshadweep?

Before we move on...

> Temperature, humidity, precipitation, wind and atmospheric
pressure together define the weather at a particular place.

> The condition of these elements is measured using special
instruments. Data collected from these help us to monitor
and predict the weather.

India and the World: Land and the People

2 - Understanding the Weather

08-04-2025 12:42:39

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Chapter 2.indd 42

>

>

In different times or situations, one of the elements is
dominant for example, rainfall in July, the temperature in
May and December, atmospheric pressure when a cyclone is
moving, and wind when a loo (strong, hot and dusty winds
that blow in north India in summers) is blowing, or forest
fires are spreading.

Weather is closely linked to climate. We will discuss this in
the next chapter.

Questions and activities

1. Match the instrument with the weather element it measures.

Instrument used Element of the Weather

(

)
2)
)
5)

2. Jyotsna is deciding what clothes to pack for her school trip

to Mumbai in June. She looks at the weather forecast, which
predicts 29 C and 84% humidity. What would be your advice
to her?

. Imagine that a small group of students is setting up a rain

gauge.

Here are some options for the site.

1. The school vegetable garden.

. The terrace of the school building.

. Open ground with elevated platform.

. Compound wall of school.

a F&F WwW NH

. Verandah of the school laboratory.

08-04-2025 12:42:39

Discuss in your group and finalise the site. Write down the

reasons for your decision.

4. Below is a chart taken from IMD, Jammu and Kashmir.
Looking at the data available, write a short script to report
the weather conditions in different parts of Jammu and
Kashmir on the date shown. (Hint: Cover the temperature
range, maximum and minimum temperatures, humidity,

precipitation, etc.)

SRINAGAR

DAILY WEATHER PARAMETERS

Jammu & Kashmir (EVENING)
DATE: 01-02-2024

TR 0.0

QAZIGUND

11.8 10.0

PAHALGAM

6.0 8.0

KUPWARA

0.5 0.0

KUKERNAG

12.0 8.0

GULMARG

8.2 6.35

MUZAFARABAD

Note: ACT means actual; NOR means normal; DEP is departure
from normal; R/F is rainfall; S/N is snowfall; TR means trace

amount.

Chapter 2.indd 43

India and the World: Land and the People

2 - Understanding the Weather

08-04-2025 12:42:39

Noodles

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

*'Noodles is our abbreviation for Notes and Doodles !

Chapter 2.indd 44 08-04-2025 12:42:39