Geographical Diversity
of India

CHAPTER

To us, by its very geography, the country [India] appears to
be quite distinct from other countries, and that itself gives
it a certain national character.

 Sri Aurobindo

Fig. 1.1. Jog Falls in Karnataka. Notice the plateau and the waterfalls. The power of the waterfall
is converted into electricity (hydroelectricity; hydro means water) through special turbines.

 1. What are some key
geographical features

of India?
2. How does India s geographical
diversity affect our lives? 0781CHO1

The Big 
Questions @

Chapter 1.indd 1 08-04-2025 11:30:22 aa

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Chapter 1.indd 2

In 1984, Rakesh Sharma, the first Indian astronaut to go into
space, spoke with the then Prime Minister of India, Indira
Gandhi. When she asked him, How does India look from
space? , he replied, Sdadre jahan se achchha better than the
whole world. (This is the title of a well-known poem of the early
20th century.)

LET'S EXPLORE

Look at the map of India at the end of this book. What are
you able to observe? Recall your lesson on different types
of landforms mountains, plains and plateaus. Which
landforms can you identify on the map? What do the different
colours on the map mean? (Hint: The legend on the map shows
the heights of each area.)

As you go through this chapter, remember to refer periodically
to the physical map.

India is the seventh-largest country in the world, and a part of
Asia. Along with its neighbours Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal,
Bhutan, Sri Lanka, and Myanmar it forms the region known
as the Indian Subcontinent (subcontinent, since it is part of
the continent of Asia). Often, for the purpose of discussion, we
refer to five regions the great mountain zone, the plains of the
Ganga and the Indus, the desert region, the southern peninsula,
and the islands. In this chapter, we will fly over these zones,
providing you with a bird s-eye view of these features and
offering glimpses of what things look like in close-up at some of
these places. It would be difficult to go into all the details at this
stage since, as you will soon see, India is large and diverse.

The Himalayan Mountain range stands as a natural barrier in
the north, while the Thar Desert and the Arabian Sea mark its
western limits. To the south, the Indian Ocean and to the east,
the Bay of Bengal form a natural boundary. These geographical
features create a separation between India and the rest of the
continent and have played a crucial role in shaping India s
climate, culture, and history.

08-04-2025 11:30:23

LET S EXPLORE

> Do you recall your lesson on latitudes and longitudes?
Look at the map. Can you read, approximately, the latitude
and longitude where India lies?

> Identify the above features on India s physical map.

Let us now journey together from the Himalayas to the islands
in the Indian Ocean, and onward to the east of India. The diverse
colours on the map already give us a sense of the geographical
diversity. Familiarise yourself with the legend on the map. The
different colours indicate the altitudes.

The Himalayas

Look at the length of the Himalayan Range on the map. It is like
a massive wall. From the legend, can you guess the altitude at
different points of the Himalayas?

India and the World: Land and the People

1 -Geographical Diversity of India

Fig. 1.2. These are satellite images of the Himalayan range. Note that the
length of the range is about 2500 km.

Chapter 1.indd 3 08-04-2025 11:30:24

as > LET'S REMEMBER
The Himalayas seem to touch the sky. In fact, many of its peaks
are over 8000 metres in height and are together called the
 Eight Thousanders . This mountain range stretches across six
countries in Asia: India, Nepal, Bhutan, China, Pakistan, and
Afghanistan. Can youname the highest mountain in the world?

In the summer, the snow on the mountains melts and feeds
major rivers, such as the Ganga, Indus, and Brahmaputra. These
rivers and their tributaries provide water for drinking, farming,
and industrial use, connecting with the lives of hundreds of
millions of people. Hence, the Himalayas are sometimes called
the Water Tower of Asia . The Himalayas are also important to
many cultures and belief systems. The mountains themselves
are considered sacred, and temples and monasteries have been
built within them, attracting monks and spiritual seekers from
around the world who come to pray and meditate.

2. DON'T MISS OUT

The Bhagirathi River, a major tributary of the Ganga, originates
from Gaumukh ( Cow s Mouth ), in Uttarakhand. It is the edge

Fig. 1.3. Gaumukh
| of the Gangotri Glacier. This glacier is one of the largest in the
Indian Himalayas. It is considered sacred and attracts many
pilgrims. Gaumukh is also a popular trekking destination. Next

time you see the Ganga, remember its journey began there!

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Chapter 1.indd 4 08-04-2025 11:30:25

- DON T MISS OUT

Chapter 1.indd 5

How the Himalayas were formed ...
an interesting story

A long, long time ago, India was part of a much
bigger landmass called Gondwana , where its
neighbour was Africa! At some point, it broke
away and slowly started moving north. About
50 million years ago, it reached the landmass
of Eurasia and collided with it. As India pushed
against Eurasia, the land between them
crumpled and rose up just like how a carpet
wrinkles when you push it. That s how the
mighty Himalayan mountains were formed!

Amazingly, India is still pushing into Asia
today, very slowly about five centimetres
each year, which is much slower than the rate
at which your hair grows. This means the
Himalayas are still growing taller, just a tiny bit
each year about five millimetres, but over a
millennium, that adds up to five metres!

EURASItAN PLATE

f
 e et "0 INDIAN
ees OCEAN
ie
i
ey \
1 71 million
= \ ye a
 NDA ae

 

=~

ah
~~ SRI LANKA
'

ae

Fig. 1.5. Folded layers of Himalayan rock

- etal . 
dl oo

J

Fig. 1.4. India s journey
to Eurasia

The word Himalaya is a combination of two Sanskrit
words hima, meaning snow , and a@laya, meaning abode or

 dwelling thus, abode of snow .

India and the World: Land and the People

1 -Geographical Diversity of India

08-04-2025 11:30:26

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Chapter 1.indd 6

The Himalayas are broadly categorised into three main ranges:

The Himadri (the Greater Himalayas) are the highest and
most rugged part of the range, home to towering peaks like
Mount Everest and Kanchenjunga. This region remains
snow-covered throughout the year. Life here is tough, and
there are not many human settlements.

The Himachal (the Lower Himalayas) lie south of the
Greater Himalayas and have a more moderate climate,
allowing rich biodiversity and human habitation. Popular
hill stations, such as Nainital (Uttarakhand), Darjeeling
(West Bengal), Shimla (Himachal Pradesh), and Mussoorie
(Uttarakhand), are located in this region.

The Shivalik Hills (the Outer Himalayas) form the
outermost and lowest range, consisting of rolling hills and
dense forests. These foothills are rich in wildlife, serving as
a transition zone between the Himalayas and the Gangetic
Plains (also called the Northern Plains).

LET'S EXPLORE

ts en ad

Fig. 1.6. Kath-kuni House, event of mild earthquakes.

Can you locate the names of the states in the different parts
of the Himalayas? Take the help of both the physical and
political maps for this exercise.

DON T MISS OUT

The traditional house
construction method in the
western Himalayan region is
known as kath-kunv or dhajjidewari style of houses. A
combination of locally available
stone and wood is used, which
not only keeps the house warm
but also resists damage in the

Himachal Pradesh

08-04-2025 11:30:26

< - DON'T MISS OUT

The Great Himalayan National Park in Himachal Pradesh has a
wide diversity of flora and fauna. The park has been declared

Fig. 1.7. 1.Great Himalayan National Park Conservation Area. 2. Himalayan monal
(male). 3. A monastery in Ladakh. 4. The Beas river in Himachal Pradesh. 5. Snow
Leopard 6. A display of produce in a local market in the Himalayas. 7. Rnododendron a
type of sherbet is made out of this flower.

India and the World: Land and the People

1 -Geographical Diversity of India

Chapter 1.indd 7 08-04-2025 11:30:31

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Chapter 1.indd 8

a World Heritage Site by UNESCO. The biodiversity of the park
is being preserved by the government as well as the village
communities that live inside the park.

The cold desert of India

The word desert immediately evokes an image of a hot place.
However, there are also cold deserts, and we have one in India.
Ladakh is a cold desert where winter temperatures drop below
 30 C. There is very little rainfall, and the landscape is rugged,
with rocky terrain, deep
valleys, and lakes such as
Pangong Tso (tso means lake).

ee oe oth Be ae | - The terrain here resembles
: "OEE La **"\ 3" that of the moon; hence, it is

i a Vg a. | called moonland . Geologists
explain the formation of this
terrain, as we saw earlier, by
the fact that the mountains
were folded when _ the
Indian landmass _ collided
with Eurasia. This folded
portion was part of an ocean,
and so the rocks in this area

Fig. 1.9. Yaks are very important for the lives of people in the Himalayas. They
are reared for their milk, meat, wool and dung, and are also used for transport.

08-04-2025 11:30:31

Fig. 1.10. Pangong Tso, Ladakh. This lake has salty water, unlike most other lakes. The
saltiness is a result of the minerals that dissolve from the surrounding mountain areas.

are made largely of sand and clay. Wind and rain have eroded
the mountains into the shapes you see in the photograph.

Despite the harsh conditions, Ladakh is home to unique
wildlife like snow leopards, ibex, and Tibetan antelopes. The
Ladakhi people lead a simple life. The region is known for its
ancient monasteries and colourful festivals such as Losar and
the Hemis Festival.

The Gangetic Plains

As we move southwards from the Himalayas, we reach the
vast and fertile Gangetic Plains. These plains have been an
important part of the history and civilisation of India. These
plains are nourished by mighty rivers originating from the
Himalayas, providing a vital lifeline: water. The Ganga, Indus,
and Brahmaputra river systems, along with their extensive
network of tributaries, enrich the soil with minerals, making the
region highly fertile and ideal for agriculture. The rivers bring
with them minerals that enrich the soil, enabling abundant
agriculture. The rivers are also a source for generating electricity.
A large proportion of India s population lives in these plains.

India and the World: Land and the People

1 -Geographical Diversity of India

Chapter 1.indd 9 08-04-2025 11:30:32

fi rif z 4 ess > Ss & 4 ' *]
: = ifs r a - 5
Bs , Ae ae - +3" : gare eae ea I

Fig. 1.11. Modern agricultural practices Fig. 1.12. Aerial view of Delhi with the
in the plains river Yamuna on top right

Fig. 1.13. Multi-cropping in Uttar Pradesh Fig. 1.14. Rural women working ina
paddy field in West Bengal

The flat land of the Northern Plains has allowed for the
development of an elaborate transportation network. Road and
railway networks facilitate the movement of people and goods
over long distances. As you will see in the Tapestry of the Past
chapters, the Ganga, the Brahmaputra and other rivers have
been used for millennia for travel and trade.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Fig. 1.15. Modes of transport in the Gangetic plains

Chapter 1.indd 10 08-04-2025 11:30:34

~ DON'T MISS OUT

Most rivers are named after goddesses Ganga, Yamuna,
Kaveri, etc. The name of Brahmaputra, however, means the
son of Brahma . This river gets bigger during summer instead
of drying up! Can you guess why?

LET S EXPLORE

Notice the concentration of lighting in the plains. What could
be the reason for this concentration?

Be Nyaa 
>, ager ve, : x Pe : ei, es : by : Br a. 7 : ts
Fig. 1.16. Satellite image of the Gangetic plains

Fig. 1.17. The Northern plains grey langur Fig. 1.18. The majestic tiger that was on
sits on a wooden beam in Bandhavgarh __ the verge of extinction. Project Tiger has
National Park, Madhya Pradesh supported the return of the tiger to its
habitats.

India and the World: Land and the People

1 -Geographical Diversity of India

Chapter 1.indd 11 08-04-2025 11:30:35

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Chapter 1.indd 12

Fig. 1.20. A peacock and peahen the
is between 2.5 and 4.5 m long. This Indian peacock is our national bird
reptile is on the verge of extinction.

There are laws that prohibit harming

it or hunting it.

The Great Indian Desert or Thar Desert

If we move westward on the map, you will notice a yellowish
area. This area is the Thar Desert. What do you see? A vast stretch
of golden dunes, rugged terrain, and a wide-open sky?

Fig. 1.21. A traveller among the sand dunes of the Thar Desert.

What is the shape of a sand dune? While mountains are
made of rock and their shape is fixed, why do you think sand
dunes also have a similar shape, even though they are made
of sand?

08-04-2025 11:30:37

Chapter 1.indd 13

India. The Jaisalmer fort is a UNESCO World Heritage site.

Sand dunes are formed when the wind shifts and shapes the
sand into hill-like formations. Sometimes these rise as high as
150 metres.

The Thar is a vast arid region. Most of it lies within India,
spanning the states of Rajasthan, Gujarat, Punjab, and Haryana.
The desert acts as a natural barrier due to the harsh conditions
that deter human and animal movement including very high
daytime temperatures and cold nights, as well as a lack of access
to water.

People living in the Thar have adapted their way of life to the
place and what it offers; food habits, clothing and lifestyle are
suited to these harsh conditions.

Fig. 1.23.
Camel
vendor at
the Pushkar
Mela (at
the edge of
the Thar
Desert)

India and the World: Land and the People

1 -Geographical Diversity of India

08-04-2025 11:30:41

~ DON'T MISS OUT

Fig. 1.24. (Left) Women fetching water from a source far away from home.
(Right) Rainwater harvesting structure in a hamlet.

Water is scarce in the desert. Women often need to travel
long distances every day to fetch water for their families. So,
the traditional method for cleaning utensils is to scour them
with sand until they are clean. A little water can be used for a
light rinse. The water used for rinsing is reused for purposes
like watering a plant. So, the next time you leave the tap
running, remember the people of the Thar Desert. Rajasthan
is also famous for its ingenious water conservation methods,
including taanka or kunds. These are special water collection
systems that store rainwater, often for drinking purposes.

The Aravalli Hills

LET'S EXPLORE

Let s go back to the map. Trace your path slowly from the
Thar Desert towards the east. Do you see the Aravalli Hills?

|

| The Aravallis are among the oldest mountains in the world,
some 2.5 billion years old! The range has many peaks and ridges.
Although its highest peak, Mount Abu, towers at over 1700 m,
most of its hills are between 300 and 900 metres high. Isn t it
fascinating that a drive of about 4 and a half hours can take us

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Chapter 1.indd 14 08-04-2025 11:30:42

Chapter 1.indd 15

Fig. 1.25. (Left) A part of the Aravallis; just beyond this range, the Thar Desert begins.

(Right) A part of the Aravallis seen from space.

from Mount Abu in the Aravallis to Jodhpur in the Thar Desert,
a drive into a completely different geography?

Look at the political map in the textbook and identify the states
that the range spans. Did you see Delhi, Rajasthan, Haryana

and Gujarat?

The Aravallis play a vital role in shaping the geography and
climate of northwestern India. One of its most important
functions is acting as a natural barrier, preventing the Thar
Desert from expanding further eastward. You will read more

about this later.

The Aravallis, rich in minerals
like marble, granite, zinc, and
copper, have supported mining and
construction activities for centuries.
In fact, evidence from its ancient
mines at Zawar has shown that over
eight centuries ago, Indians were
the first in the world to master the
delicate process of extraction of zinc.
Historic forts, such as Chittorgarh,
Kumbhalgarh, and Ranthambore, are
located here.

Fig. 1.26. Kumbhalgarh Fort surrounded
by the Aravallis; this location in the hills
proved to be an excellent deterrent to
the enemy.

India and the World: Land and the People

1 -Geographical Diversity of India

08-04-2025 11:30:45

Peninsula:
A peninsula
is a piece of

land that is
surrounded
by water on
three sides.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Chapter 1.indd 16

a
The Peninsular Plateau

LET'S REMEMBER

=)

A plateau is a landform that rises up from the surrounding
land and has a more or less flat surface; some of its sides are
often steep slopes.

India has several plateaus; the most important one is the
triangular peninsular area in the middle and south of the
country.

It is also a very old land formation! Since this region is a peninsula,
surrounded by water on all three sides by the Arabian Sea, the Bay
of Bengal, and the Indian Ocean, it is called a peninsular plateau.

The plateau is bordered by two mountain ranges, the Western
Ghats and Eastern Ghats. The Western Ghats are taller and run
along the western coast like a wall, with many beautiful waterfalls
flowing down their steep sides during the monsoon season.

- DON T MISS OUT

The Western Ghats have been declared a UNESCO World
Heritage Site. They are home to many rivers and have a rich
biodiversity. The northern portion of the Western Ghats are
also known as the Sahyadri Hills.

The Eastern Ghats are lower and broken into smaller hills
along the eastern coast. Between these mountain ranges lies the
Deccan Plateau, a vast area of flat highlands.

Rivers like the Godavari, Krishna, and Kaveri flow across the
plateau from west to east. These rivers are important for farming
and provide water to millions of people.

LET'S EXPLORE

Look at the physical map of India given at the end of the
book. Notice the direction of the flow of the rivers.

08-04-2025 11:30:45

Chapter 1.indd 17

Fig. 1.27. Dense forests of Chhattisgarh, home to many tribal communities

This plateau is rich in minerals, forests, and fertile land,
making it vital for India s economy. It tilts a little to the east, so
a few of the rivers in this region flow towards the Bay of Bengal.
East-flowing rivers like the Godavari, Krishna, and Mahanadi
originate here, providing water for farming, industries, and
hydroelectric power. There are west-flowing rivers (Narmada,
Tapti) too, which drain into the Arabian Sea.

Dense forests on the plateau are home to tribal communities,
including the Santhal, Gond, Baiga, Bhil, and Korku. These tribes
have distinct languages, traditions, and ways of life closely
connected to Nature.

Tribal communities are largely spread over the states of
Jharkhand, West Bengal, Odisha, Assam, Madhya Pradesh,
Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Telangana, and Gujarat. Examine
the physical and political maps at the end of this book to locate
the states and connect them to their location on the physical
map.

Plateaus are home to many beautiful waterfalls in India,
as rivers flow over their uneven and rocky surfaces. These
waterfalls not only attract tourists but also help in hydroelectric
power generation and provide water for irrigation.

India and the World: Land and the People

1 -Geographical Diversity of India

08-04-2025 11:30:46

Fig. 1.29. Lion-tailed macaque
in the Western Ghats

Fig. 1.31. This is an
insectivorous plant,
meaning it feeds on ; = :
insects, found in the Fig. 1.32. Coal mines in the plateau; an important

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Western Ghats. It catches resource, especially in the production of electricity.
small insects in sticky Coal is a fossil fuel, the use of which contributes
traps and digests them! to global warming.

Chapter 1.indd 18 08-04-2025 11:30:49

Chapter 1.indd 19

Fig. 1.33. Mumbai, on the west coast, is India s financial centre

India s Amazing Coastlines

India s coastline is dotted with beautiful beaches, rocky cliffs,
and lush green forests. Some beaches have golden sand while
others have black rocks. Some islands have coral reefs while
others are covered in thick jungles. India s coasts are full of
surprises! The Indian coastline is over 7500 km long.

> Look at the physical map of India in your school atlas
or wall map and find the names of five rivers that flow
into the Bay of Bengal. Find out India s coastal states and
discuss the difference between the western and eastern
coastal plains.

> Do you know what it is called when these rivers split into
multiple streams near the coast? Discuss with your teacher
in class to find out!

The West Coast of India

The West Coast of India stretches from Gujarat to Kerala, passing
through Maharashtra, Goa, and Karnataka. Most rivers here
originate in the Western Ghats, flow swiftly, and form estuaries.
The coastline is shaped by alluvial deposits from short rivers
and features coves, creeks, and estuaries, with the Narmada and
Tapti estuaries being the largest.

a

India and the World: Land and the People

1 -Geographical Diversity of India

08-04-2025 11:30:50
rt
+2

Fig. 1.34. An aerial view of a part of the west coast. Note how close the
hills of the Western Ghats are to the Arabian Sea.

The west coast has many important ports and cities. These have
been the centres of economic activity for millennia.

The East Coast

The East Coast lies between the Eastern
Ghats and the Bay of Bengal, stretching
from the Ganga delta to Kanyakumari.
It has wide plains and major river
deltas, including Mahanadi, Godavari,
Krishna, and Kaveri. Important water
bodies like Chilika Lake and Pulicat
Lake (a lagoon, which is a body of water
separated from larger bodies of water
by a natural barrier) are found here.

Deltas are landforms formed at the
mouth of a river when it deposits
Fig. 1.35. Satellite view of the East sediments into a larger body of water,
Coast of India. such as an ocean, a lake, or another
river. Over time, these sediments build up, forming a triangular
or fan-shaped area. The Godavari, Krishna, Kaveriand Mahanadi

| rivers create fertile deltas, making the land ideal for farming.

Indian Islands

The Indian Islands refer to the group of islands scattered across
the Indian Ocean, the Arabian Sea, and the Bay of Bengal,
which form part of India s territory. India has two major island

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Chapter 1.indd 20 08-04-2025 11:30:51

groups Lakshadweep in the Arabian Sea and the Andaman
and Nicobar Islands in the Bay of Bengal. These islands have
unique wildlife, beautiful beaches, coral reefs, and volcanoes.
Several ancient tribes made these islands their home tens of
thousands of years ago.

Lakshadweep islands

Lakshadweep is an archipelago (a group of islands) located in
the Arabian Sea, close to the Malabar coast of Kerala. It is made
up of 36 islands made of coral. Not all islands are inhabited by
people. India controls a vast marine area, allowing for fishing,
resource exploration, and environmental protection.

Andaman and Nicobar islands

This archipelago comprises more than 500 large and small
volcanic islands, divided into two distinct groups the Andaman
and the Nicobar Islands. Their location is very important.

Fig. 1.36. Coral reef in the Fig. 1.37. Coral reef in the
Lakshadweep Islands Andaman Islands

India and the World: Land and the People

1 -Geographical Diversity of India

Fig. 1.38. A floating dock (a small port) of the Indian Navy near
the Andaman Islands.

Chapter 1.indd 21 08-04-2025 11:30:52

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Chapter 1.indd 22

Fig. 1.39. An aerial view of the active
volcano on Barren Island, the only one
in India

- DON'T MISS OUT

A)

They are like the outposts of India,
keeping an eye on the ocean. It is home
to a variety of flora and fauna. The
Andaman Islands are also significant
from a historical point of view many
of our freedom fighters were jailed
there under the most severe conditions
in a prison complex called Cellular
Jail . It has been preserved to remind
us of the tremendous sacrifices that
our forefathers made so we could be
free. We will discuss this some more in
higher classes.

Barren Island (Fig. 1.39 above) in the Andaman and Nicobar
Islands is the only active volcano in India. It sometimes erupts,
sending smoke and lava into the sky!

The Delta in West Bengal and the
Sundarbans

Fig. 1.40. Mangroves of the delta in the

Sundarbans of West Bengal

As we travel back from the islands
towards the eastern side of the
Himalayas via the Bay of Bengal,
we come to the Sundarbans.
This is located in the delta of the
Ganga, Brahmaputra (you saw
them earlier in the chapter) and
their tributaries. This delta has a
unique combination of the river,
sea and land. About half of it is
located in India, and the rest is in

Bangladesh. This is also a UNESCO Heritage site. The Sundarbans
are home to many species, including the Royal Bengal Tiger.

Note: Do remember to look at the map and identify where the

delta is.

08-04-2025 11:30:52

Chapter 1.indd 23

Meghalaya, India; The Shad Suk Mynsiem festival is celebrated by the
Khasi people as a form of gratitude towards nature; Living roots bridge
near Nongriat village, Cherrapunjee, Meghalaya

The hills of the Northeast

Stay on the map as we move towards the hills of the Northeast,
our final destination for now. Can you see Garo, Khasi, and
Jantia marked on the map? These hills, part of the Meghalaya
Plateau, are known for their lush greenery, heavy rainfall, and
breathtaking waterfalls. This region experiences one of the
highest rainfalls in the world, making it rich in forests, unique
wildlife, and fertile land.

India and the World: Land and the People

1 -Geographical Diversity of India

08-04-2025 11:30:54

aio FY = Mawlynnong Village, situated in
the East Khasi Hills of Meghalaya,
is renowned as the cleanest village
in Asia . This picturesque village
is famous for its well-maintained
cleanliness, bamboo dustbins, and
eco-friendly living practices. The
village is also known for its living
root bridges, which are created by
weaving tree roots over the course

of many years.
Fig. 1.42. Living root bridges showcase

the craftsmanship of the tribes of the
Northeast.

Before we move on...

> India gives its name to the subcontinent it is a part of.

> It has many diverse geographical features, ranging from
the snowy Himalayas to the heat of the Thar Desert. The
plains are watered by a large number of rivers. There is also
a peninsular plateau with the Arabian Sea on the west and
the Bay of Bengal in the east.

> These diverse geographic features have created a variety
of conditions with respect to soil, flora, fauna, life and
economic opportunities, and honed a rich culture.

> These geographical features have played an important role
in shaping our civilisation.

Questions and activities

1. What, in your opinion, are two important geographical
features of India? Why do you think they are important?

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Chapter 1.indd 24 08-04-2025 11:30:55

Chapter 1.indd 25

. What do you think India might have looked like if the

Himalayas did not exist? Write a short note or sketcha
drawing to express your imagination.

. India has been called a mini-continent . Based on what

you ve read, why do you think this is so?

. Follow one of India s big rivers from where it starts to

where it meets the ocean. What are the different ways in
which people might utilise this river along its journey?
Discuss in groups in your class.

. Why is the southern part of India referred to as a peninsular

plateau?

. Which UNESCO Heritage Site mentioned in this chapter

did you find more interesting? Write a short paragraph to
describe what about it is interesting.

. Look at the two maps of India, physical as well as political,

given at the end of this book. Identify the place you are
at now. Which physical feature of India would you use to
describe its location?

. Food preservation techniques differ from place to place

across India. They are adapted to local conditions. Do a class
project. Gather different methods of preserving food. Hint:
Drying vegetables when they are in season for use during
the off-season.

. Despite having such different regions (mountains, deserts,

plains, coasts), India remains one country. How do you think
our geography has helped unite people?

India and the World: Land and the People

1 -Geographical Diversity of India

 

08-04-2025 11:30:55

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

* Noodles is our abbreviation for Notes and Doodles !

Chapter 1.indd 26 08-04-2025 11:30:55