Chapter Qiindd 1185

From the Rulers to
the Ruled: Types of
Governments

A ruler s duties in the internal administration of the country
are three-fold: raksha (protection of the state from external
aggression), palana (maintenance of law and order within the
state), and yogakshema (safeguarding the welfare of the people).

Kautilya in Arthashastra
(translation by L.N. Rangarajan)

a ~< a=

Fig. 9.1. Inside the Indian Parliament SS = <25

 
o781CHO9

(0370452025) k43x43)

What is Government?

What are its Functions?

In Grade 6, we learned what government is and explored some

of its roles.

The government plays an important role in our lives. This role

includes:

= maintaining law and order in society;

= _ ensuring peace, stability, and security for the people;

= _- managing relationships with other countries;

= taking care of national defence;

= delivering essential goods
and services (education,
healthcare, infrastructure);

= managing the economy and
economic activities;

= working for the welfare and
improving people s lives.

LET S EXPLORE

> Do you remember this
picture from your Grade 6
textbook?

> The government also has
many other roles. Try to list
them.

In Grade 6, we learned that India has a democratic form of

government. Like India, many countries have a democratic

government; but some countries have other forms of

| governments. Even all democratic governments are not exactly
the same. In this chapter, we will learn about various forms of
government, how they differ from each other, and how they
function.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

|

Chapter 9.indd 186 08-04-2025 11:43:44

What is Democracy?

As we studied in Grade 6, democracy is best understood as rule
of the people. This means that the source of power and authority
in a democracy are the people of the country. Let s understand
this with the example of a school.

A school example

A school is full of activities and things that must be done. Many
day-to-day tasks need to be managed, and things need to be
organised. For example, there are timetables to be made and
followed, sports activities to be organised, food to be served
during lunch time (also called the mid-day-meal), utensils to be
cleaned, speakers to be decided for the morning assembly, and
activities to be arranged for No Bag Days . The list is very long
in terms of all that needs to be done in the school.

With so many things to be done, the Head Teacher realised that a
Student Committee should be appointed so that students can be
part of making the relevant rules to get all this done, then help in
implementation of the rules, and ensure that the rules are being
followed. The question before the Head Teacher was who will
be part of the committee?

The Head Teacher discussed this in the assembly. She proposed
that it would be good if some students can take responsibility
for these tasks. A student committee should be formed. Hearing
this, the students got excited and started arguing.

Naghma: Students in Grade 12 are
the most senior; we will take care of
everything.

Shobha: But you will finish school ina
few months. The students in Grade 11
should take care of everything.

Gurpreet: If the students of only one
grade will take care of everything,
then how will they know about the
problems that other grades face?

Chapter 9.indd 187

yy THINK ABOUT IT

The school
example helps

us to understand
the concept of
representation
and how it
works. However,
the students 
committee is
different from
Parliamentary
and Legislative
committees,

as class
representatives
in a school are
quite different
from Members of
Parliament (MPs)
and Members of
the Legislative
Assembly (MLAs).
What are these
differences?
Discuss with your
teacher in the
classroom and
make a list.

9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government

Governance and Democracy

02-06-2025 09:59:48

In this exciting situation, the students finally came to three
options:

= Everyone in the school becomes part of the committee and

Representative: takes responsibility.

A person who is
chosen to act or

 . The Head Teacher chooses the students herself for the
make decisions

on behalf of committee.
anothe group of = The students choose their representatives through voting,
people and the chosen representatives become the members of the

committee.

LET'S EXPLORE

Which of the three methods do you think is most effective?
Why?

The first method may seem appealing, but if every student in
the school is part of the committee, it will be difficult to reach
decisions and manage implementation effectively. In the second
method, since the Head Teacher selects the students for the
committee, many students will not have a role and won t have
a way to ensure that their voices are heard regarding what
they need and want. However, in the third method, students
from each grade can choose one representative from among
themselves someone they believe will effectively advocate
for their class s needs. This representative will serve on the
committee, meaning that the student committee will consist of
representatives from each grade. This approach is a democratic
way to choose representatives and form a committee.

Functions of Government

Previously, we discussed the various roles that a government
plays in our lives, similar to the responsibilities of a student
committee in a school. Just like the school committee, a
government must create necessary rules, implement them,
and ensure that everyone follows these rules. These three
responsibilities are known as the functions of government.

 _
@ Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Chapter 9.indd 188 08-04-2025 11:43:46

The creation of rules is called the legislative function; these
rules serve as the framework for running the country. The
implementation of these rules and the administration of the
country according to them is known as the executive function.
Finally, ensuring that the rules are followed is referred to as the
judicial function.

Democracy is defined as the rule of the people . This means
that, similar to the third method of electing representatives ina
school, in a democracy, the people select their representatives to
govern them. However, not every country uses the same method
for choosing these representatives. We will explore this topic in
more detail in the following sections.

~~ DO YOU KNOW?

Chapter 9.indd 189

ACO iN

OF THE PEOPLE
BY THE PLOPLE
FOR THE PEOPLE

Fig. 9.4. An 1896 mural by the painter Vedder called
 Government from the Library of Congress, USA.

Abraham Lincoln, a U.S. president in the late 19th century,
described democracy as a government of the people, by the
people, for the people , a phrase still widely used today.

Mural:

A large
painting
or artwork
created
directly on
a wall or

a ceiling

9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government

Governance and Democracy

 

08-04-2025 11:43:47

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

 

Chapter 9.indd 190

Who gets to
decide that
 this is the
government

How is the
government

formed?

What are

the different

parts of the
government
and what do
they do?

What Makes Governments Different?

The government of any country evolves over time. Since countries
have their own history, culture, and aspirations, it is natural that
governments of different countries are different. Let s look at
some aspects that can make one form of government different
from another. These differences will become clearer when we
look at various types of government later in the chapter.

Key differences between governments

1. Who gets to decide that this is the government ?
This is the most basic difference across many types
of government. Who or what says that this is the
government of our country ? That is, who or what gives
the government its authority and power? For example,
in a democracy like India, it is the people of the country
who decide and are the source of authority, while in a
theocracy, the source of authority is religious beliefs and
the head of a religious institution.

"?

2. How is the government formed? In a democracy, a
government is formed usually through some kind of
election. While in kingdoms which have kings or queens,
the kind that you have read about in other chapters,
usually someone from within the family continues to
rule and decide how the government will be set up.
There are other ways of forming a government, and even
in democracies there can be different kinds of elections.

3. What are the different parts of the government and
what do they do? Any government has many parts
and systems, and these vary across different types
of government. For example, the three functions
of government referred to _ earlier legislative,
executive, and judiciary can be performed by totally
independent bodies or by the same body. The system to
decide how the government will work can be written
down in a book of fundamental rules of the country,
called the constitution , which is what happens in most

08-04-2025 11:43:47

democracies. Or it can be decided by the king or queen, as it
happens in monarchies governments of kings or queens.

4. Whatis the government working for? What goals is it
trying to achieve? Governments are designed to work
towards certain values and ideals. Some governments,
like the government of India, are designed to work
towards equality and prosperity for all, while some other
governments may be designed only for the prosperity of
some families or groups.

There are differences between different forms of government
based on these four major aspects, but there could be other
kind of differences. So, let us now look at some types or forms of
government.

Democratic Governments around
the World

Democracy is the most popular form of government in the
modern world. In this part of the chapter, we will see that there
are different kinds of democratic governments. Before we
get into the differences, we should know that there are some
fundamental principles of any democracy.

Fundamental principles of democracy

What is the
government
working for?

What goals
is it trying to
achieve?

Equality in a democracy means that every person has ow
the right to be treated equally. It also means that everyone &O8

should have equal access to facilities like education and
health, and that everyone is equal before the law.

Freedom in democracy means that citizens have the right mee

to make their own choices and express their opinions.

Representative participation means that every person

This is done through the process of elections. Elected

has a right to choose and elect their representatives. Se

representatives become a part of the legislature.

Chapter 9.indd 191

9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government

Governance and Democracy

 

08-04-2025 11:43:47

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

 

Chapter 9.indd 192

Universal adult franchise grants every citizen
(above a certain age) the right to vote to choose their
representative.

Fundamental rights of a citizen, such as right to
equality, right to freedom of speech and expression,
and right against exploitation are all provided and
protected in a democracy.

RIGHTS

Independent judiciary ensures that every citizen s
fundamental rights are protected, and that laws are
followed by the citizens and also by all the parts of the
government.

Hs

It is useful to remember that even these fundamental principles
have evolved over time. For example, India provided universal
adult franchise (meaning the right to vote in elections to all
adults) from the very beginning of the Indian republic in 1950;
on the other hand, in Switzerland, women got the right to vote
only in 1971.

Clearly, the above principles are ideals; not all democracies are
able to put them in practice. But equally clearly, it is important
for the citizens to keep these ideals in front of them.

Different forms of democratic governments

Let us now understand the different forms of democratic
governments around the world.

1. Direct democracy

This is a form of democracy where all the citizens of a
country are directly responsible for all the rules, regulations
and functions. They participate in all the decisions directly.

In contemporary times, some kinds of this form are
followed in a few countries, like Switzerland. The limitation
of this form of government is that it is very hard to carry
out in practice, particularly in larger countries just as we
saw in our school story: if everyone becomes a part of the

08-04-2025 11:43:47

committee, then decision-making and working on all tasks
smoothly will be difficult.

2. Representative democracy

This is the form of democratic government in which the
people elect their representatives through universal adult
franchise, just like in India. In this form of democracy, the
people do not directly govern, but the government is always
accountable to the people.

Elections are an integral part of representative democracy
through which people can express changes in their choices as
well. To accomplish this, elections happen in regular and fixed
intervals of time. In India we have general elections every five
years, while in the United States of America they occur every

four years.

<

Chapter 9.indd 193

DON T MISS OUT

As we stated in the beginning, democracies have evolved
over time, and so have their characteristics. Even today,
there are a lot of differences in the functioning of these
democracies. It is useful to remember that when these
countries adopted democracies, they may not have had all
the principles of democracy as we understand them today.
For example, effective Universal Adult Suffrage in the UK
happened in 1928 and in the USA by 1965.

Country Year when democracy was established

Accountability:

Accountability
in democracy
means that the
government is
answerable to
the people who
have elected
them.

Governance and Democracy

9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government

 

08-04-2025 11:43:48

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

 

Chapter 9.indd 194

Most of the democracies today are
representative democracies. But every
democracy functions differently. Here are
the two forms of representative democracy.

a. Parliamentary democracy

In this form of government, the
members of the executive are also
part of the legislature. For example,
in India, the prime minister and the
council of ministers are also members
of the parliament.

Fig. 9.5. Voting in India

The council of ministers are accountable to the legislature
and continue working as long as they have the confidence of
the legislature. In India, the council of ministers can continue
working while they have confidence of the Lok Sabha.

In this form of government, people elect the legislature
but not the executive. Selected members of the legislature
become ministers.

Presidential democracy

In this form of government, the executive works
independently of the legislature. The president is elected
by the people. The president does not need to have the
confidence of the legislature for his/her position.

In some countries like India, states within the country such
as Rajasthan or Kerala have their own governments, but they
are not completely independent. They are still governed by a
larger national government, the Union Government of India.

The different forms of democratic government have different
structures. You can understand the basic differences from the
table 9.1 on the facing page.

What do these terms mean?

Executive: The executive is the organ of the government
which is responsible for implementing the law. But the
process of its election is different in different countries.

08-04-2025 11:43:49

Chapter 9.indd 195

USA

South

resident single house (National
P Assembly)

Korea

Australia

Different forms of democratic government

Lower House (Lok
Sabha) is more
powerful than Upper
House (Rajya Sabha)

prime minister
and the council
of ministers

equal power between
Upper House
president (Senate) and Lower
House (House of
Representatives)

equal power between
Upper House (Senate)
and Lower

House (House of
Representatives)

prime minister
and the council
of ministers

independent from
executive and
legislature (separation
of power)

independent from
executive and
legislature (separation
of power)

independent from
executive and
legislature (separation
of power)

independent from
executive and
legislature (separation
of power)

Table 9.1 Different forms of democratic government

Legislature: The legislature is the body of the government
whichis responsible for making laws. Itis known by different
names in different countries. In India, itis called Parliament;
in the USA, it is called Congress. In most democracies, it has
two houses, the Upper House and the Lower House.

9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government

Governance and Democracy

 

08-04-2025 11:43:49

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1
Chapter 9.indd 196

= Upper House and Lower House: In most countries, the
Lower House is elected by direct voting and is generally
more powerful than the Upper House, which is formed
either by election or nomination. These Houses are known
by different names in different countries. In India, the
Lower House is called the Lok Sabha, and the Upper House
is called the Rajya Sabha.

= Separation of Power means that the three organs of the
government Legislature, Executive, and Judiciary work
independently and do not interfere in each other s functions.

LET'S EXPLORE

Fill the blank columns under Country A and Country B
in table 9.1 given on the previous page by taking two
different countries of your choice.

> Analyse the table and discuss amongst yourselves the
similarities and differences in all the examples.

The exercise must have given you an understanding that
different forms of democratic governments have different ways
of formation, structures and functioning. Along with this, the
relationships between the three organs of government also
differs. But as we read in the beginning, some characteristics,
like equality, freedom and universal adult franchise remain the
same in all democracies.

LET'S EXPLORE

> After studying the above examples, list the core principles
ofademocratic government. Basedon yourunderstanding,
do the activity given below:

> You have to form a Student Committee in your school.

Make a plan and execute it in a democratic manner,

ensuring that:

 Functions of the committee are well defined

 The election process of the committee members is
democratic

08-04-2025 11:43:49

Chapter 9.indd 197

A Peek into History
Early republics

A republic is a form of government in which the head of state is
elected and is not a hereditary monarch.

This was the case in at least two of India s ancient
mahdjanapadas, as you might recall from the chapter New
Beginnings: Cities and States . In the Vajji (or Vriji) mahadjanapada,
the Lichchhavi clan, in particular, practised collective
decision-making, and leaders were chosen based on merit
rather than birth. Key positions were filled through elections,
and representatives from various clans met regularly to address
issues and develop solutions to ensure the people s welfare. As a
result, such states have been called early republics.

Indeed, the voice of the common people has been valued and
upheld in India through the ages, even when the power was
in the hands of a king or queen. A remarkable example from
the Chola period is seen in the Uttaramerur inscriptions from
the 10th century CE in Tamil Nadu, which provide us with
details about the election of members to the village sabha (local
administrative body). We learn about the election process,
including sealed ballot boxes, qualifications of members, their
duties, and also the conditions that could lead to their dismissal.

Fig. 9.6. Chola period inscriptions on the walls of Vaikuntha Perumal temple,

Uttaramerur, Tamil Nadu

9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government

Governance and Democracy

 

08-04-2025 11:43:49

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

 

Chapter 9.indd 198

Slave:

A person
who is
forced to
work for
and obey
another
and is
considered
to be their

property.

Subjugate:
To take
control of
people or

a place by
using force
and make
the people
obey.

Fig. 9.7. Adoration of the pillar
of Sanchi Stipa

For instance, members would be immediately removed if found
to have indulged in any corruption.

There were republics in other parts of the world too. In the 5th
and 4th centuries BCE, Rome and Greece had republics. In some
regions of Greece, free men could vote, but women, workers and
slaves could not. Other areas had a system where only a small,
privileged group could vote or make decisions.

Other Forms of Government

In the previous sections we saw that democracy is the most
popular form of government in today s world, and that there are
different forms of democracy as well. Let us now look at other
forms of governments, and understand their basic structures.

1. Monarchy

As we saw in chapters of Tapestry of the Past , mahdjanapadas
were headed by kings, who were guided by the sabha or samitiand
were expected to take decisions and advice of these institutions
seriously. AS empires were built and
expanded across India, kings began to
gain immense power. Yet, they relied on
a council of ministers and a network of
officials to help them govern the empire.
In many cases, the king also sought the
advice of learnt scholars on matters
related to dharma. Of course, there were
also examples of kings who used their
power to subjugate their people.

In some parts of the world, kings had all
the power; they made the laws, enforced
them, and also decided the punishments.
In some cases, they claimed to have
received divine power from God.

However, in many parts of India, the
power of the raja was neither absolute
nor beyond question. The king was

08-04-2025 11:43:50

Y THINK ABOUT IT

Chapter 9.indd 199

expected to make decisions while staying within the limits
of rajadharma; this meant ruling according to dharma and
ensuring the welfare of all people. This was an ideal that kings
did not necessarily achieve.

What might happen if the king considered himself to have
divine powers? How would he rule over the people?

DON'T MISS OUT

Fig. 9.8. A 17th-century Rajput miniature painting depicting
Bhishma lying on a bed of arrows, teaching Yudhisthira while
Krishna sits at the head, witnessing the moment.

In the Shanti Parva of the Mahabharata, when Bhishma,
the wise elder of the Kuru dynasty, lies on a bed of arrows
awaiting his death, he teaches Yudhisthira, the eldest
Pandava, at great length on good governance, justice, and the
moral responsibilities of a raja. A raja is not just a ruler; the
welfare of his people is his highest priority. He must apply
the law without bias to ensure fairness and equality. He must
not get attached to power, as it fosters ego and corruption.
He must seek guidance from wise advisors to ensure just
and well-informed decisions. The raja must understand that

his authority is temporary and bound by dharma.

9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government

Governance and Democracy

 

08-04-2025 11:43:50

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

|

Chapter 9.indd 200

King Chandrapida wanted to build a temple to his deity,
but the hut of a stubborn cobbler stood in the way. When
the builders complained to the king that he did not even
allow them to take measurements, the king blamed them
for not asking the cobbler s permission first. The king
received the cobbler, who explained that his humble hut
was like a mother to him and as precious to him as the
palace was to the king: The misery people feel when
their homes are forcibly taken away can be described
only by a god who has fallen from his celestial car or
by a king who has lost his kingdom! Nevertheless, the
cobbler expressed his readiness to let go of his hut if
only the king would come and respectfully ask for his
permission which the king did, giving him adequate
money as compensation. For those who desire
happiness, there should be no false pride, concludes the
text, while the cobbler praised the king s commitment
to dharma, even towards a lowly subject!

 From Rdjatarangini by the Kashmiri
scholar Kalhana (12th century CE)

oh ali Pa A

Sovereign:
Sovereign indicates
that the source of
power of a country
is independent from
external influence.

Monarchs: Kings or
queens who inherit
their position from
their family, usually
passing it from

one generation to
the next within the
royal family.

2. Monarchies today

A monarchy is the type of government that is ruled by a
monarch. Kings and queens are called monarchs, who
exercise their sovereign power. Monarchies are usually
hereditary; typically, the eldest son of the ruling
monarch becomes the next king.

Today we have two types of monarchy:
a. Absolute monarchy

In an absolute monarchy the monarch
has complete control in the making of laws,

08-04-2025 11:43:51

ensuring that they are followed and adjudicating when
they are not. Saudi Arabia is an example of an absolute
monarchy; here the king holds all power and governs
according to Islamic law. However, he appoints a council
that advises and assists him on governance; but he is not
bound by the council s advice.

Constitutional monarchy

Let us consider an example of a different kind of monarchy.
The United Kingdom or Britain is also a monarchy. The
head of the state is the king or queen, but he or she has
only nominal power and the real power of the executive
is exercised by the prime minister. The legislative power is
exercised by the parliament.

This means that all the laws are made by the elected
parliament, and executive power is exercised by the Council
of Ministers led by the prime minister. So while Britain has
a king, it really is, today, a parliamentary democracy. This
kind of monarchy is called a constitutional monarchy.

Adjudicating:
Judging a case
when there is

a dispute

Chapter 9.indd 201

Fig. 9.9. King Charles III in a ceremonial coach during the visit of a foreign dignitary.

9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government

Governance and Democracy

 

08-04-2025 11:43:53

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Se

Chapter 9.indd 202

2. Theocracy

A theocracy is a form of government where the country is ruled
by the rules of religion and religious leaders.

Iran, whose full official name is Islamic Republic of Iran has a
unique political system combining elements of both a theocratic
and democratic governance. Their constitution is based on the
fundamental principles of Islam, the country s official religion.
The Supreme Leader, who has the ultimate authority over
the legislature, executive and judiciary, is selected by a group
of Islamic clerics and his term is for life. There are also an
elected president and a parliament that take care of everyday
governance. The intent of the republic is to establish a society
based on Islamic norms.

Other theocracies currently in existence include Afghanistan
and Vatican City.

3. Dictatorship

A dictatorship is a form of government in which one person,
or a small group possesses absolute power they do not have
any limits imposed on them by a constitution or law. The 20th
century witnessed many examples of dictators who created
extremely difficult circumstances for the people; we will only
see two of them here.

= Soon after Adolf Hitler was appointed
Chancellor of Germany in 1933, he
passed laws that gave him full power
and eliminated the opposition. He
was now a dictator. Convinced of the
superiority of his people, he believed
that Germany should rule the world
and dominate inferior races . He was
responsible for the killing of at least
: e475 2. Fig. 9.10. Caricature
six million Jews (this is known as the of Adolf Hitler
 Holocaust ) as well as hundreds of
thousands of Roma and other groups of people. In fact,
he was the cause for World War II in the years 1939-1945,

08-04-2025 11:43:53

oy)

Chapter 9.indd 203

which resulted in immense loss of life
and property in many countries.

Idi Amin was a military dictator in
Uganda. He was directly responsible
for the merciless killing of thousands
of people. Many Indians whose
ancestors had migrated to Uganda a
few generations before were forced to

flee the country. Fig. 9.11. Caricature
of Idi Amin

DON'T MISS OUT

The Roma, or Romani people;
were originally nomads. Based
on their linguistic and cultural
characteristics, scholars have
determined that they originated
in India. They first settled in parts
of eastern Europe but have now
migrated to several countries of
the world.

Fig. 9.12

Story of Shane

Shane lives in North Korea which has a set of defined rules
for his everyday living. He is currently serving in compulsory
military service in which he is expected to serve in the military
till the time government decides. There are also rules about
how his hair should be cut and the clothes he should wear.
He cannot access the global internet, and so is unaware of the
world outside his own country. The government watches his
every action closely and he is also expected to report about
anyone who tries breaking any of the defined rules. One day
he met a tourist who asked him, Why do all of you have the
same haircut here? To this Shane responded, We all want to
explore new styles, but the government decides the way we
should keep our hair. 

Caricature:

A drawing that
makes someone
look funny or
foolish because
some part of
the person's
appearance is
exaggerated

Governance and Democracy
9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government

o

08-04-2025 11:43:54

LET S EXPLORE

> Does Shane s country look like a democracy?
> How do you think Shane s everyday life would be?
> Would you like to live in such a country? Explain why.

4. Oligarchy

The word oligarchy is of Greek origin, where oligos means a few
and arkho means to rule or command. It is a type of government
where a small, powerful group makes all the important decisions; usually they are wealthy families or influential people.

commentators: In some places in ancient Greece, aristocratic families ruled
enslbce snd as oligarchies. In modern times, political commentators have
share their observed that even some democracies show signs of oligarchy
opinions about | when a small group of politicians and wealthy businesspeople

olitical events . 
P hold too much influence in governance.

Sn an THE BOSSES OF THE SENATE.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Fig. 9.13. A cartoon from 1889 depicting an oligarchic situation.

|

Chapter 9.indd 204 08-04-2025 11:43:55

Chapter 9.indd 205

LET'S EXPLORE

> Look carefully at the picture in Fig. 9.13 on the previous
page. It depicts an elected body in the USA in the late 19th
century. The people shown in the cartoon are all elected
members. What do you observe? What do you see at the
top left-hand corner of the cartoon? Who do you think is
making decisions in this elected body?

> Cana democracy turn into an oligarchy? What can people
do to keep democracy strong?

Why Democracy Matters

These different types of governments show us that democracy
is not the only way in which countries are governed. But in
most countries, democracy is considered to be a better form
of government than others. Let us do a quick comparison to
understand this better.

Consider the characteristics below in different forms of
government and fill in the blank boxes with Yes or No:

Absolute

Characteristics | Democrac Dictatorshi
y P Monarchy

Universal
Adult
Franchise
Equality
amongst citizens

Freedom of
speech

Separation of
powers

Wellbeing and
Prosperity of all
citizens

Table 9.2. Characteristics of different forms of government

Oligarchy

9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government

Governance and Democracy

o

08-04-2025 11:43:55

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1
Chapter 9.indd 206

LET'S EXPLORE

You have learnt the basic characteristics of various forms of
governments. Do a small role play of the various forms in
your classroom:

> Enact democracy
Enact monarchy
Enact dictatorship

Vvv

What do you find to be the most suitable form of
government?

You have read about different forms of government above and
how the form of government defines the lives of its citizens.
In the previous table, we could see that the representation of
people s choices and rights varies across the different forms.

In a genuine democracy, the people can lead their everyday lives
in the way they want. They can choose what to speak, what to
wear, what beliefs to follow, and how to express themselves. All
of this can be done in a democracy until and unless it harms
someone else s rights.

In a democratic government, the people choose their
government. The government is accountable for protecting the
rights of its people and is responsible for providing basic needs
to its citizens. If the government does not perform its functions
properly, the people can change their representatives through
elections. This ensures that there is a constant check of what the
government does. Thus, the values and ideals of the government
in a democracy should focus on the well-being of all its people.

Our country is ademocracy, and you can see many of the features
of a democracy in our lives every day. It is therefore no wonder
that more than half of the countries in the world have adopted
democracy and democratic forms of government.

It is important to keep in mind, however, that even democracies
have their problems. Issues such as corruption, wealth disparity,
excessive control by a few over democratic institutions, erosion
of the judiciary s independence, manipulation of information

08-04-2025 11:43:55

channels, and several more, can cause hurdles in achieving the
ideals of democracy. What can we do as individuals, and as a
society, to remain vigilant and minimize these issues and hurdles?

Before we move on...

>

Government plays an important role in running a country.
Different types of governments across the world have
different answers to the following questions: Who decides
 This is the government ? What are the parts of the
government and what do they do? Who or what is the
government working for? What values and ideals should
the government follow?

The most popular form of government in the world

today is democracy. Democratic governments across the
world have variations, including direct democracy and
representative democracy.

There are two types of representative
democracy presidential and parliamentary democracy.
India is a parliamentary democracy.

Other types of government include monarchy, theocracy,
dictatorship and oligarchy.

Democracy matters, but there are serious challenges to
democracy that citizens need to remain vigilant about.

Questions and activities

1.

Chapter 9.indd 207

Write names of the various types of government that you
have learnt in the chapter.

Which type of Government does India have? And why is
that called that type?

You read that an independent judiciary is present in all types
of democracies. State any three reasons why you think it is
important for the judiciary to be independent.

Do you think democratic government is better than other
forms of government? Why?

9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government

Governance and Democracy

o

10-Apr-25 10:51:01 AM

5. These are some practices in a few different countries. Can
you match the practice with the type of government?

Type of
Government

L All citizens are treated equally Dictatorship
before law
The government refers to the

II. | religious leader for each and every Monarchy
decision it takes.

S. No Practice in the country

After the queen s death, her son

Ill. . Democracy
became the new king.
The ruler is not bound to follow
any Constitution. He makes all the Theocracy
decisions as per his choice.

6. Belowisa list of countries. Find out the types of government
these countries have:

S. No Country Type of Government

4 South Africa

7. What are possible hurdles in a democracy in achieving its
values and ideals? How can they be overcome?

8. Democracy is different from monarchy and dictatorship.
Explain.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

S|

Chapter 9.indd 208 10-Apr-25 10:51:10 AM