New Beginnings:
Cities and States

The kingdom shall be protected by fortifying the capital and the towns

at the frontiers. The land should not only be capable of sustaining the
population but also outsiders in times of calamities. ... It should be
beautiful, being endowed with cultivable land, mines, timber forests,
elephant forests, and good pastures rich in cattle. It should not depend
[only on] rain for water. It should have good roads and waterways. It
should have a productive economy, with a wide variety of commodities ....

 Kautilya, Arthashastra

Fig. 4.1. Ruins of a major structure at Rajagriha (modern-day Rajgir
in Bihar), when it was the capital of the Magadha mahdjanapada.

0781CHO4

Chapter 4.indd 67 (0804-2025 1013744

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Chapter 4.indd 68

Let us recall that in the early 2nd millennium BCE (that is,
over a few centuries after 2000 BCE), the Indus/Harappan/
Sindhu-Sarasvati civilisation, which we called India s
 First Urbanisation , disintegrated. Some of its cities were
abandoned; in others, some people continued living
there, but reverting to a rural or village lifestyle. They
had to, since all the components of the Harappan urban
order had disappeared: elaborate structures, both private
and public; crowded streets and busy markets; different
communities with specialised occupations (metalsmiths,
potters, builders, weavers, craftspeople, and so on); a
writing system; a sanitation system; the presence of an
administration; and, behind it all, a larger state structure
with aruling class at the head. And for awhole millennium,
urban life remained absent from India, though there may
have been a few towns here and there in north India.

ra

ve:

Fig. 4.2. The fertile Gangetic plains helped the mahdjanapadas to grow and prosper.

08-04-2025 10:13:44

Chapter 4.indd 69

Indeed, there were important regional cultures, which we
need not study here.

Then, in the ist millennium BCE, a vibrant new phase of
urbanisation began in the Ganga plains, parts of the Indus
(or Sindhu) basin and neighbouring regions, gradually
spreading to other parts of the Subcontinent. How do we
know this? Mainly from two sources: (1) archaeological
excavations that have confirmed the existence of those
ancient urban centres, and (2) ancient literature describing
them late Vedic, Buddhist and Jain literatures are full of
references to these new urban centres.

This new phase is often called India s Second
Urbanisation which, incidentally, has continued right
up to today! Let us see how this phase emerged.

Janapadas and Mahajanapadas

Towards the end of the 2nd millennium BCE, regional
cultures gradually reorganised themselves in north India.
As people formed clans or groups, probably sharing a
common language and common customs, each clan came
to be associated with a territory or janapada led by a
raga or ruler. ( Janapada is a Sanskrit word which means
 where the people (jana) have set foot (pada), that is, have
settled down.)

The janapadas grew as trade networks expanded and
connected them. By the 8th or 7th centuries BCE, some
of those early states had merged together; the resulting
bigger units were known as mahdjanapadas. Although
the texts have different lists of them, the more frequent
list gives the names of 16 mahdjanapadas, extending from
Gandhara in the northwest to Anga in the east and to
Ashmaka in central India, close to the Godavari River (see
map). There may have been a few more, along with some
smaller janapadas continuing independently.

4 - New Beginnings: Cities and States

Tapestry of the Past

 

08-04-2025 10:13:45

Y THINK ABOUT IT

Notice how many of the mahdjanapadas are concentrated in
the Ganga plains. There are several possible reasons for this,
including the growth of agriculture in the fertile Ganga plains,
the availability of iron ore in the mountains and hills (see
below about iron), and the formation of new trade networks.

LET'S EXPLORE

> The most powerful of these new states were Magadha,
Kosala, Vatsa and Avanti. Looking at the map, can you
identify their capitals? Also, how many can you match
with Indian cities of today?

> Compare this map with the map of the regions mentioned
in the Mahabharata (see Fig. 5.4 in the chapter India, That
Is Bharat in Grade 6) and list the names common to both

Moat: maps. What do you think this implies?
A deep,
wide ditch

surrounding

The map (Fig. 4.3) shows the mahdjanapadas capitals. Most

afortora were fairly large well-fortified cities, with a moat running
ang Fe ath outside the fortifications as further defence. Often, the
water. gateways through the rampart walls would be deliberately

kept narrow, so guards may control the movement of people
and goods entering or leaving the city. It is fascinating to
note that most of those ancient capitals continue to be living
cities today modern cities that are often 2,500 years old!

Early Democratic Traditions

Each janapada had an assembly or council, called sabha
or samiti, where matters concerning the clan would be
discussed. (Remember, from the chapter on India s Cultural
Roots , that the words sabha and samiti first appear in the
Vedas, India s most ancient texts.) We may assume that
most of the members were elders in the clan. The raja
was not expected to rule independently or arbitrarily;

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Chapter 4.indd 70 08-04-2025 10:13:45

shina op
Se + WRI ia

MALLA + Vaishalry 

ie fi

Rajagriha 4 Ghampa 

. . : Py

Tripuri aa Kaushambt 5
bu pf ANGA

 s = MAGADHA ;

Fig. 4.3. Map of the sixteen mahdajanapadas. Note that their borders are approximate.

a good ruler was supposed to take the advice from those
assemblies, apart from the ministers and administrators.
Indeed, according to some texts, an incompetent ruler
could be removed by the assembly. Of course, while such
mentions are significant, it does not mean that this was an
established law; let us remember that the data we have for
such remote periods is incomplete.

In their political systems, the mahdjanapadas expanded
the basic principles of the janapadas. Some were, in effect,
monarchies, in the sense that the raja was the ultimate
authority, supported by ministers and an assembly of

4 - New Beginnings: Cities and States

Tapestry of the Past

Chapter 4.indd 71 08-04-2025 10:13:46

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Chapter 4.indd 72

elders. His position was hereditary, in the sense that a raja
would usually be the son of the previous one. The king
would collect taxes or revenue, maintain law and order,
get impressive fortifications built around their capital, and
maintain an army to defend the territory or wage war with
neighbouring ones, as the case may be. Magadha (located
in part of today s Bihar), Kosala (in part of today s Uttar
Pradesh) and Avanti (in part of today s Madhya Pradesh)
were among the most powerful such states.

However, at least two mahdjanapadas, Vajji (or Vrijji) and
the neighbouring Malla, had a different system: the sabha
or samiti had more power and took important decisions
through discussion, and, if necessary, through vote.
Surprisingly, this included the selection of the raja! This
means that those mahdjanapadas, which were called ganas
or sanghas, were not monarchies their functioning might
be called democratic, since members of the assembly were
the ones to select the ruler and take major decisions. In fact,

Fig. 4.4. Ruins of a complex at Kaushambt, capital of the Vatsa mahajanapada

08-04-2025 10:13:47

Chapter 4.indd 73

scholars have often called them early republics , as they
are indeed one of the earliest such systems in the world.

More Innovations

The age of the janapadas and mahdjanapadas was an age of
profound change, which would impact Indian civilisation
until present times. In the chapter India s Cultural Roots 
in Grade 6, we saw the emergence of several new schools
of thought late Vedic, Buddhist, Jain in particular, and
their respective literatures. Those schools disseminated
their teachings and literature through scholars, monks
and nuns travelling across India or people undertaking
pilgrimages. Indian art also underwent a renewal; it will
blossom in the age of empires.

Urbanisation does not happen without technologies. Let us
remember that the Harappan civilisation mastered copper
and bronze metallurgy. Now, in this Second Urbanisation,
a major shift in technology involved iron metallurgy. In
several regions of India, the techniques of extracting and
shaping iron were actually perfected from the early 2nd
millennium BCE, but it took a few centuries for iron to
become a part of daily life. By the late 2nd millennium BCE,
iron tools had become widespread, facilitating agriculture
on a bigger scale. Iron also made better weapons than
bronze, lighter and sharper swords, spears, arrows,
shields, etc. As it happens, there is some evidence of warfare
between neighbouring mahajanapadas how frequent or
how intense it was, of course, is impossible to tell. Such
military campaigns, but occasionally alliances too, gave
rise to new kingdoms and empires, which we will turn to
later in our journey.

Another innovation was the first use of coins in India,
made necessary by growing trade. Very soon, coins were
exchanged across different regions and even with other
parts of the world. The first Indian coins were made of

4 - New Beginnings: Cities and States

Tapestry of the Past

08-04-2025 10:13:47

silver, a soft metal into which symbols could be
 punched ; they are called punch-marked coins .
Later, coins of copper, gold and other metals were
also made. Generally, a mahdjanapada issued its

om own coins, but coins from neighbouring regions

were used as well as exchanged in trade.

LET'S EXPLORE

Fill up the following table with a Yes (or tick mark) or No (or
cross mark) in each square, which provides an interesting
comparison between these two phases of Indian civilisation.

First Second
Urbanisation Urbanisation

Ganga plains

Copper/bronze

The Varna-_Jati System

We saw earlier how human societies grew more complex
with the rise of civilisation. Whenever this happens, a
society organises itself in several groups based on class,
occupation or some other criteria. For instance, there
could be different groups concerned with governance,
administration, religion, education, trade, town-planning,
farming, crafts, arts and all kinds of other professions.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Chapter 4.indd 74 08-04-2025 10:13:47

Fig. 4.5. A panel of the Sanchi stupa depicting a smithy (or metal workshop), where different
workers bring firewood, water, stoke the fire, beat the iron, etc.

4 - New Beginnings: Cities and States

Tapestry of the Past

Fig. 4.6. A few punch-marked coins from various ancient cities of north India.

Chapter 4.indd 75 08-04-2025 10:13:48

LET'S EXPLORE

> Why should a complex society divide itself into such
groups? Think about several possible factors why this
happens.

> List other such professions you expect in a complex
society of the 1st millennium BCE.

In an ideal society, all those groups would complement each
other and work in harmony. But most of the time, these
divisions also lead to inequalities: some groups acquire
more wealth, power or influence than others. In other
words, while equality is an ideal that human societies have
often aspired to, very few, if any, have ever achieved it.

In India, the society was organised in a two-fold system.
One category was the jati, a group or community of people
with a specific professional occupation closely tied to their
livelihood. The skills that defined a particular jati for
instance, skill in agriculture, metallurgy, commerce or
any craft was generally transmitted from generation to
generation. Often, a jati would get further subdivided into
sub-jatis, each of which developed customs and traditions
of its own, for instance concerning marriage, rituals or food
habits.

Along with the jati, there is another category, that of varna,
a concept that emerged from Vedic texts. There were four
varnas: Brahmins were engaged in preserving and spreading
knowledge, and in the performance of rituals; Kshatriyas
were expected to defend the society and the land, and to
engage in warfare if necessary; Vaishyas were supposed to
increase the society s wealth through occupations of trade,
business or agriculture; finally, Shudras were the artisans,
craftspeople, workers or servants.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Chapter 4.indd 76 08-04-2025 10:13:48

DON'T MISS OUT

Chapter 4.indd 77

You may have heard the English word caste . It comes from a
Portuguese word, casta, as Portuguese travellers to India in the
16th century CE tried to make sense of Indian society. While a
few scholars consider caste to refer to varnas, most take it to
apply to jatis; yet others consider caste to refer to the whole
varna-jati system.

There is historical evidence, both in texts and inscriptions,
that in the early period individuals and communities
changed their professional occupations if circumstances
demanded. For instance, a long drought or some natural
calamity could force a community of farmers to migrate
to a city and take up other occupations, or some Brahmins
would turn to trade or even military activities. This complex
system structured Indian society, organised its activities,
including economic ones, and therefore gave it some
stability. In time, however, the system became rigid and led
to inequalities and discrimination towards the lower jatis
or some communities excluded from the varna-jati system.
This process will be studied in a higher grade.

The varna-jati system has had a deep impact on Indian
society, and generations of scholars have studied its
countless aspects. There is a broad agreement that the
system was significantly different (more flexible, in
particular) in earlier periods and became more rigid with
the passage of time, in particular during the British rule
in India. Let us also keep in mind that while varna-jati has
been an important mechanism at work in Indian society, it
is not the only one; there have been many others, some of
which we will explore later, especially in the theme Our
Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions .

4 - New Beginnings: Cities and States

Tapestry of the Past

08-04-2025 10:13:49

YW THINK ABOUT IT

Inequalities within society can exist in many forms. Have you
encountered any incident where you or anyone you know
might have been made to feel different from others? Do you
think equality is desirable in a society? If so, why? Have you
come across people or initiatives that lessened inequalities?

Developments Elsewhere in India

In this 1st millennium BCE, important communication
routes opened up for purposes of trade, pilgrimage, military
campaigns, etc. Two routes became widely used and are
often mentioned in the literature: the Uttarapatha and the
Dakshinapatha. The first connected the northwest regions
to the Ganga plains, all the way to eastern India; the second
started from Kaushambi (near Prayagraj), then a capital of

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Fig. 4.7. Shishupalgarh (today a suburb of Bhubaneswar, first excavated in 1948): one of the
gateways into the city, through the fortifications; the moat, full of water, is visible outside the
gateway. Notice the narrowing in the gateway, for control of movement of people and goods.

Chapter 4.indd 78 08-04-2025 10:13:49

Chapter 4.indd 79

one of the mahdjanapadas, and crossed the Vindhya Range
of hills to proceed all the way south. We will return to these
routes when we explore the formation of empires in India.

Many lateral roads also connected with other parts of India,
especially the important ports on the western and eastern
coasts, which were vibrant centres of trade. In the eastern
region, major cities emerged, such as Shishupalgarh (today
Sisupalgarh, part of Bhubaneswar), which was the capital
of the Kalinga region and followed a strict square ground
plan, with imposing fortifications and broad streets.

In the Subcontinent s southern regions, cities began
emerging from about 400 BCE, although recent excavations
claim to find some signs of commercial activities
going further back. Around this time, three kingdoms
emerged the Cholas, the Cheras and the Pandyas.

Harappan Civilisation

BCE BCE

Janapadas

Fig. 4.8. Timeline covering the period from 1900 BCE to 300 BCE.

4 - New Beginnings: Cities and States

Tapestry of the Past

08-04-2025 10:13:49

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1
Chapter 4.indd 80

Fig. 4.9. Shell and gemstones industries at the site of
Kodumanal (near Erode, Tamil Nadu)
Apart from archaeological evidence, the most ancient
Tamil literature mentions those kingdoms and several of
their kings.

Because the southern regions are rich in resources such as
precious and semiprecious stones, gold, and spices, they
profitably traded not only with the rest of India but also
with kingdoms and empires overseas.

By 300 or 200 BCE, almost the entire Subcontinent, including
regions in the Northeast, was one vibrant interconnected
land; goods and culture travelled from region to region,
and often beyond India to parts of Central and Southeast
Asia.

About the same time, the mahdjanapadas ceased to exist,
leaving the place to fresh developments that were going to
reshape India.

08-04-2025 10:13:51

Before we move on...

>

From the end of the 2nd millennium BCE, janapadas rose
in parts of north and central India; they were smaller
states with a raja at the head taking counsel from an
assembly of elders.

The 16 mahdjanapadas were the first organised states

of the 1st millennium BCE; they witnessed the Second
Urbanisation of India, which spread in all directions from
the Ganga region, all the way to south India. By 300 BCE or
so, the mahdjanapadas ceased to exist.

In the same period, a vast network of roads connected
north and south, east and west, and eventually all regions
of the Subcontinent. People, goods, ideas and teachings
travelled along all those roads.

Questions and activities

1.

Chapter 4.indd 81

Consider the quotation at the start of the chapter and
discuss in several groups. Compare your observations and
conclusions on what Kautilya recommends for a kingdom.
Is it very different today?

According to the text, how were rulers chosen in early
Vedic society?

Imagine you are a historian studying ancient India. What
types of sources (archaeological, literary, etc.) would you
use to learn more about the mahdjanapadas? Explain how
each source might contribute to your understanding.

Why was the development of iron metallurgy so important
for the growth of urbanism in the 1st millennium BCE?
You may use points from the chapter but also from your
knowledge or imagination.

4 - New Beginnings: Cities and States

Tapestry of the Past

08-04-2025 10:13:51

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

* Noodles is our abbreviation for Notes and Doodles !

Chapter 4.indd 82 08-04-2025 10:13:51