Chapter 8:indd 1167

How the Land
Becomes Sacred

Ether, air, fire, water, earth, planets, all creatures,

directions, trees and plants, rivers and seas, are organs
of the supreme Lord s body.

 Bhagavata Purana

- oe e in < 
on

 wer?

+ inh r fe
. be ? 5

,

re > Oh MRD

aw a 
 
=
=S
S

 

0781CHO8

8704-2025 12539

LET S EXPLORE

Do any of the pictures look familiar to you? Can you name
similar places found in your neighbourhood?

What is Sacredness ?

Sacredness can have many meanings. In the limited context of
this chapter, sacredness is finding something of deep religious or
spiritual significance, worthy of respect and reverence, holy or
divine. But what is this something ? It can be a special location or
shrine that evokes such deep feelings, high thoughts or emotions.
It can also be, as we will see in this chapter, a journey of a special
kind (often called a pilgrimage ), the route the journey takes, or
even the very land covered.

Sacredness, therefore, is not just connected with religion and
spirituality, but also with geography, all sorts of traditions, and, in
the case of India, with something more that we will discover soon.

Let us focus on sacred places first. You will find that almost every
school of thought and religion in India has its own sacred places.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Chapter 8.indd 168 08-04-2025 12:53:22

Chapter 8.indd 169

The places in these pictures are revered by followers of Islam,
Christianity, Judaism and Zoroastrianism religions that
originated outside India. People visit or congregate in these places
for prayer and worship. Followers from other faiths also visit
them, as can be seen at the Dargah Sharif of Ajmer (Rajasthan) or
the Velankanni Church in Tamil Nadu. People go on pilgrimages
to these shrines on special occasions.

Naturally, when we turn to religions that originated in India,
we find that they have many more sacred sites. In the case of
Buddhism, those are often places that were visited by the Buddha
or where his relics are kept. Among them is the Great Stipa at
Sanchi (Madhya Pradesh), which is a relic stipa (you saw this in
the chapter on The Rise of Empires ), and the Mahabodhi Sttpa
in Bodh Gaya (Bihar), where, according to Buddhist tradition,
the Buddha attained enlightenment. They are important sites
for pilgrims; Bodh Gaya, for instance, receives more than four
million visitors every year.

In Sikhism, takhts
are seats or
centres of spiritual
authority for
example, the Takht
Sri Patna Sahib (in
Patna), the Akal Takht
(part of the Golden
Temple at Amritsar,
see Fig. 8.3), and Takht
Sri Keshgarh Sahib
(at Anandpur). Sikhs
aspire to undertake
pilgrimages to these

Fig. 8.3

places at least once in their lifetimes, as they are associated with
important Sikh Gurus and therefore have special significance. In
addition, Sikh tradition records pilgrimages conducted by several
Gurus, such as Guru Nanak, to places like Haridwar, Prayag,
Mathura, Varanasi, Ayodhya, Puri and many more, besides a few
Muslim shrines.

Pilgrimage:
A journey
to asacred
place that is
significant
within a
religion

or belief
system.

Shrine:

A place
regarded

as holy
because

of its
associations
with

the divine, a
sacred relic,
or a Spiritual
figure.

Relic:

A part of

a Saint s

or other
spiritual
figure s
body or
sometimes
to one

of their
belongings
kept as an
object of
reverence.

Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions

8 - How the Land Becomes Sacred

 

08-04-2025 12:53:23

Tirtha:
Literally, a
place where
one can cross
a river or
other body
of water.
Symbolically,
it becomes a
place where
one can
cross from
the ordinary
worldly life
to a higher,
spiritual

life. Such
places are
held in high
reverence
and regarded
as sacred.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1
Chapter 8.indd 170

India has, for ages past, been a country of pilgrimages.
All over the country, you find these ancient places, from
Badrinath, Kedarnath and Amarnath, high up in the snowy
Himalayas down to Kanyakumari in the south. What has
drawn our people from the south to the north and from
the north to the south in these great pilgrimages? It is the
feeling of one country and one culture.

 Jawaharlal Nehru, 1961

Pilgrimages

Many Indians undertake tirthaydatras or pilgrimages to various
sacred sites (tirthas) during their lifetime. This ancient and
continuous tradition of pilgrimage is not just a physical journey
but also an inner journey that requires a specified code of
conduct.

For at least 3,000 years, and with no modern means of
transportation available, Indians have been crisscrossing the
Subcontinent, resulting in its entire geography being considered
sacred. We will return to this soon.

Here s an excerpt from the writings of Dharampal, a historian
and thinker:

 I was travelling from Gwalior to Delhi... when I met a group of
people ... about twelve of them, some three or four women and
seven or eight men... They said that they had been ona pilgrimage,
three months long, up to Rameswaram, among other places. They
came from two different villages north of Lucknow. They had
various bundles of things and some earthen pots with them... They
had taken all the necessities for their food atta, ghee, sugar 
with them ... I asked them, You are going to Delhi now? Yes! ,
they replied. You will stop in Delhi? No, we only have to change
trains there. We re going to Haridwar! ... We don t have time ... We
have to go to Haridwar. And then we have to get back home. 

08-04-2025 12:53:23

Chapter 8.indd 171

LET'S EXPLORE

> Read the excerpt. What are your observations? Locate the
route the group must have taken from Rameswaram to
Haridwar. Why do you think the group was going straight
to Haridwar instead of stopping at Delhi?

> In ancient times, when people were travelling from
Madurai in Tamil Nadu to Varanasi in Uttar Pradesh,
what languages would they come across? How would they
communicate with people in those places? Where would
they stay? What food would they eat?

In the Jain tradition, the tirthas are associated with places where
the Tirthankaras attained liberation or where significant events
of their lives occurred. Trees, ponds, hills and mountains that the
Tirthankaras visited or meditated at are also considered sacred.
Examples of such places include Mount Abu, Girnar and the
Shatrufijaya hill in Saurashtra (Gujarat).

Another example is the pilgrimage to Sabarimala temple
(Kerala), dedicated to the deity Ayyappa, which draws over ten
million devotees every year. This hilltop shrine was traditionally

reached by an immensely
difficult trek through hills and
forests. Such a challenging
approach, common to
many hilltop or mountain
shrines all over the country,
symbolises the difficulties of
the inner path, with natural
landmarks along the route
being considered sacred.

Fig. 8.4. Pandharpur wari,

an 800-year-old tradition in
Maharashtra. Wari means a
pilgrimage that is held regularly,
in this case annually. Pilgrims
walk in large groups for 21 days
to the famous Vithoba temple in
Pandharpur.

Tirthankara:
Literally,
someone
who.makes a
tirtha, that is,
who guides
the crossing
from ordinary
to higher life.
In Jainism, the
Tirthankaras
are the
supreme
preachers of
dharma.

Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions

8 - How the Land Becomes Sacred

08-04-2025 12:53:24

@

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

 

Chapter 8.indd 172

More sacred sites

Hindu and many folk and tribal belief
systems go further. In Grade 6 we learnt
that in such belief systems, people regard
elements of Nature, such as mountains,
rivers, trees, plants and animals, and
sometimes stones too, as sacred. In
Hinduism, for instance, this includes
countless geographical sites or features
of Nature, such as specific mountains,
rivers and forests, which are regarded as
particularly divine and are worshipped
as deities; many rivers are regarded Mf

as devis, while some species of trees, Fig. 8.5. In this image,

animals and plants are particularly holy. Ae. i the form of 5

This tradition comes from the perception a demon and saves
wo Bhidevi (Mother Earth),
of a divine presence in all of Nature. snown here sitting on his
Ultimately, the whole of planet Earth is elbow (from the Belur
considered sacred she is Mother Earth ="? / , Karnataka)

or Bhtdevi.

Here are a few more examples of such traditions:

= The Niyam Dongar hill in the Niyamgiri Range of Jharkhand
is sacred to the Dongria Khond tribe. They believe that the
hill is the abode of Niyam Raja, the supreme deity who
provides everything they need for sustenance. Cutting trees
here is prohibited and considered a sign of disrespect to the
deity.

= In the early 2000s, the Government of Sikkim identified
several sacred mountains, caves, lakes, rocks and hot springs
that were to be protected against all forms of damage.

= Inthe Nilgiris of Tamil Nadu, the Todas, a tribal community,
regard many mountain peaks as sacred and associate them
with their gods. To them, this sense of sacredness extends to
many plants (which often become part of their rituals), Shola
forests, wetlands, and even specific stones and individual
trees.

08-04-2025 12:53:24

Chapter 8.indd 173

Becoming Aware of Sacred Geography

Some sacred places are marked on the map (Fig. 8.6) given
on the next page. Though spread all over India, they are also
interconnected. For example, some Hindus aspire to do the char
dham yatra, and those four sites appear to have been deliberately
located in the southern, northern, eastern and
western corners of India! A similar aspiration
exists with respect to the 12 jyotirlingas, which are
considered highly auspicious. The 51 Shakti pithas,
too, cover the entire map of India (even parts of
present-day Bangladesh and Pakistan). And there
are many more regional networks.

breadth, creating a sacred geography. As a result, and name.
the land itself becomes sacred.

There is a story about the 51 Shakti pithas. Shakti, the divine
mother in the form of Sati, and her consort, Shiva, were insulted
by her father. An angry Sati immolated herself. Shiva was so
livid that he took her body and refused to allow the last rites.
Shiva s anger was dangerous for the world and the cosmos. So
Vishnu used his chakra to cut up Sati s body. The Shakti pithas
are the places across the Subcontinent where the body parts of
the divine mother fell one by one. The symbol behind the story
is clear: the whole land becomes the body of the divine mother.

LET'S EXPLORE

Note the locations of the char dham. What do you think it
implied for the people when they travelled north-south and
east-west?

While visiting the major sacred places connected to their
respective faiths, pilgrims would naturally cover the geography
of India. They would come across diverse languages, customs,
clothing and foods along the way, but would notice the
commonalities too.

The 12 jyotirlingas
are sacred shrines
dedicated to Shiva,
a major deity of
Hinduism. Each

shrine has its own
These networks crisscross India s length and _ynique mythology

Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions

8 - How the Land Becomes Sacred

 

08-04-2025 12:53:25

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

@

Chapter 8.indd 174

40 N

30 N

20 N

10 N

LEGEND

Hl

ee
Z
z .
g

70 E 80 E 90 E

Fig. 8.6. A map showing a few networks of traditional tirthas.

LET'S EXPLORE

Can you identify the names of a few traditional tirthas given
in the map above? You can refer to the political map at the
end of the book for help.

NoOv

NoOE

NoOZ

NoOT

08-04-2025 12:53:26

Chapter 8.indd 175

Why did people travel such long distances? Apart from religious
motivations, some, like merchants and traders, travelled to
exchange goods; others travelled to discuss, debate and popularise
their beliefs or to learn and study from eminent teachers in
different parts of the country. However, though they were
travelling for different purposes, their routes often converged.
Discussions and debates, sharing of goods, experiences, and
tales, enriched everyone. New ideas emerged, and old ones were
adapted. This complex process became a major factor in the
cultural integration of the Indian Subcontinent.

Sacred Ecology

Tirthas are usually located on the banks of a river or a lake, ina
forest or on a mountain. As we saw above, the natural landscape
itself is thus seen or perceived as sacred space, or punyakshetra.
This perception has helped us to protect and preserve Nature,
since we are not distinct from her. So geography, culture and
spirituality fuse together in these kshetras.

Rivers and sangams (confluence of rivers)

Rivers have been worshipped in India since Vedic times. The
nadistuti sukta of the Rigveda is a hymn (sukta) in praise of (stuti)
rivers (nadi) that invokes 19 major rivers of ancient northwest
India. Even today, many rituals involving water invoke the
presence of some of the most important rivers of India:

gange cha yamune chaiva godavari sarasvati
narmade sindhu kavertjalesmin sannidhim kuru

Ganga, Yamuna, Godavari, Sarasvati, Narmada, Sindhu,
and Kaveri, may you manifest in this water.

Those rivers have been lifelines for the Indian civilisation. Their
sources, tributaries and the places they flow through are often
regarded as sacred too, and are visited by many pilgrims. In local
languages, these rivers are referred to with respect for instance,
 Ganga ji or Yamuna ji .

Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions

8 - How the Land Becomes Sacred

 

08-04-2025 12:53:26

DON'T MISS OUT

 Prayagraj hosts the Kumbh Mela every six years. Prayag is
located at the confluence of three rivers Ganga, Yamuna
and the invisible Sarasvati. A few years ago, UNESCO listed
the Kumbh Mela as an intangible heritage of the world .

 An estimated 660 million people participated in the
Kumbh Mela of 2025. What proportion of the population
of India is this?

Kumbh Mela

The Kumbh Mela originates in the legend of amrita manthana.
The devas and asuras (i.e., more or less, gods and demons),
traditional enemies, for once joined forces in churning the
cosmic ocean to extract amrita, the divine nectar that would give
them immortality. To prevent the asuras from getting the amrita,
Vishnu, in the form of Mohini, a beautiful lady, snatched the
pitcher or kumbha which contained the amrita. In the process,
a few drops fell over four places Haridwar, Prayagraj, Nashik,
and Ujjain. These are the places where the Kumbh Mela has been
held, and a dip in the rivers there during a prescribed period is
considered most auspicious.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

ae
ce
N

Chapter 8.indd 176 08-04-2025 12:53:27

Y THINK ABOUT IT

Chapter 8.indd 177

How do you think these
sacredplacesareconnected
with the people s economic
lives and activities? Draw
a mind map to trace these
connections. (Hint: The
pictures above can provide
some clues.)

Mountains and Forests

All over the world, mountains are often associated with legends,
deities or heroes. Also mountains are seen as a symbolic gateway
from earth to heaven because of their height. That is why many
tirthas and temples in India are located on hilltops, as the
physical journey to these peaks is seen as a symbolic journey
to reach the divine. People would undertake arduous walks
through mountain trails to those sites and shrines, which tested
not only their physical abilities but also their mental strength.
Today, such places are often accessible through roads and other
modes of transport.

a
Fig. 8.9

Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions

8 - How the Land Becomes Sacred

 

08-04-2025 12:53:29

Trees, Forests and Sacred Groves

In many parts of India, trees are adorned with offerings like
turmeric and kumkum. One species of fig tree commonly called
 peepul (or pipal ), bo tree or bodhi tree (ashvattha in Sanskrit)
is sacred to Hinduism, Buddhism, Sikhism and Jainism. In fact, its
botanical name is Ficus religiosa (literally, in Latin, the religious 
or sacred fig tree).

wee tq
 _ 

Fig. 8.10. The tree in the Mahabodhi Temple at Bodh Gaya is often cited as a direct
descendant of the original tree under which, according to Buddhist tradition, the
Buddha attained enlightenment hence the names bodhi tree and Bodh Gaya .

~ + tee

 

In Grade 6 we read about the two epics of India, the Mahabharata
and Ramayana. These texts have vivid descriptions of pilgrimages

| undertaken and places visited, and of sacred rivers, forests and
mountains. In almost every region of India, numerous rural
and tribal traditions claim that the heroes of these texts passed
through their locality, with shrines often marking such passages.
Such legends allowed a wide diversity of communities to make
the two epics their own.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

 

Chapter 8.indd 178 08-04-2025 12:53:30

Fig. 8.11. A shrine in
Bastar, Chhattisgarh,
celebrating Rama s
passing through the
area

1 se Be ee rie Fig. 8.12. A seal from
Lo ial gnet tara Mohenjo-daro

ie am

Observe this seal from Mohenjo-daro. Can you recognise the
leaves at the top? As you can see, the peepul tree has been an
important part of India s cultural geography for millennia.

v THINK ABOUT IT |

Many parts of the peepul tree have medical uses: the leaves
are used to treat some skin ailments while the bark is useful
for stomach ailments. Since it stays green almost through the
year, it provides food and shelter to many types of birds and
other animals.

Over time, many rural and tribal communities across India
decided to protect and preserve some natural forests from
harmful activities such as hunting, tree felling or mining.
They saw those forests as the abodes of deities for example,
Ryngkew or Basa in Meghalaya. Such special forests are called
 sacred groves in English (see the table below for a few names
in regional languages) and, thanks to their sacred status, have
come to shelter great biodiversity of flora and fauna. Many
sacred groves are also home to small water bodies and thus help
in water conservation.

There were many thousands of sacred groves in India. Sadly,
these numbers have been shrinking as people have started
encroaching on them for various purposes, from agriculture to
industry. Still, sacred groves continue to be protected in many
regions of India.

Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions

8 - How the Land Becomes Sacred

 

Chapter 8.indd 179 08-04-2025 12:53:31

SS itt

Fig. 8.13. Kalkai temple, Mulshi, Maharashtra Fig. 8.14. Mawphlong, Shillong

Fig. 8.15. From the sacred Fig. 8.16. Udaiyankudukadu
groves of the Bhils Karumbayiramkondan, Tamil Nadu

Given below are the names of a few sacred groves in a few
regional languages of India. Can you add to this?

|
|

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

2 |

Chapter 8.indd 180 08-04-2025 12:53:33

Chapter 8.indd 181

In Tamil Nadu, local chronicles highlight the relationship
between the deity of a sacred grove, Nature and humans. One
such chronicle in the Thanjavur District states that the groves 
deities protect fruit bats, which are regarded as sacred spotting
one of them is considered auspicious. Besides, bats play a critical
role in the pollination of flowers and in the dispersal of seeds.
Sacred groves thus evolve a harmonious relationship between
the deity, the ecosystem, and humans.

From pilgrimage to trade

Pilgrims encounter traders and
merchants along their journey. This
interaction benefits both groups.
Pilgrims need various items, which
traders can provide. As a result, the
pilgrimage routes and the trade routes
often overlap. Some traders might
also double as pilgrims, taking their
wares to distant towns and cities
while visiting sacred sites and shrines.

Fig. 8.17

What routes did those traders use in ancient India? Revisit the
map of trade routes (Fig. 5.5) in the chapter The Rise of Empires .
Uttarapatha was a major trade route connecting the northwestern and eastern parts of the Subcontinent; the Dakshinapatha
went from Kaushambi through Ujjayini (Ujjain) to Pratishthana
(Paithan). As you know, some of the goods traded along these
routes included precious stones like shells and pearls, coins, gold
and diamonds, as well as cotton, spices, and sandalwood.

LET'S EXPLORE

Take a sheet of transparent paper that can be used for tracing.
Trace a map of the trade routes from the chapter The Rise of
Empires . Place it on top of the map of the important tirthas.
What do you observe?

Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions

8 - How the Land Becomes Sacred

 

08-04-2025 12:53:34

Sacred Geography beyond India

The concept and practice of sacred geography are not unique
to India. Ancient Greece had many sacred landmarks, from
mountains to sacred groves. The Native Americans used to
have a special bond with Nature, which they viewed as sacred.
The Maoris, the indigenous people of New Zealand, regard the
Taranaki Maunga mountain as their ancestor and therefore as
sacred; after many representations by the Maoris, a law recently
granted this mountain the rights and responsibilities of a human
being an acknowledgement of the Maori worldview. The elders
of the community represent the voice of the mountain or river
threatened with destruction. This ensures that the sacred places
are not exploited and degenerated.

Restoring and conserving the sacred

Vv THINK ABOUT IT

Fig. 8.18

Look carefully at these pictures of places and animals that are
, considered sacred. The Yamuna in the north, the Mahanadiin

the east or the Kaveri in the south are all sacred rivers. How

come they have become so polluted? Are there sacred places

in your locality or region that have been similarly polluted

or degraded by human activity? Whose responsibility is it to

preserve the sanctity of our sacred places? Discuss in class.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1
Chapter 8.indd 182 08-04-2025 12:53:36

Chapter 8.indd 183

A harmonious relationship that once existed between people
and the sacred geography sustained Indian civilisation over
millennia, creating values that were shared all over the
Subcontinent. But today it is under great strain.

Sacred geography continues to be relevant today. When there
is a conflict in our relationship with Nature, when a river
is overexploited to the point of disappearance, or a sacred
mountain is challenged with competing ideas of development,
people have spoken up to protect their environment, their
deities and values. At a time when sustainability has become a
global issue, a worldview that embeds sacred geography has a
significant contribution to make.

Before we move on...

> All religions in India have their sacred places dotted over
the landscape. In Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism, such
places are usually associated with some of the great figures
in these belief systems.

> Hinduism has dense networks of pilgrimage sites, covering
the entire geography of India. The practice of pilgrimage
is interwoven with the lives of people, as it serves the
individual development and spiritual growth, but also the
socio-economic purposes of trade expansion and pan-Indian
cultural integration.

> In many Hindu, tribal and folk traditions, the very land is
perceived as sacred.

> Our sacred places are being polluted owing to widespread
neglect and a lack of concern. It is our duty to protect our
national heritage, as our Constitution also reminds us.

Questions and activities

1. Read the following statement by a well-known
environmental thinker, David Suzuki:

 The way we see the world shapes the way we treat it. If a
mountain is a deity, not a pile of ore; if a river is one of the
veins of the land, not potential irrigation water; if a forest

Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions

8 - How the Land Becomes Sacred

 

08-04-2025 12:53:37

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

|

Chapter 8.indd 184

is a sacred grove, not timber; if other species are biological
kin, not resources; or if the planet is our mother, not an
opportunity then we will treat each other with greater
respect. Thus is the challenge, to look at the world from a
different perspective. 

Discuss in small groups. What do you think this statement
means? What implication does it have for our actions
with respect to the air, water, land, trees and mountains
around us?

List the sacred sites in your region. Enquire into why
they are considered sacred. Are there stories connected
with these sacred places? Write a short essay of 150
words. (Hint: You could speak to elders in your family and
community, discuss with your teacher, read books and
articles, etc., to gather relevant information.)

Why do you think natural elements like rivers, mountains
and forests are considered sacred for the people? How do
they contribute to our lives?

Why do people visit a tirtha or other sacred sites?

How did the ancient pilgrimage routes help in fostering
trade during those times? Do you think the sacred sites
help in developing the economy of the region?

How do sacred places influence the culture and traditions
of the people living near them?

From the various sacred sites of India, select two of your
choice and create a project explaining their significance.

What is the two-fold significance of a tirthayatra or a
pilgrimage?

08-04-2025 12:53:37