The Age of
Reorganisation

By continuous living tradition and a vital power of
rejuvenescence, this land has readjusted itself through
unnumbered transformations.

 Jagdish Chandra Bose (1917)

Fig. 6.1.1. A glimpse of the art from the age of reorganisation

A $F rene S 
(oh Bs

 
&

O781CHO6

Chapter Gindd 1/17 (08704-2025 1hk38:22

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1
Chapter 6.indd 118

Bhavisha and Dhruv had recovered from their journey to
the Maurya empire and were itching for another adventure.
They decide to use Itihdsa again and landed in a new
historical period. They came across a collection of art pieces,
each one quite different from the other. (See Fig. 6.1.1) They
wondered could these artefacts belong to multiple
kingdoms rather than just one? They guessed right. In this
chapter we will travel over a fairly long period. Here we go...

Very little is known about Ashoka s
successors to the throne. It is generally
accepted, however, that the last
Maurya emperor was_ assassinated
around 185 BCE by his commanderin-chief Pushyamitra Shunga. This led
to a breakup of the empire hardly
half a century after Ashoka, as we
mentioned in the last chapter. Many
new kingdoms emerged across the
subcontinent, which, often, were
earlier tributary kingdoms under the
overlordship of the Maurya empire. The northwest region
became weak, exposing it to invasions from outside the
subcontinent.

Fig. 6.1.2.

This period is also known as the age of reorganisation by
some scholars as the existing regions were being reorganised
into new kingdoms that were constantly competing to become
powerful. The map of India changed significantly in that age, as
did people s lives.

LET'S EXPLORE

Create a timeline on a sheet of paper marking the period
from the first year of the 2nd century BCE and ending in the
last year of the 3rd century CE. How many years does this
period cover? As we progress through the chapter, mark the
key individuals, kingdoms and events on the timeline.

08-04-2025 11:38:23

60 E 70 E 80 E 90 E

40 N
N.OV

Shakas

(Indo-Scythians)

N.O 

20 N
N.02@

Arabian
Sea

10 N
N.Ob

0 500 1,000 km
ee |

60 E 70 E 80 E 90 E
Fig. 6.2. Prominent dynasties of India during the age of reorganisation

While working on the timeline, did you notice the transition
from BCE to CE? Remember what you learned in the Grade 6
chapter Timeline and Sources of History about how time
is measured in history.

6 - The Age of Reorganisation

Tapestry of the Past

 

Chapter 6.indd 119 08-04-2025 11:38:24

ai uF

Matrimonial LET'S EXPLORE

alliance : An

alliance arranged In the previous chapter, you studied the map of the Maurya
through a . 1 Ab . f th M
marriage, empire (see page 100). Above is a map of the post-Maurya
generally period. How many kingdoms can you count in the area that

between two were previously under the control of the Maurya empire?

members of

royal families.
In practice, this The new kingdoms now competed for territorial control.
woule Sling Peaceful methods like matrimonial alliances between neighbouroffering his ing kingdoms, or the use of force in warfare, were means of

mar enter er gaining control. Remember that there was constant wrestling
royal family of for control over areas along the borders, as gaining control over

a neighbouring them was important to keep the kingdom safe from attacks.

kingdom, with
the intention Together with those political events, there was a burst in the
of cementing development of art, architecture and literature, and enriching
between the two cultural exchanges. We will get a peek into this in the following
kingdoms. sections.

Dynasties from
outside the
Subcontinent

Indo-Greeks,
Shakas,
Kushanas

Prominent
dynasties of the
Subcontinent

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Fig. 6.3

e

Chapter 6.indd 120 08-04-2025 11:38:25

Chapter 6.indd 121

~ DON'T MISS OUT
=

Surge of the Shungas

Pushyamitra Shunga founded the Shunga dynasty, which
ruled over parts of north and central India. He performed
the ashvamedha yajria, a Vedic ritual, to establish himself as a
most powerful ruler. Although his empire was smaller than the
previous Maurya Empire (compare their two maps), he kept it
safe from potential invaders and maintained friendly relations
with the Greeks, after some initial military campaign against
them. But, again, the empire did not last long after him a
century later, it was gone.

The period witnessed the revival of Vedic rituals and practices,
but other schools of thought nevertheless continued to flourish.

Fig. 6.4. Scene from the Ramayana in which King Rama is seen performing
the ashvamedha yajria (19" century painting, National Museum)

The ashvamedha yajria was a Vedic ritual conducted by
many rulers to declare their position as the king. In this
ritual, a horse accompanied by soldiers was left to wander
freely. Any territory that the horse crossed unchallenged
was considered to become a part of the king s empire. If
any ruler stopped the horse, it led to a battle to determine
supremacy.

6 - The Age of Reorganisation

Tapestry of the Past

 

08-04-2025 11:38:26

Sanskrit emerged as one of the preferred languages for
philosophical and literary works. Do you recall some aspects
of the Yoga Sutras in your Physical Education and Well-being
classes in Grade 6? These Yoga Sutras were compiled by Patanijali
during this period.

The Shungas patronised literature, art and architecture. The
Bharhut Stapa (in present-day Madhya Pradesh) presents us
with beautiful examples of Shunga art. It was probably built
during the time of Ashoka, but the Shungas added beautifully
carved railings and reliefs depicting stories from the Buddha s
life. These are considered some of the earliest examples of
Buddhist art.

Fe ) an >. Hs I. 2 5 2 er.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Fig.6.5.1. Railings at the Bharhut Stipa. Fig. 6.5.2. Carving of Lakshmi ona
railing. Fig. 6.5.3. A group of singers and dancers. 6.5.4. Elephants holding up
the wheel of dharma

SS

Chapter 6.indd 122 08-04-2025 11:38:28

Fig. 6.6.1. Pillar with a Greek warrior. Fig. 6.6.2. Male figure. Fig. 6.6.3. Woman with a
child. Fig. 6.6.4. Woman with a fan. Fig. 6.6.5. A vase. Fig. 6.6.6. Female figure with hair
ornaments, terracotta. Fig. 6.6.7. Royal family. Fig. 6.6.8. Bronze bangles covered witha

thin layer of gold. Fig. 6.6.9. Comb of ivory. Fig. 6.6.10. Beads of a necklace.

6 - The Age of Reorganisation

Tapestry of the Past

 

Chapter 6.indd 123 08-04-2025 11:38:32

LET'S EXPLORE

Below is a panel from the Bharhut Sttpa. Look at the two
figures on the right. What are they doing? Can you guess
their profession? Notice their attire. What does this tell us
about them? List other details that you notice in the panel
and discuss your findings in class.

 . .. . woo ew

LET'S EXPLORE

Look closely at the pictures in the collage in Fig 6.6 (on the
previous page). In a note, write down your observations on
the clothes, the jewellery, and other objects of daily use.

The Satavahanas

From the limited evidence available, the Shungas seem to have
waged wars with many of their neighbouring regions. This
may have included the Satavahanas, who ruled large parts of
the Deccan from the 2nd century BCE onward, to the south of
the Shunga Empire. Sometimes referred to as Andhras , the
Satavahanas were a powerful dynasty and their empire largely
comprised of present-day Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and
MaharasnNtra, with different capital cities at different times the
most famous were Amravati and Pratishthana (Paithan). Trade
and commerce appear to have flourished in the Satavahana
kingdom.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

S|

Chapter 6.indd 124 08-04-2025 11:38:33

Coins issued by the Satavahana rulers
have been found in various regions
of India, from Gujarat to Andhra
Pradesh India s western and eastern
coasts. Indeed, many coins depicted
ships, suggesting that maritime trade
was animportant part of economic life.
The type of ship depicted on the coin
above suggests advanced shipbuilding

and navigation technologies.
Fig. 6.8. A Satavahana coin bearing

Agriculture flourished in the Krishna- the image of a seafaring ship with
Godavaririver system, which provided two masts. Notice how the masts of
: 2. . the ship are prominently depicted
economic stability to the kingdom. with intersecting lines, possibly
The Satavahanas had active trade representing sails; the wavy lines

below represent oceanic waters.
networks that reached as far as the P

Roman Empire and included an exchange of goods like spices,
textiles, sandalwood, and luxury items like gold-plated pearls,
ivory, etc. Imports included glass and perfumed ointments. Tolls
and taxes on trade added revenue to the kingdom.

Economic prosperity and a relatively peaceful political period
facilitated the development of literature, art and culture, to
which the Satavahanas made significant contributions.

Fig. 6.9. The Naneghat Caves near Pune, located close to a major trade route, were
used for collection of tolls and taxes, and as resting places for traders.

Chapter 6.indd 125

6 - The Age of Reorganisation

Tapestry of the Past

 

08-04-2025 11:38:33

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

 

Chapter 6.indd 126

PRBAWUAY PILAZTY

Ratio Gotamiputasa Siri-Sdtakanisa

Fig. 6.10. Coin of the Satavahanas with
an inscription in Brahmi script, king

Life under the Satavahanas

Inthe Satavahana tradition, princes were
often named after their mothers. Thus
Gautamiputra Satakarni was named
after his mother, Gautami Balashri. She
was a powerful queen who donated
land to Buddhist monks and had an
important inscription carved in Nashik,
showing her influence in the kingdom.

Lord Satakarni, son of Gautam? .

yy THINK ABOUT IT

What, according to you, could the tradition of using the
mother s name at the beginning of a king s name signify?

Another set of inscriptions found in the Naneghat caves near
Pune (Fig. 6.9) focuses on a Satavahana widow queen who,
remarkably, performed several Vedic rituals, including the
ashvamedha yajra. The inscriptions mention Vedic gods like
Indra, Chandra, and Surya. We also get a glimpse of the queen s
donations (dana): land, cows, horses, elephants, silver coins, and
other items to priests, guests, workers, scholars, and monks.

These inscriptions are in the Brahmi script and include a
few numerals (that is, symbols for numbers) which, at times,
resemble today s shapes, as shown below. This is one of the many
evidences showing that modern numerals ultimately originated
in India.
-= F &) Pe

yy THINK ABOUT IT

In the above series of numerals, which ones look somewhat
like our modern numerals? Which ones don t?

08-04-2025 11:38:33

Satavahanas contributed during their reign.
These caves were made for Buddhist monks.
Notice the magnificent pillars and the stone

The Satavahanas were devout followers of Vasudeva (another
name for Krishna), although they also patronised other schools
of thought, which flourished during their rule. For instance,
Satavahana kings often granted tax-free agricultural land to
Vedic scholars, Jaina and Buddhist monks, helping them to
pursue their studies and practices.

Fig. 6.11. The Karla caves (near Lonavala
in present-day Maharashtra) to which the

Chapter 6.indd 127

This sculpture of a yaksha from Pitalkhora carries an
inscription on its hand, kanhaddsena hiramakarena kata
meaning made by Kanahadasa, a goldsmith . Is it not
interesting to see that a goldsmith could also craft a sculpture
made of stone? What do you think this tells us about people s
professions at the time?

In the 3rd century CE, the Satavahana Empire fragmented into
smaller independent kingdoms. Several factors contributed to
its disintegration, the most significant one being weak central

Fig. 6.12. A yaksha (a minor deity

associated with nature) from the

replica of a sttipa in the centre all of Pitalkhora caves, Maharashtra, carved
it carved out of a rocky hillside! in the Satavahana period.

yy THINK ABOUT IT

6 - The Age of Reorganisation

Tapestry of the Past

 

08-04-2025 11:38:33

control and a gradual economic decline. Once again, this will
pave the way for regional powers to assert or reassert their
dominance and establish new kingdoms.

Coming of the Chedis

Let us go back a little. Do you remember the Kalinga war
mentioned in the previous chapter? After the decline of the
Maurya Empire, Kalinga rose as a prominent power under the
kings of the Chedi dynasty.

Kharavela, one of their main rulers, was a devoted follower
of Jain teachings; he was sometimes called bhikshu-radja or
monk-king, although he respected all schools of thoughts. Near
Bhubaneswar, the famous Udayagiri-Khandagiri caves, likely
developed for Jain monks, feature intricate panels and statues,
and spacious rooms carved into the rock, showcasing the skill
of the craftsmen. The design and craftsmanship of these caves
make them notable examples of rock-cut architecture , a style of
architecture that we will turn to in higher classes.

tee yO

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Fig. 6.13.1. Udayagiri caves near Bhubaneswar. Fig. 6.13.2. The Hathigumpha
inscription. Fig. 6.13.3. Carved panel showing a scene from the Ramayana

S

Chapter 6.indd 128 08-04-2025 11:38:35

One of the caves prominently displays the Hathigumpha
inscription, written in Brahmi script, which records King
Kharavela s accomplishments year after year, including his
victorious military campaigns and his benevolent works for the
welfare of his people. Kharavela also proudly declares that he
created a council of ascetics and sages from a hundred regions
and is accomplished in extraordinary virtues, respector of every
sect and repairer of every temple . Once again, a ruler takes
pride in extending his protection to all schools of thought. This
is a fundamental part of what we may call the Indian ethos .

Y THINK ABOUT IT

Notice the regularity of the rock-cut chambers sculpted
nearly two millennia ago. How did artisans achieve such
precision with just a chisel and a hammer? Picture yourself
as a sculptor in that era, shaping stone into art with your own
hands. What tools would you use?

Kingdoms and Life in the South

In India s southern region, this period, between the 2nd or 3rd
century BCE and the 3rd century CE, saw the rise to prominence
of three powerful kingdoms the Cheras, the Cholas and the
Pandyas which often competed with each other for control
over the South, while also contributing to the region s growth
in trade and culture. Let s remember how Ashoka s empire
stopped at those south Indian kingdoms (which he mentions in
his edicts), which suggests that they remained independent even
at the height of Mauryan power. And although Kharavela claims
that he defeated an alliance of south Indian kings that threatened
his own territory, the location of that battle is unknown and he
does not seem to have invaded the southern region.

Y THINK ABOUT IT

Chapter 6.indd 129

In the map given on next page, you may notice different
symbols alongside the names of the kingdoms. What do
these symbols represent? Think about how they highlight the
unique identities of the kingdoms.

6 - The Age of Reorganisation

Tapestry of the Past

 

08-04-2025 11:38:35

LEGEND

South Indian Kingdoms
~ Chola
_ Chera
Pandya
@ Capital Cities
 Rivers

an
0 100 200 km 
a | :
 

ew. ~

78 E 80 E

83 N

76 E

Fig. 6.14. Kingdoms in the South (note that borders are approximate
and fluctuated in time).

That period saw the advent of many poets whose works,
collectively known as Sangam literature , defined the entire
era: it came to be known as the Sangam Age . The word sangam
is derived from the Sanskrit sangha, which translates to
 association and coming together in this context, referring
to an assembly of the poets. The Sangam literature, the oldest
in south India, consists of several collections or anthologies of
poems and is much consulted by historians who investigate
the society and culture of the times. Primarily, Sangam poetry
expresses with great skill and delicacy personal emotions such
as love or societal values like heroism and generosity.

The Cholas

The Sangams refer to three crowned kings the Cholas, Cheras
and Pandyas. The Cholas were a powerful dynasty that ruled
parts of south India from the 3rd century BCE to the 13th century
CE. The Chola king Karikala is said to have defeated a combined
force of the Cheras and Pandyas and established his supremacy.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

 

Chapter 6.indd 130 08-04-2025 11:38:36

a HS ais

te
Chapter 6.indd 131

Silappadikaram: The Tale of the Anklet

This famous epic,
composed soon after the
Sangam collections, tells
the story of Kannagi, who
lived happily with her
husband Kovalan in the
prosperous Chola capital
city of Puhar (identified
with Kaveripattinam
seen earlier). However,
Kovalan fell in love with
a dancer and eventually
lost all his wealth
over her. Realising his
mistake, he returned to
Kannagi, who forgave
him. They then travelled
to Madurai, the capital
of the Pandya kingdom,
hoping to rebuild their Fig. 6.15. Statue of Kannagi, Chennai
lives.

To start anew, Kannagi gave Kovalan one of her anklets to sell;
however, he was falsely accused of theft and executed by the
Pandya king. Devastated, Kannagi proved his innocence by
revealing her second anklet. The king, realising his mistake,
died of shock. Kannagi then cursed Madurai, invoking the god
of fire who destroyed the city. She then walked further west to
the Chera kingdom, where she was honoured as a goddess. Even
today, Kannagi is worshipped in Tamil Nadu and Kerala.

Silappadikaram s exquisite poetry thus centres on the principles
of justice and the ruler s dharma to protect it. It also takes us
through cities rich in traded goods, through three kingdoms,
and also through several schools of thought.

ape

6 - The Age of Reorganisation

Tapestry of the Past

@

08-04-2025 11:38:37

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

 

Chapter 6.indd 132

yy THINK ABOUT IT

ik 4

me Observe the statue of the

king. How is he depicted?
What do his posture, clothing,
and expression say about his
power and status?

Fig. 6.16. Statue of King Karikala at
the Grand Anicut Memorial Park in
Tamil Nadu

Karikala undertook many projects for the benefit of the people.
Among them is the Kallanai or Grand Anicut, a complex water
diversion system located at a geographically strategic point
just downstream of the Srirangam island. It helped to divert
waters from the Kaveri to the central and southern parts of
the Kaveri delta. This enabled more land to be brought under
cultivation, earning this area the name rice bowl of the South .
Restored several times in the course of time, it is still in use and
helps millions of people in Tamil Nadu by providing water for
irrigation and thus supporting agriculture in the region.

08-04-2025 11:38:38

The Cheras

Also known as the Keralaputra (sons of Kerala), the Cheras
ruled over the western parts of Tamil Nadu and Kerala, with
their capital at Vanji, present-day Karur in Tamil Nadu. They
played an essential role in shaping the region s cultural and
economic history, encouraging the growth of Tamil literature
and patronising Sangam poets.

The Cheras were known for their extensive trade connections
with the Roman Empire and West Asia, exporting many goods
from India to the outside world. The kingdom became a hub for
the export of spices, timber, ivory and pearls.

y THINK ABOUT IT

Chapter 6.indd 133

Have you ever wondered how historians uncover the trade
relations between two distant kingdoms many centuries
ago? Let s take a moment to brainstorm and discuss how this
information comes to light.

The Chera kings issued a number
of coins under their reign. Do you
notice the royal emblem of Cheras
on one such coin given below?

The Pandyas

The Pandyas rule over parts of Tamil Nadu and the surrounding
regions, with their capital at present-day Madurai, goes back
several centuries BCE. Successive kings expanded the Pandyan
kingdom. In his work Indika, Megasthenes mentions this
kingdom as a prosperous one, with a strong administration and
involved in active trade with distant powers like the Greeks
and Romans, apart from much internal trade (Kharavela, for
instance, states that he gets hundreds of pearls brought from the
Pandya kingdom). The Pandyas were also an important naval
power of the subcontinent. The later Pandyas also contributed
greatly to the art, architecture, and overall prosperity of the
region.

Fig. 6.18. Coins under Chera Kings

6 - The Age of Reorganisation

Tapestry of the Past

 

08-04-2025 11:38:38

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Se

Chapter 6.indd 134

Fig. 6.19. The Heliodorus pillar near Vidisha

y THINK ABOUT IT

The Pandyas were known for their pearls. Why do you think
pearls were an important article of trade during these times?

The Pandyas left many inscriptions in which their kings
asserted their great concern for their subjects welfare and their
encouragements to all schools of thought and belief.

Invasions of the Indo-Greeks

Having completed our brief journey
into south India, it is time to return
to the north, where a very different
kind of development is about to
occur. So far, we have only visited
a few native dynasties; yet the same
period also witnessed the arrival of
invaders who entered through the
northwest frontier and took control
of the northwestern, northern, and
central regions of the Subcontinent.

Let us first examine the legacy of
Alexander s brief campaign in the
Indus plains. While retreating from
the areas he had conquered, he left
satraps behind. Over time, these
regional rulers established their independent domains and
came to be known as Indo-Greeks .

After the decline of the Mauryas, the areas in the northwestern
regions (roughly present-day Pakistan and Afghanistan) were
an easy target for the Indo-Greeks. However, while they arrived
as conquerors, they were much influenced by the rich local
culture. This cultural interaction led to a blend of Greek and
Indian elements in governance, art, language, and daily life,
shaping the cultural landscape of the region.

The Heliodorus pillar, near Vidisha (Madhya Pradesh), is a
notable example of such connections. It is named after an Indo
08-04-2025 11:38:39

Chapter 6.indd 135

Greek ambassador, who in his inscription praises Vasudeva as
the god of gods . The inscription also states, Three immortal
precepts (footsteps) [...] when practised lead to heaven: selfrestraint, charity, consciousness. 

During excavations in north India, archaeologists have found
many Indo-Greeks coins, which have provided most of the
information we have about these rulers. Those coins were made
of gold, silver, copper and nickel often portraying a king on one
side and Greek deities on the other. However, some coins, instead,
depicted Indian deities like Vasudeva-Krishna and Lakshmi.

The rule of the Indo-Greeks ended with the invasions of the
Indo-Scythians or Shakas (see a little below).

LET'S EXPLORE

What do you think might have
been the meaning of having
deities like Vasudeva-Krishna
or Lakshmi on some Indo-Greek

Fig. 6.20. An Indo-Greek silver coin
with Vasudeva-Krishna on one side

coins?
DON'T MISS OUT be
The Shakas (sometimes Che Garette of udia
called Indo-Scythians) also ae

PART II Section 1

invaded the northwest of
the Subcontinent and ruled
from the latter part of the
2nd century BCE to the 5th
century CE. Their kingdoms

viftrer & verter
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY

ae feeet, GAR, STAT 16, 2024/57 25, 1946 CF)
IDAY.

16th Augi

Fig. 6.21. Notice how dates are provided in both
rose to power after the the Gregorian and Shaka Samvat eras on this

Indo-Greeks, and they were official publication of the Government of India.
in power until the arrival of the Kushanas (see below). It

was during this period that the Shaka Samvat calendar was
developed. It is 78 years behind the Gregorian calendar

(except from January-March, when it is behind by 79 years).

It was adopted as the Indian National Calendar in 1957.

6 - The Age of Reorganisation

Tapestry of the Past

 

08-04-2025 11:38:39

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

 

Chapter 6.indd 136

The Emergence of the Kushanas

The Kushanas, originally from central Asia, entered India
probably in the 2nd century CE. Atits peak, their empire extended
from central Asia to large parts of northern India. Their rule
marked a period of extensive cultural intermixing and had a
profound impact on the history of the Indian subcontinent.

When he was not busy with his military campaigns, Kanishka
encouraged art and culture, leading to the development of new

artistic styles.

Fig. 6.22. Headless statue
of King Kanishka

LET'S EXPLORE

Carefully observe this massive statue (1.85 m
high) and notice the clothing, weapon, and
footwear. What does it tell us about this
figure?

This famous headless statue is of King Kanishka,
probably the most powerful ruler of the Kushana
dynasty. The Brahmi inscription on the statue
reads, maharaja rajadhiraja devaputra kanishka ,
that is, The great king, king of kings, son of God,
Kanishka .

LET'S EXPLORE

Observe the coins carefully. Who, besides the emperor,
appears on the coin?

Fig. 6.23. Coins of Kanishka

08-04-2025 11:38:43

On the first coin, Kanishka is shown holding a spear, titled
 King of Kings , while the other side features Buddha with the
inscription BOAAO (Buddha) in Greek script. On the second coin,
an emperor appears on one side, and Shiva with the bull Nandi
on the other. Let s reflect on the following:

= Why would a powerful ruler feature Buddha and Shiva on
his coins? What does it say about his values and priorities?

= Can you find modern examples of such symbolic currency?

The Kushanas held control over significant sections of the Silk
Route (on the next page), and during their reign, trade grew,
connecting India with other parts of Asia and the West.

Continuing the trend set under the Indo-Greek rulers, Kushana
art and architecture, exemplified by the Gandhara and Mathura
schools of art, are celebrated for their fusion of Indian and Greek
styles. The sculptures feature a variety of deities reflecting the
peaceful co-existence of various schools of thought. This era saw
the rise of representations of deities like
Surya or the sun god which looked more
similar to humans and the increase in the
development of religious art, laying the
groundwork for later temple architecture in
the subcontinent.

The Gandhara style, which emerged in the
western regions of Punjab, blended GrecoRoman elements with Indian features. Most
sculptures and artefacts from this tradition
were crafted in intricate detail from greyblack schist stone. In particulary, sculptors

features.

Y THINK ABOUT IT

Chapter 6.indd 137

Do you know where Gandhara is? Does it remind you of a
character from the epic Mahabharata?

Fig. 6.24. Head of a bodhisattva
; : (or future Buddha) from the
produced many fine Buddha images with Gandhara School of Art. Note

realistic anatomy and flowing robes. the fusion of Indian and Greek

6 - The Age of Reorganisation

Tapestry of the Past

 

08-04-2025 11:38:43

10 E 20 E 30 E 40 E 50 E 60 E 70

60 N

50 N

fe
an
:
O
N

40 N

30 N

20 N

10 N

O 

10 E 20 E 30 E 40 E 50 E 60 E 70
Fig. 6.25. Some of the trade routes of the ancient world. The network marked

in green shows the Silk Route connecting China with the Mediterranean world
and passing through central Asia, Persia, etc.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

 

Chapter 6.indd 138 08-04-2025 11:38:44

 E 80 E 90 E 100 E 110 E 120 E

LEGEND

= = Main Route of Silk Road
Other Caravan Routes
Important C

6 - The Age of Reorganisation

 E 80 E 90 E 100 E 110 E 120 E

Tapestry of the Past

 

Chapter 6.indd 139 08-04-2025 11:38:45

The Mathura style developed in
the Mathura region of presentday Uttar Pradesh and is known
for its distinct Indian style.
Unlike the Gandhara style, it
primarily used red sandstone
for its sculptures and reflects
less influence from _ GrecoRoman aesthetics. This art form
is known for its depictions of
Indian deities, including Kubera,
Lakshmi, Shiva, Buddha, yakshas
and yakshinis and_ generally

Fig. 6.26. Kubera, God of wealth 
. : from the Mathura School of
produced fuller figures with Art. Did you miss the prominent
smooth modelling. moustache? The moustache is a
distinguishing feature of some

Indian sculptures.
LET S EXPLORE

Now that you are familiar with the basic characteristics of
the Mathura and Gandhara styles of art, study the pictures of
artefacts given in Fig. 6.27 on the right page and try to identify
which school of art each artefact belongs to. Write your
observations with justifications and discuss your answers
with your classmates.

Despite the political conflicts and power struggles, the period
saw remarkable cultural exchange and assimilation. This
shared heritage is evident in art and architecture, where styles
interacted, but with a dominance of Indian themes (especially
Hindu and Buddhist ones). It was also the age when Sanskrit
literature flourished, with, in particular, the composition of
major Indian texts such as the Mahabharata and the Ramayana
(refer to the chapter Unity in Diversity, or Many in the One in
your Grade 6 textbook).

Recognising these connections encourages us to view this
 Tapestry of the Past not as confined to any one kingdom or
ruler, but as a dynamic process that works through interaction
and assimilation over time.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

SE

Chapter 6.indd 140 10-Apr-25 10:48:20 AM

Fig. 6.27.1. A scene of the death of Buddha. Fig. 6.27.2. Bodhisattva Maitreya.
Fig. 6.27.3. Shiva linga being worshipped by Kushana devotees.
Fig. 6.27.4. A Naga between two Nagis, with an inscription referring to the
eighth year of Kanishka s reign. Fig. 6.27.5. Kartikeya, the god of war, and
Agni, the god of fire. Fig. 6.27.6. Standing Buddha.

6 - The Age of Reorganisation

Tapestry of the Past

@

Chapter 6.indd 141 08-04-2025 11:38:49

Kharavela

Kanishka

Gautamiputra
Satakarni
Karikala

Pushyamitra
Shunga

 

Kushanas
Indo-Greeks 7
 ao
Shakas
Satavahanas As

Chola, Chera, Pandyas

Fig. 6.28

Before we move on...

> The period after the disintegration of the Maurya empire
was characterised by the emergence of many big and small
kingdoms across the Subcontinent.

> The internal conflicts were coupled with foreign invasions,

which together led to a period of reorganisation of political
powers.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

e

Chapter 6.indd 142 08-04-2025 11:38:50

> This period witnessed a dialogue of various cultures that
absorbed each other s influence to create new styles of art,
architecture, coinage, etc., with ultimately a dominance of
Indian themes and flourishing Sanskrit literature.

> This time was also marked by remarkable developments in
trade activities, both internal and external.

Questions and activities

1. Why was the post-Maurya era also known as the era of
reorganisation?

2. Write a note on the Sangam literature in 150 words.

3. Which rulers mentioned in this chapter included their
mother s name in their title, and why did they do so?

4. Write a note of 250 words about one kingdom from this
chapter that you find interesting. Explain why you chose
it. After presenting your note in class, find out what
kingdoms have been the most selected by your classmates.

5. Imagine you have the chance to create your own kingdom.
What royal emblem would you choose, and why? What
title would you take as the ruler? Write a note about your
kingdom, including its values, rules and regulations, and
some unique features.

6. You have read about the architectural developments
of the post-Maurya era. Take an outline of the Indian
subcontinent and mark the approximate locations of some
of the ancient structures mentioned in this chapter.

6 - The Age of Reorganisation

Tapestry of the Past
Chapter 6.indd 143 10-Apr-25 10:52:34 AM

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

*'Noodles is our abbreviation for Notes and Doodles !

SE |

Chapter 6.indd 144 08-04-2025 11:38:50