The Constitution of
India An Introduction

I would like to point out that if we are able to act according to the
Constitution which has been adopted..., Iam sure we shall be able
very soon to make our country great. This is a goal which is within
our power to reach, but its realisation would require hard physical
and mental labour and above all great moral regeneration.

We have prepared a democratic Constitution. But the successful
working of democratic institutions requires in those who have to
work with them willingness to respect the viewpoint of others,
capacity for compromise and accommodation.

 Dr. Rajendra Prasad, first President of India

Chapter 10.indd 209 (0820452025) WIZ2S4ior7

is a gas that
doesn t react
with paper or

Helium

ink, helping to
preserve the
Constitution

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

=

Chapter 10.indd 210

over time.

It was yet another chilly January morning in Delhi, much like every
Republic Day. Ma s voice echoed through the house, Wake up! It s
time, or you'll miss the parade! Papa, already up, switched on the
television to Doordarshan and called out, Kumar, Niharika, come
quickly! The parade has started! The children jumped out of their
warm beds, rushing to sit in front of the television, eager not to
miss even a moment of the Republic Day Parade.

The sight of the majestic marching bands, vibrant displays, and
the unfurling of the tricolour at Kartavya Path filled the room
with pride and excitement.

This day carries a deep significance it marks the coming into
effect of the Indian Constitution on 26 January 1950.

The book in the picture is our Constitution. To keep it safe, it is
carefully preserved in a helium-filled glass case in Parliament.
But what exactly is a constitution, and why is it so important?

LET'S REMEMBER

Recall that in Grade 6, we saw the meaning of the word
 constitution - a document that lays down the _ basic
principles and laws of a nation. In small groups of three, list
all the questions that come to your mind about a country s
constitution.

08-04-2025 12:54:58

The Constitution of India is the document that many of the
important officials of our country pledge to uphold. The
president takes an oath to preserve, protect, and defend it. The
prime minister, council of ministers, and judges promise to
follow its provisions.

What Is a Constitution?

A simple answer is that it is a document that spells out a nation s
basic principles and laws. It lays out:

the framework of the three organs of the government
(legislature, executive, and judiciary) and their roles and
responsibilities;

checks and balances amongstthe three organs of government
to ensure fairness, responsibility and accountability;

the rights and duties of the citizens;

an outline of the long-term goals and aspirations of the
nation.

Why do we need a constitution?

LET'S EXPLORE

Chapter 10.indd 211

Imagine that your school has reached the final tournament in
kabaddi at the state-level. The opponent is a strong team that
has won the tournament two years in a row. They are aiming
to win a third time, a hat-trick. The match is on, and a player
from your team has just got one of the players from the other
team out ; then a dispute breaks out. The player from the other
team insists that she had already crossed into her team area
before your team player caught her. The referee has seen that
the player from the other team was indeed out . To settle the
dispute amicably, she pulls out a little official rulebook. The
team captains confer with the referee and look at the rules.
They then agree that the player was indeed out , and your
team has won the state-level trophy.

10 - The Constitution of India An Introduction

Governance and Democracy

 

08-04-2025 12:54:58

Discuss in your group what might have happened if there was
no official rulebook that the referee and the team captains
could refer to. What is required to ensure everyone agrees
to abide by the rulebook? What might happen if the team
captains did not agree to refer to the rulebook at all?

Think of a game that you play often and list the rules you
follow. Each group will then present their set of rules to the
rest of the class. Listen to each presentation, discuss the rules,
and work together to decide on a common set of rules for the
game. What challenges do you face in reaching a consensus
on rules that everyone agrees with?

What could be the rulebook for a country? How would it be
made?

Our Constitution is something like a rulebook for the country.

<=: DON'T MISS OUT

Just as your textbook has many sections and chapters, the
Constitution of India has 25 parts and 12 schedules. Each
part has sections within it. It is the world s largest written
constitution. When it came into effect, it had 22 Parts and 8
schedules. You don t need to remember these numbers, but
can you guess why they have increased since 1950?

The basic rules and principles in a constitution determine what
kind of government will be there, how it will be formed, and
how it will function. This includes many principles we saw in
the previous chapter, such as how the legislature, executive
and judiciary are formed and how they work. A constitution
describes, for example, how laws are to be made and
implemented, who elects the executive, how the judiciary is
made, and what rights and duties individual citizens have.

Many constitutions, including the Indian Constitution, also state
the values and ideals the country is committed to for instance,

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

SS

Chapter 10.indd 212 08-04-2025 12:54:58

equality and justice for all, fraternity, pluralism and freedom. In
fact, it is these values and ideals that usually form the basis for
the laws and principles in a constitution.

Some of the important things that most constitutions contain:

Constitution

Values and Political Structure and
ideals of a formation of the

society system government

Functions of different Guiding principles for
parts of the government government

Writing the Constitution of India

Iwish your labours success, and invoke Divine blessings
that your proceedings may be marked not only by
good sense, public spirit, and genuine patriotism, but
also by wisdom, toleration, justice, and fairness to all;
and above all with a vision which may restore India to
her pristine glory, and give her a place of honour and
equality amongst the great nations of the world.

 Dr. Sachidananda Sinha,
President of the Constituent Assembly at the start of
the process of the writing of the Constitution

While India was struggling for independence from British
rule, it was necessary to start planning for how we would
govern ourselves. There were many important questions to be
answered in a large, culturally diverse and complex country like
India: What type of government should we have? What rules
and principles should guide us? Who should have the right to
vote? How should we decide on disputes?

10 - The Constitution of India An Introduction

Governance and Democracy

 

Chapter 10.indd 213 08-04-2025 12:54:58

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

=

Chapter 10.indd 214

To answer these and many other questions, a Constituent
Assembly was formed in 1946, initially with 389 members (later
reduced to 299 after the Partition of India), of which 15 were
women. These members represented India s diverse regions,
professions, and social groups.

How was our Constitution developed?

The Indian Constitution was developed and written by the
Constituent Assembly over a period of almost three years. It
was formed on 9 December 1946, with its members elected by
the legislative assemblies of the provinces (whose members
had been, in turn, elected by the people). Dr. Rajendra Prasad
was the Chairman of the Constituent Assembly. The work was
completed on 26 November 1949, and the resulting document
was adopted as the Constitution of India on 26 January 1950,
which is why we celebrate this day annually as Republic Day.

The initial text of the Constitution was prepared by a Drafting
Committee chaired by Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, an eminent social
reformer and the first Law and Justice minister of independent
India (Fig. 10.3).

Fig. 10.3. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar (seated, centre) with a few other
members of the Drafting Committee.

08-04-2025 12:54:58

LET'S EXPLORE

a6

In small groups, try to find out the names of people from
your region who may have participated in the making of
the Constitution. What sources can you use to gather this
information? (Hint: Look for books in your school or local
library. You could also ask your teacher, parents and other
elders in the neighbourhood. Explore https://sansad.in/ls/
about/constituent-assembly )

What Shaped and Influenced the Indian
Constitution?

While the Constitution was developed by the Constituent
Assembly, it had many influences. The experience, ideas and
ideals of the Indian freedom movement were a significant
influence. India s civilisational heritage and culture also played
a key role. Useful learnings from constitutions of other countries
were also considered.

Influence of the Indian Freedom Movement

Many key ideals and values of the Indian freedom struggle
were enshrined in the Constitution. The Constitution was the
cornerstone for an independent India. A number of leaders of
India s freedom movement were members of the Constituent
Assembly and, therefore, carried their experience and ideas
from the freedom struggle to the Constitution.

Some of these values and ideals are: equality of all, justice
for all, freedom, fraternity,
preservation ofIndia s cultural
heritage, and the idea of using
the Constitution as a tool for
and means of achieving these
values and ideals.

The experience and learnings
from the freedom struggle also % yee ay
provided answers to many of Me Mme

the how and what questions: Fig. 10.4.1. Workings of the Constituent Assembly

10 - The Constitution of India An Introduction

Governance and Democracy

 

Chapter 10.indd 215 08-04-2025 12:54:58

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

SS

Chapter 10.indd 216

Fig. 10.4.2. and 10.4.3. Workings of the Constituent Assembly

How do we make sure that = What should be the process
every adult citizen has a right if we want to amend the

to vote? Constitution?

How do we ensure that the = What should be the

powers of the executive,
legislature and judiciary are

relationship between the
Central and State governments?

kept separate? And so on.

How do we guarantee that

We will get glimpses of how all

every individual s fundamental | these have been structured in the

rights are respected?

U
Constitution later in this chapter.

India s civilisational heritage and history

LET'S REMEMBER

In the chapter on Unity in Diversity, or Many in the One 
in Grade 6, we studied what makes India one country and the
underlying unity that embraces the diversity.

This idea of India being one country is embedded in the
Constitution.

Some fundamental principles are embedded in _ our
culture acceptance of the idea that people could have different
points of view, Nature as sacred, the pursuit of learning and
knowledge, respect for women, the concepts of vasudhaiva
kutumbakam ( the world is one family ) and sarve bhavantu

08-04-2025 12:54:59

sukhinah (an invocation for the well-being of all creatures). All
these principles find a place in our Constitution though you
might find them expressed a little differently.

6. LET'S REMEMBER

Earlier, we described various types of governance systems that
we experimented within India from the janapadas, sanghas,
rulers and their councils, Kautilya s concept of saptdnga,
ragjadharma and so on. On the whole, there has been a great
emphasis on the duties and role of the people in governance.

It was, therefore, quite natural that the Constitution makers would
incorporate these ideas of our civilisational heritage into our
Constitution Fundamental Duties , for instance, are part of it.

Learnings from across the world

In addition, in the Indian tradition
of a@ no bhadrah kratavo yantu
vishwatah Let noble thoughts
come to me from every side the
Constitution makers studied the
constitutions of France, USA,
UK, Ireland, Australia, and other
countries that have a democratic
system, to explore their usefulness
for our context. For example,
the ideals of liberty, equality,
fraternity were adopted from
France s constitution (which
enshrined them from the French
Revolution of 1789); the idea of the
Directive Principles of State Policy
(which we will study shortly) was Fig. 10.5. This Declaration of the Rights of Man

inspired by the Irish Constitution; and of the Citizen , which focused on equality,

. ae liberty and justice for all, was formulated
and the American Constitution gyring the 1789 French Revolution. It helped the
helped shape the concept of an _ spread of such ideals in many parts of the world;
indevendent judicia many constitutions (including the French one)

p J ty. adopted or adapted its values and principles.

10 - The Constitution of India An Introduction

Governance and Democracy

Chapter 10.indd 217 08-04-2025 12:55:00

Some illustrations in the Constitution of India

Fig. 10.6. A scene
from an ancient
gurukula

Fig. 10.7.A
scene from the
Ramayana: Rama s
conquest of Lanka
and recovery of Sita

Fig. 10.8. A
scene from the
Mahabharata:

Krishna
propounding the
Gita to Arjuna

Fig. 10.9. A scene
from Orissan
sculptures

Chapter 10.indd 218 08-04-2025 12:55:01

Fig. 10.10. An image
of Nataraja

Fig. 10.11.
Scenes froma
Mahabalipuram
bas-relief:
Bhagiratha s
penance and the
descent of Ganga

Ses ah
yo
PDS

 Sau

YS Fig. 10.12. A
i} ix =) | scene with Akbar
| and Mughal
architecture

Fig. 10.13. A scene
depicting Nalanda,
one of India s
ancient universities

Chapter 10.indd 219 08-04-2025 12:55:02

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

SS

Chapter 10.indd 220

Key Features of the Constitution of India

Before we get acquainted with the main features of the
Constitution, let us revisit some of the concepts we saw in Grade 6.

x LET'S REMEMBER

> There are three organs of government legislature,

executive and judiciary and the separation of powers 
is essential to their effective working.

The legislature makes the laws.

The law is implemented by the executive, which is headed
by the prime minister.

The judiciary ensures that all laws made are in accordance
with the Constitution. It also decides whether a law has
been broken and what punishment is necessary.

We have a three-tier system of government central,
state and local (Panchayati raj system).

Some functions and responsibilities are reserved for the
central government, and others are assigned to the state
government.

The Constitution addresses these points comprehensively.
It clearly defines the roles, functions, responsibilities, and
accountability measures for each organ of government. The
electoral system has been laid down to ensure that every eligible
citizen of the country is enabled to vote.

Other core aspects of the Constitution are the Fundamental
Duties, Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles of State
Policy. The infographic (Fig. 10.14) provides us with examples
of a few of the Fundamental Duties and Rights (which are listed
in full in the beginning of all NCERT textbooks). The Directive
Principles of State Policy (DPSP, as they are popularly called)
represent the essence of the social and economic vision that
the framers of the Constitution had for India. The examples we
present in the infographic illustrate the principles they wanted
governance to follow.

08-04-2025 12:55:02

3 DON T MISS OUT

Directive Principles are goals that the government should try
to achieve. They reflect the direction they wished the country
take to make India better for all; for example, everybody in
the country must have a good standard of living. But if the
government does not make efforts to follow this, one cannot
go to a judge and complain about it. The DPSP are more like
guidelines than strict rules. Fundamental Rights, on the other
hand are promises that must be kept. If someone treats you
unfairly because of who you are, you can actually go to court
and the judge can help you.

The people who wrote our Constitution created this system on
purpose. They wanted some rights that could be demanded
immediately (Fundamental Rights) and some bigger goals
(Directive Principles) that might take time to achieve as our
country progressed.

LET'S EXPLORE

Read the quotation given below. Which article of the
Constitution do you think she was referring to? Why do you
think she said that the equality of women was not a new
concept for India? Discuss in the class.

C C Sir, the women of India are happy to step into their rightful

Chapter 10.indd 221

heritage of complete equality with men in all spheres of
life and activity. I say so because I am convinced that
this is no new concept which has been postulated for
the purposes of this Constitution, but is an ideal that has
long been cherished by India, though social conditions
for some time had tragically debased it in practice. This
Constitution affirms that ideal and gives the solemn
assurance that the rights of women in law will be wholly
honoured in the Indian Republic.

 Begum Aizaz Rasul, 22 November 1949,
during the Constituent Assembly s debates

10 - The Constitution of India An Introduction

Governance and Democracy

 

08-04-2025 12:55:02

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

SS

Chapter 10.indd 222

Right to Equality (Article 14. Equality before law)

Right to Freedom (Article 21. Protection of life and personal
liberty)

Right against Exploitation
Article 21-A. (Right to education)

Fundamental

 Article 41: Welfare Fundamental
Government ND) uti es

e Article 44: Uniform Civil
Code

e Article 38: Social, Political,

and Economic Justic to abide by the Constitution and respect

its ideals and institutions, the National
Flag, and the National Anthem;

e Article 48-A: Environment
and Wildlife Protection

 Article 49: Protection
of monuments, places,
and objects of national
importance

 Article 47: Nutrition,
standard of living,
and public health

b. to defend the country and render national
service when called upon to do so;

c. to value and preserve the rich heritage of
our composite culture;

d. to protect and improve the natural
environment including forests, lakes,
rivers and wild life, and to have
compassion for living creatures;

e. to strive towards excellence in all spheres
of individual and collective activity so
that the nation constantly rises to higher
levels of endeavour and achievement;

f. ifaparent or guardian, to provide
opportunities for education to his or
her child or, as the case may be, ward

between the age of six and fourteen years;
Fig 10.14. A glimpse of how the

parts of the Constitution are
organised

08-04-2025 12:55:02

The Constitution is a Living Document

Our Constitution makers realised that a need for new laws
and rules would emerge over time. For example, Part IV-A:
Fundamental Duties was added in 1976. However, we must
remember that any changes (called amendments ) to the
Constitution are rigorously debated in the Parliament before they
are accepted. Some require a debate in legislative assemblies as
well. Many times, opinions are sought from the general public.
Some changes can also be initiated by popular movements.

LET'S EXPLORE

> There was a time when people were not allowed to fly
the national flag at their homes. This changed in 2004
when a citizen felt it was his right to express pride in his
country and challenged the rule in court. The Supreme
Court agreed, saying that flying the flag is part of the
Fundamental Right to Freedom of Expression. We can
now fly the tricolour with pride, keeping in mind that it
should never be dishonoured.

> Westudied the Panchayati Raj System in Grade 6. This was
not a part of the original Constitution; it was integrated in
it in 1992 with the 73" Constitutional Amendment Act.

> Canyou find out the amendments made to the Constitution
in the past ten years?

The government also creates opportunities for people to
provide feedback on proposed laws or changes in rules. See the
highlighted portion on the next page.

DON'T MISS OUT

The Indian Constitution is not just a legal document but also a
work of art. Calligrapher Prem Behari Narain Raizada wrote
its text by hand, while Nandalal Bose and his team illustrated
its pages with scenes from Indian history, from Mohenjo-daro
to the freedom movement (see Figs. 10.6 to 10.13).

10 - The Constitution of India An Introduction

Governance and Democracy

 

Chapter 10.indd 223 08-04-2025 12:55:02

uy English 
Cove Home otestinitictivess Postinitiotives Qo 

Inviting comments on a
draft amendments to the

Aadhaar Authentication
for Good Governance | 4 f,
"ha

Rules, 2020

Government invites feedback on amendments to the Aacthoor Authentication for Good Governance Rules, 2020 to enable performance of
Aodhoor cuthentication by entities other than Ministries and Departments of the Central Government and State Governments tor prescribed
purposes

Home / Acdhoor IT Rules

About

in fine with Government's commitment to make Aodhoar people-triendily and enable its voluntary use to
perform Aadhaar authentication under any low or os prescribed, it is proposed to provide for preparation of
the proposal for performance of such cuthentication by entities Other than Government Ministries and
AALMAAN AUTHEN CATON nti ox COW LUNANEE & 27 Deportments for prescribed purposes.

SUBMISSION CLOSED > Through on amendment enacted in 2019 to the Aadhaor (Targeted Delivery of Financiol ond: Other Subsidies:
Banefits ard Services) Act, 206. it wos provided under section 4(4) of the Act that entities May be allowed to
perform authentication if the Unique identification Authority of India (UiDal) is sotistied that the requesting

| scr | > antity is compliant with standards of privecy and secunty specified by regulations and is permitted by law

to offer authentication services or seeks authentication tor a prescribed purpose, Pursuant to this

amendment, the soid purposes were prescribed by the Aadhoar Authentication for Good Governonce

(Social Welfare. innovation, Knowledge) Rules, 2020. These rules provided that Aadhaar authentication by

Wve RAnPIAM requesting entities may be Gliowed in the interest of good governance, preventing leakage of public funds,

 promoting ease of living of residents and enabling better access to services for them, for the purposes of
usage of digital platforms to ensure good governance, prevention of dissipation of socio! welfare benefits
and enablement of innovation and the spread of knowledge,

The amendments now proposed to the rules will provide for preparation of the proposal for performance of
Aochoor authentication by entities other than Ministries ond Departments of the Central Government and
State Governments for prescribed purposes. Further, It is proposed to Include the promoting of ease of living
of r sidents and enabling of better access to services for them of One of the prescribed purposes.

The draft amendments cre placed on the Ministry's website at https:/ /www.melty.govin/content/dratt
Smencments-aodhcer-authentication-geed-govemance-rul s-2020-enable-performance. The teat of the
rules os they would stand after effecting the amendments (with the amended portions of the text shown in
colour) is also placed at hittpsi//wwwmeity.gov.in/content/dratt-omendments-cednaor-cuthentication=
good- governance: rules 2020 enable -performance.

Feedbock ts invited tram the public on these drott amendments, Submissions will not be ottributed to
individuals pubsicly and will be held in fiduciary cCapocity to enable persons submitting the feedback to
provide the sume free!

VENIMANEE oi Start Dote: 20th April 2023

Anor AXONAL AACeraa End Date: 20th Moy 2023

Fig 10.15

Understanding the Preamble: The Guiding
Values of the Constitution of India

The Constitution s core values are the guiding principles for
| policies and decision-making, which the government is expected
to follow. Citizens are also expected to practise them to the best
of their ability. These guiding values are present across the
Constitution, but their essence is written in the Preamble. So, let
us study the Preamble, which is a fitting end to this chapter.

India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

Exploring Society:

Chapter 10.indd 224 08-04-2025 12:55:03

WE, THE

PEOPLE OF INDIA

The Constitution has
been drawn up

and enacted by the
people through their
representatives, and not
handed down to them by
a king or any

outside powers.

SOVEREIGN

The people have
supreme right to make
decisions on internal as
well as external matters.
No external power can
dictate the government
of India.

SOCIALIST

Wealth is generated
socially and should be
shared by the society.
Government should
regulate the ownership
of land and industry to
reduce socio-economic
inequalities.

SECULAR

Citizens have complete
freedom to follow any

religion. But there is

no Official religion.
Government treats all

& religious beliefs and
practices with equal

respect.

PREAMBLE OF THE INDIAN
CONSTITUTION
ce (RE THE PEOPLE OF INDIA, having solemnly
resolved fo constitute India into a SOVEREIGN DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC and fo secure to all its citizens:
JUSTICE, social,economic and political;

LIBERT Y of thought, expression, belief, faith and
worship ;

EQUALITY of status and of opportunity;
and to promote among them all

FRATERNITY assuring the dignity of the individual
and the unity of the Nation;

IN OUR CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY this twentysixth day of November, 1949,do HEREBY ADOPT,
ENACT AND GIVE TO OURSELVES THIS
CONSTITUTION.

DEMOCRATIC

A form of government

where the people enjoy

equal political rights, elect
their rulers and hold them
accountable. The government
is run according to some basic
rules.

FRATERNITY

All of us should behave
as if we are members
of the same family. No

citizen as inferior.

Note: The terms Socialist and Secular were added in the
Preamble through the 42" Constitutional Amendment in 1976

Fig. 10.16. Preamble of the Indian Constitution

one should treat a fellow

REPUBLIC

The head of the state
is an elected person
and not a hereditary
position.

JUSTICE

Citizens cannot be
discriminated on the
grounds of caste,
religion and gender.
Social inequalities
have to be reduced.
Government should
work for the welfare
of all, especially of
less advantaged
groups.

LIBERTY

There are no
unreasonable
restrictions on the
citizens in what they
think, how they wish
to express their
thoughts and the
way they wish follow
up their thoughts in
action.

EQUALITY

All are equal

before the

law. The social

inequalities

have to be

ended. The >

government s

should 2

ensure equal sS

opportunity 3

for all. @
=i
o
fe)
o
o

10 - The Constitution of India An Introduction

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

 

Chapter 10.indd 226

LET'S EXPLORE

Below is the list of features given in the Preamble. Read them
closely from the image above and write down examples of
the application of these values in daily life around you. Two
have been completed to help you with the exercise.

Features of _.
the Preamble How we see them in our daily lives

Sovereign

Secular

A person does not have to take permission
from the State to practice the rituals of their
religion if the practice does not interfere with
anyone else s day-to-day life.

Republic

Justice

The State provides equal opportunity to all in
jobs, regardless of gender, caste, religion, etc.

Liberty

Equality

Fraternity

Before we move on...

Vv

v

Vv

Vv

The Constitution of India is a guiding book or rulebook which
protects the rights of all citizens. Citizens are also expected to
follow the fundamental duties of the Constitution.

The rich civilizational heritage of India, the freedom struggle
and good practices from the constitutions of other countries
served as the building blocks of the Indian Constitution.

Its key features define the social, economic, and political
structure of the country and its parliamentary form of
government.

It is a living document that can be improved as per the country s
needs.

08-04-2025 12:55:04

Chapter 10.indd 227

Questions and activities

1.

 The Constituent Assembly had representatives from diverse
backgrounds in India. Why do you think it was important
to have a diverse set of representatives from all over India?

Read the statements below carefully and identify which key
features / values in the Constitution of India are reflected in
each statement.

a. Sheena, Rajat, and Harsh are standing ina line. They are
excited to cast their first vote in the general elections.

b. Radha, Imon, and Harpreet study in the same class in
the same school.

c. Parents must make arrangements to ensure their
children s education.

d. People of all castes, genders, and religions can use the
village well.

It is said that All citizens in India are equal before the law .
Do you think this is a fact? If yes, why? If not, why not?
Formulate your arguments.

You have learnt that India is the only country that provided
universal adult franchise to its citizens from the beginning. 
Can you explain why India did it?

How did the freedom struggle inspire the making of the
Constitution of India? How did India s civilisational heritage
inspire some of the key features in the Constitution of India?
Explain.

Do you think we, as a society, have achieved all the ideals of
the Constitution? If not, what can we each do as citizens to
move our country closer to these ideals?

Read the clues carefully to solve the crossword on the
next page to uncover important concepts from the Indian
Constitution.

10 - The Constitution of India An Introduction

Governance and Democracy

 

10-Apr-25 10:53:23 AM

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1

SS

Chapter 10.indd 228

Across
2.

10.

The branch of government that
makes laws.

The part of the Constitution that
outlines the duties of citizens
towards the country.

The highest court in India that
protects the Constitution.

A system where the head of state
is elected, not hereditary.

The process by which the
Constitution can be changed
over time.

Down

1. The group of people who wrote
the Indian Constitution.

3. The statement at the beginning
of the Constitution that tells us
the values it upholds.

4. The document that lays out the
rules and laws of a country.

5. The gas used to preserve the
original Constitution safely.

6. Basic rights given to every

citizen, like freedom and
equality.

08-04-2025 12:55:04