for breakfast, but when the bottles of wine began to arrive, the real possibilities of the situation began to dawn on the household. It was to enrich Tricki s blood. Lunch became a ceremonial occasion with two glasses of wine before and several during the meal. 4 Footprints without Feat Reprint 2025-26 We could hardly believe it when the brandy came to put a final edge on Tricki s constitution. For a few nights the fine spirit was rolled around, inhaled and reverently drunk. They were days of deep content, starting well with the extra egg in the morning, improved and sustained by the midday wine and finishing luxuriously round the fire with the brandy. It was a temptation to keep Tricki on as a permanent guest, but I knew Mrs Pumphrey was suffering and after a fortnight, felt compelled to phone and tell her that the little dog had recovered and was awaiting collection. Within minutes, about thirty feet of gleaming black metal drew up outside the surgery. The chauffeur opened the door and I could just make out the figure of Mrs Pumphrey almost lost in the interior. Her hands were tightly clasped in front of her; her lips trembled. Oh, Mr Herriot, do tell me the truth. Is he really better? Yes, he s fine. There s no need for you to get out of the car I'll go and fetch him. I walked through the house into the garden. A mass of dogs was hurtling round and round the lawn and in their midst, ears flapping, tail waving, was the little golden figure of Tricki. In two weeks he had been transformed into a lithe, hard-muscled animal; he was keeping up well with the pack, stretching out in great bounds, his chest almost brushing the ground. I carried him back along the passage to the front of the house. The chauffeur was still holding the car door open and when Tricki saw his Reprint 2025-26 \ NS ' mistress he took off from my arms in a tremendous leap and sailed into Mrs Pumphrey s lap. She gave a startled Ooh! And then had to defend herself as he swarmed over her, licking her face and barking. During the excitement, I helped the chauffeur to bring out the beds, toys, cushions, coats and bowls, none of which had been used. As the car moved away, Mrs Pumphrey leaned out of the window. Tears shone in her eyes. Her lips trembled. Oh, Mr Herriot, she cried, how can I ever thank you? This is a triumph of surgery! JAMES HERRIOT GLOSSARY sausage: finely minced meat stuffed into long cylindrical cases and divided into small lengths by twisting or tying rheumy: a watery discharge from a mucous membrane especially of the nose or eyes listless: lacking energy and enthusiasm lumbago: muscular pain in the lower part of the back (lumbar region) regime: prescribed course of exercise and diet distraught: extremely worried surgery: a place where a doctor, a