them with humour, a practice common to all healthy democracies. CRIMINAL ELECTIO N COMMISSIONER | Fig. 6.13.a. Monsoon Session: Expect Fig. 6.13.b. Scrutiny of papers filed thunder, lightning, storms, breaches by candidates etc. It s Monsoon Session. 6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive Governance and Democracy Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 3 | Yet, our democracy grows stronger when citizens stay informed and engaged. By asking questions, sharing their views, and participating in public discussions, people help shape better policies. Therefore, one of the best ways to overcome the challenges India faces regarding its legislature, is to ensure that many more citizens stay informed on matters of importance to society, participate in discussions through public debate on digital spaces that various government departments offer during policymaking processes, and constructively engaging with political representatives on policies. Many more young leaders and diverse voices are entering public life, and technology is making it easier to stay connected and involved with governance. As future voters, your choices, and participation will play a key role in strengthening our Parliament and the assembly of the state you belong to, ensuring that they truly serve all people. DON'T MISS OUT > Atal Bihari Vajpayee, a former Prime Minister of India, said during a speech in the Lok Sabha, Sarkaarein aayengi, jJaayengi. Paartiyaan banengi, bigadengi. Lekin yeh desh rehna chaahiye, is desh ka loktantra amar rehna chaahiye. Fig. 6.14. Atal Bihari Vajpayee (Governments will come and go, parties will rise and fall. But the nation must endure, and its democracy must live on.) > What message do you think this gives about the role of Parliament and leaders in a democracy? Why is it important to protect democratic values even when political power changes? Before we move on... > > India s Parliamentary system ensures that power is shared, decisions are debated, and leaders are held accountable. The Legislature makes laws, the Executive implements them, and the Judiciary ensures that they follow the Constitution. The Parliament represents the voice of the people and reflects the federal spirit of our democracy. Both at the Centre and in the states, structures are designed to balance representation, responsibility, and unity. Checks and balances between institutions help protect citizens rights and uphold democratic values. The functioning of the Parliament needs to become more efficient and productive so that the country s progress is not thwarted. Questions and activities 1. Find out how many representatives from your state are in each House of the Parliament. . What makes the Indian Parliament the voice of the people ? How does it ensure that different opinions are heard? Why do you think the Constitution made the Executive responsible to the Legislature? Why do you think we have chosen the system of bicameral legislature at the Union level? Try to track the journey of a recent bill passed by the Parliament. Identify in which House it was introduced. Were there any major debates or disagreements? How long did