The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive The Constitution is not a mere lawyer s document; it is a vehicle of life, and its spirit is always the spirit of the age. Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar November 1949, Constituent Assembly Debates y - % = aL m ZB , | : . ny F2 WSS0/E2025 26-52) Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 | The Grade 8 students from Nalanda Vidyalaya were on a school trip to Delhi. Usha, Sukhwinder, Anjali, John, and Farida were especially excited to visit the new Parliament building. It's not The three-sided It also uses green square or design reflects balance, construction, cutting round it s inclusivity, and purpose. electricity use by 30 per cent. like a soft triangle! Inside, they saw walls decorated with carvings peacocks, lotuses, tribal art, temple patterns, and freedom fighters. This Exactly, democracy must new look ahead but never building forget its roots. houses sO many ancient symbols! Chapter 6.indd 141 INTRODUCTION India s independence was achieved through great sacrifices by many people of the country after years of struggle against colonial rule. The citizens of a free country could now make decisions about their own governance. The first important step in this new epoch in the life of our nation was the drafting of the Constitution of independent India. This comprehensive document laid foundational principles for the nation, including that of Universal Adult Franchise which guarantees all adult citizens of the country the right to vote irrespective of their social or economic background, gender, race, or religion. The people of India directly elect their representatives who become members of the Lok Sabha. A majority group from among these elected representatives forms the government. The Parliament is the supreme legislative body of the government (it makes laws for the country). It comprises all elected representatives of the people and controls and guides the work of the government. The government can therefore be seen as functioning with the people s consent. There have been 17 Lok Sabhas since the first one in 1952. The 18" Lok Sabha was constituted in June 2024. Fig. 6.2. Our old Parliament (now called Samvidhan Sadan) building was constructed in the 1920s. The Constituent Assembly met there for its deliberations, and it served as Parliament House for over seven decades. ee Fig. 6.3. The Parliament Building (Sansad Bhavan) in New Delhi was constructed to accommodate the growing needs including capacity, technology, sustainability and safety. 6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive Governance and Democracy @ 05-07-2025 17:26:56 COMPOSITION OF THE PARLIAMENT OF INDIA The Indian Parliament is composed of the President and two houses: the Lok Sabha (House of the People / Lower House) and the Rajya Sabha (Council of States / Upper House). This structure with two houses is called a bicameral system ( bi means two, cameral means chamber / house). Fig. 6.4. Lok Sabha Chambers in Fig. 6.5. A view of the Chamber of the the new Parliament building Rajya Sabha