December, 2024/Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) Fig. 6.9. Extract froma report of the Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare 1.2 Co-location of Ayush facilities at Primary Health Centers (PHCs), Community Health Centers (CHCs) and District Hospitals (DHs) Recommendation: 1.2.1 The Committee, at this juncture, notices that in some states and UTs, a separate Department of Ayush has not been opened. The Committee, to boost the Ayush system and for better coordination in Ayush Healthcare, recommends the Ministry of Ayush to impress upon and persuade the States and UTs with no separate department of Ayush to create such a department for speedy development and implementation of Ayush sector and schemes respectively. (Para 2.13 of the Report) Action Taken: 1.2.2 Public Health is being a state subject, creation of separate Department of Ayush in the States/UTs comes under purview of respective State/UT Governments. However. Ministry of Ayush has requested State/UT Governments in _ different meetings to create separate Directorates, deployment of manpower in SPMU & DPMU in the States/UTs for speedy development and implementation of NAM scheme As on date, separate Ayush Directorate is available in 24 States/UTs. (SPMU=state project management unit; DPMU=district project management unit) (Para 2.23 of the Report) Given here is an extract from the report of meetings between the Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare and the officers from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Observe the screenshots above and discuss the following in small groups Who is reporting to whom? What is the subject that has been reviewed? Identify the Committee s recommendation. What is the government s reply? 4) Financial accountability The Parliament approves and monitors government expenditure through the annual budget, and examining the distribution of funds to different ministries. LET'S EXPLORE Why do you think that Parliament keeps an eye on government expenditure? (Hint: Whose money does the government spend?) The government is expected to provide the necessary information to Parliament in a timely and accurate manner. EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS OF PARLIAMENT We have uncovered a few points on the role of the executive in the previous sections. We look at this a little more closely now. yg, DON'T MISS OUT Part V of the Indian Constitution begins with Chapter I The Executive. It looks at the roles and responsibilities of the President, Vice President, and Council of Ministers, among others. It is in Chapter II that the role and functions of Parliament are listed. Why might this be so? 1) The President The President is the Head of State and the nominal head of the Executive. The Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers are responsible for running the government. The President appoints the Prime Minister and other ministers, summons the Parliament, and gives assent to bills, among other functions. The Council of Ministers aids and advises the President. However, in specific circumstances, the President can exercise discretionary powers, particularly during political crises, like when no party holds a clear majority in a Lok Sabha election. 6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and