What might happen if one of the organs Legislature, Executive, Judiciary had all the power? How could it affect the rights of people? Discuss with your classmates 05-07-2025 17:26:59 how each organ checks the others. For example, how does the Legislature question the actions of the Executive? How | does the Judiciary make sure that laws and government | actions respect the Constitution? Do you think there might be ways in which the actions of the Judiciary itself are reviewed? > Can you find examples where the Judiciary has asked lawmakers to review a law? Can you find any instances when the implementation of a law has been questioned by the Judiciary? We will learn more about the Judiciary in a later chapter. LEGISLATIVE AND EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS AT THE STATE LEVEL As discussed, the Union Government has a Parliament with legislative and executive functions. Similarly, each state has its own legislature and executive, called its State Assembly . Just as the Parliament has Members of Parliament (MPs) who make laws, there are Members of Legislative Assembly (MLAs) who formulate laws on subjects that are on the State List and on the Concurrent List . Union List, State List, and Concurrent List The Constitution has lists that help to clarify the areas on which the Union and State governments can exclusively legislate, called the Union List and the State List, respectively. There is also a Concurrent List that has CONCURRENT LIST subjects on which both the Union and State Specific matters, like overnments can legislate. However, in the | dUcation and environmental . ? policy, require collaboration case that the Union government legislates | between the union and states, on a subject in the Concurrent List, the state exhibiting the patercependent government is bound to follow it. In the case , of RTE, for example, the Act is applicable all Fig. 6.11 over India even though education is in the Concurrent List. 6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive Governance and Democracy Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Chapter 6.indd 156 Parallel Structure of Union and State Governments in India The structure at the state-level imitates the one at the union-level. You can see this structure across both levels in the table: Feature Union Government State Government Constitutional The President of India Governor of the State Head elected by an electoral appointed college by the President Term of 5 years 5 years Office (Head) Executive Head The nominal head is the | The nominal head is the President, but the Prime | Governor, but the Chief Minister is the de facto Minister is the de facto executive authority at the | executive authority of the centre state Selection of Leader of majority party/ | Leader of majority party/ Executive coalition in Lok Sabha coalition in Vidhan Sabha Council of Selected by Prime Selected by Chief Minister Ministers Minister Responsibility Collectively responsible | Collectively responsible to to Lok Sabha Vidhan Sabha Legislature Bicameral - Lok Sabha Can