the President, but the Prime | Governor, but the Chief Minister is the de facto Minister is the de facto executive authority at the | executive authority of the centre state Selection of Leader of majority party/ | Leader of majority party/ Executive coalition in Lok Sabha coalition in Vidhan Sabha Council of Selected by Prime Selected by Chief Minister Ministers Minister Responsibility Collectively responsible | Collectively responsible to to Lok Sabha Vidhan Sabha Legislature Bicameral - Lok Sabha Can be unicameral (Vidhan Structure and Rajya Sabha Sabha only) or bicameral (Vidhan Sabha and Vidhan Parishad) Lower House Lok Sabha (House of the | Vidhan Sabha (Legislative People) Assembly) Upper House Rajya Sabha (Council of | Vidhan Parishad (Legislative States) Council) - in some states only Term of Lower 5 years 5 years House Presiding Officer | Speaker Speaker (Lower House) Legislative Makes laws on subjects Makes laws on subjects in Powers in Union List and State List and Concurrent List Concurrent List Financial Powers | Money bills originate Money bills originate only in only in Lok Sabha Vidhan Sabha 05-07-2025 17:26:59 Structure of State Legislatures Unlike the Centre, the State legislatures can be unicameral (having only one house) or bicameral (having two houses). The legislative assembly is called the Vidhan Sabha, and the legislative council (the upper house) is called the Vidhan Parishad. The states having a bicameral system are Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Telangana, and Uttar Pradesh, while the remaining states have a unicameral system. Fig. 6.12. Vidhana Soudha houses the legislature in Karnataka. This building was envisioned by Kengal Hanumanthaiah, who was a freedom fighter and a member of the Constituent Assembly, Chief Minister of Karnataka, and later a Member of Parliament. LET'S EXPLORE What type of legislature does your state have? CHALLENGES TO THE EFFECTIVE FUNCTIONING OF THE LEGISLATURES As discussed, the Indian legislature (including the Parliament at the Centre and the State Assemblies) has the critical and vital role of enacting laws, overseeing administrative processes, and approving the budget. It also provides a platform for discussing national policies, development plans, international relations, and addressing public grievances. However, the legislature also faces several challenges in its effective functioning. 6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive Governance and Democracy Productivity: In the Parliamentary context, productivity is measured by the number of hours either the Lok Sabha or Rajya Sabha actually functioned against the time it was scheduled to. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Some of these can include regular absenteeism of members, noncooperative conduct or communication of members, reduced quality of important debates, and disruptions of the Question Hour. The Parliament typically meets three times a year. These meetings are called sessions Budget Sessions, Monsoon Sessions and Winter Sessions. Each of these has sittings , where the Parliament meets to deliberate upon proposed laws, discuss important matters of governance, and seek explanations from the Executive onits decisions and actions. Usually, the Parliament sits for 6 hours a day during sessions.