of members, noncooperative conduct or communication of members, reduced quality of important debates, and disruptions of the Question Hour. The Parliament typically meets three times a year. These meetings are called sessions Budget Sessions, Monsoon Sessions and Winter Sessions. Each of these has sittings , where the Parliament meets to deliberate upon proposed laws, discuss important matters of governance, and seek explanations from the Executive onits decisions and actions. Usually, the Parliament sits for 6 hours a day during sessions. This can be extended on special occasions or when there is a need to complete urgent business. The State Assemblies too, have similar schedules. LET S EXPLORE > Study the data given in the following table. What conclusions can you draw about the functioning of Parliament over time? Compile data for more recent years. Number of sittings Number of Period of Lok Sabha : sessions 1* Lok Sabha (1952-1957) 2" Lok Sabha (1957-1962) 10 Lok Sabha (1991-1996) 13% Lok Sabha (1999-2004) > Read the following statement of the former chairman of the Rajya Sabha, M. Venkaiah Naidu given in 2021: the productivity of Rajya Sabha during 2004-14 has been about 78% and it declined to about 65% since then. Of the 11 sessions [that he presided over], four of them clocked low productivity of 6.80%, 27.30%, 28.90% and 29.55%; during the year 2018, the Rajya Sabha recorded the lowest ever productivity of 35.75% under the impact of disruptions. What conclusions can you draw from this statement? What implications does this have for the role that the Rajya Sabha is expected to play? The Parliament and the State Assemblies have been envisioned as spaces for thoughtful debates and discussions where laws are made in the interest of the people. However, when debates are disrupted, sessions are cut short and some bills take years to be discussed and passed, it becomes a matter of concern. LET'S EXPLORE > Take up a small group project. Compile data regarding ; the functioning of the legislature in your state or union territory. > Seekan appointment with an MLA and gather information about challenges with respect to the state legislature. Concerns have been expressed by sections of the society about | the fact that a substantial proportion of their representatives in the Lok Sabha have criminal cases against them, and that many sessions are marked by angry or biased debates that do not seriously address issues affecting the people. The media also plays an important role in communicating the concerns of the electorate. These cartoons express them with humour, a practice common to all healthy democracies. CRIMINAL ELECTIO N COMMISSIONER | Fig. 6.13.a. Monsoon Session: Expect Fig. 6.13.b. Scrutiny of papers filed thunder, lightning, storms, breaches by candidates etc. It s Monsoon Session. 6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive Governance and Democracy Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 3 | Yet, our democracy grows stronger when citizens stay informed and engaged. By asking questions, sharing their views, and participating in