of the Executive. The Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers are responsible for running the government. The President appoints the Prime Minister and other ministers, summons the Parliament, and gives assent to bills, among other functions. The Council of Ministers aids and advises the President. However, in specific circumstances, the President can exercise discretionary powers, particularly during political crises, like when no party holds a clear majority in a Lok Sabha election. 6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive Governance and Democracy @ Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 2) The Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers The Prime Minister is the de facto executive authority in India s Parliamentary system. The President appoints the leader of the majority party or coalition in the Lok Sabha as the Prime Minister. The Prime Minister serves with the support of the majority of the MPs in the Lok Sabha. The Prime Minister s key functions include: = Leading the Council of =" Coordinating the work of Ministers different ministries =" Advising the President = Shaping national policies The Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers take decisions and run the government. They are collectively responsible to the Lok Sabha. Most of the bills that come to the Parliament for discussion are initiated by the government. A permanent group of officials called civil servants help in implementing laws and policies. These officers, often called administrators or bureaucrats, work under the direction of ministers and ensure that government departments function smoothly. LET'S EXPLORE If the Executive is part of the Legislature, how do we say that there is separation of power? (Hint: revisit the section on legislature above) In 1956, Railway Minister Lal Bahadur Shastri resigned after a train accident. Although he was not blamed for the accident, he believed that a minister must take moral responsibility for anything that happens in their ministry. He offered his resignation to Fig. 6.10. Lal Bahadur the then Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru; Shastri (Minister for Nehru declined at first, but Shastri insisted. ia and later . . . . Prime Minister Finally, his resignation was accepted. of India) Chapter 6.indd 153 Differences Between the Legislature and the Executive It is important to understand some key differences between the Legislature and the Executive. The following table briefly summarises the distinctions. Composition Main Role Functions Legislature The Parliament of India is the supreme legislative body of the country, composed of the President, the Lok Sabha and the Rajya Sabha. Making laws and overseeing the work of the Executive Can introduce some bills in the Parliament Keeps a check on the activities of the Executive by asking questions and seeking explanations Sanctions all government-related expenses Consults different Parliamentary committees Executive The Executive is composed of the President, the VicePresident, and the Council of Ministers headed by the Prime Minister. Enforcing the laws made by the Legislature Most of the bills are introduced by the Executive in the Parliament Provides information and explanations to