President and Vice President? What about amendments to the Constitution? Indeed, these are vital constitutional functions of the Parliament. There are other important functions that we will explore in higher grades. The Parliament is directly entrusted with upholding the core values of the Indian Constitution, including: a. Enabling parliamentary democracy through universal adult suffrage, b. Following the separation of powers between the legislature, executive, and judiciary, c. Ensuring federalism, and d. Upholding Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of State Policy by framing laws and policies. 6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive Governance and Democracy Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 S Chapter 6.indd 146 Bill: Abillis a draft of a proposed law that needs to be approved by the parliament before it can be enacted into law. CC 2) Lawmaking Among the primary responsibilities of the legislature is to make laws. The Constitution has laid out an elaborate and rigorous process for lawmaking. A law is generally brought into force through an instrument called an act. A bill, which is a draft of a proposed law, is introduced in Parliament and goes through a long and effortful journey before it becomes an act. Given below is the journey of how a bill becomes an act, and ultimately a law, in the case of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (RTE). Most people call me RTE. I came into existence in August 2009, though the idea began almost a century before. My roots lie in the Directive Principles of State Policy of the Indian Constitution. Though the Constitution makers wanted me implemented within a decade after Independence, this didn t happen, leaving countless children without access to education. In the early 1990s, someone argued in court that I was inherently part of the Fundamental Rights in the Constitution, namely, the Right to Life as education is important to lead a meaningful life. Parliamentary action began some years later with the introduction of the 86" Constitutional Amendment Act, 2002, which mandated as Article 21A of the Constitution that the state shall provide free and compulsory education to all children between the ages of 6 and 14 years. Six years later, I was tabled as a bill in the Rajya Sabha. A committee studied me thoroughly and suggested modifications. The major debate concerned funding new schools, infrastructure, and teachers for millions of children would be costly. By 2008, the MPs determined it was time. After the 2009 elections, the new government pursued the matter, and in August 2009, I was passed in the Lok Sabha and received the President s assent, becoming an Act. Today, I ve enabled the creation of legal pathways for children to attend school, facilitated new school construction, and ensured free books and uniforms for children. 05-07-2025 17:26:58 From bill to act the process of lawmaking in the Parliament Standing : duction | Ref, d Committee: ntroduction in : eferred to i : Reading of Itisa either House