@ 05-07-2025 17:26:56 COMPOSITION OF THE PARLIAMENT OF INDIA The Indian Parliament is composed of the President and two houses: the Lok Sabha (House of the People / Lower House) and the Rajya Sabha (Council of States / Upper House). This structure with two houses is called a bicameral system ( bi means two, cameral means chamber / house). Fig. 6.4. Lok Sabha Chambers in Fig. 6.5. A view of the Chamber of the the new Parliament building Rajya Sabha taken from the Press Gallery LET'S REMEMBER The people of India choose their representatives for the Lok Sabha through a direct election (based on universal adult suffrage). The maximum number of members of this House envisaged by the Constitution is 550. The Members of __ Parliament (MPs) in the Rajya Sabha are elected indirectly by the electoral college that you read about in the previous chapter. Both, the number of Rajya Sabha seats allocated and the number of MPs represented in the Lok Sabha, are based on the population of each state. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 e ~ DON T MISS OUT We are aware that several aspects of the Indian Constitution were drawn from the constitutions of other countries. Britain s system 2a sINDIA inspired our system of Parliamentary : democracy. However, there were also experiences that our freedom fighters and Constitution makers had the practical experience gained through participation in British colonial governance structures, even Fig. 6.6. Constitution if in a very limited way, that provided of India familiarity with Parliamentary procedures; the memory of the ancient republics (mahdjanapadas); the village panchayats where elders made collective decisions, as we learnt in a previous chapter. CONSTITUTION Extensive discussions took place during the making of the Constitution regarding whether India should have a bicameral system. It was felt that a single directly elected House would be inadequate to meet the challenges independent India would face. In the spirit of federalism , it was felt that a Council of States, the Rajya Sabha, was needed. The composition and process of election to the Rajya Sabha were also designed to be different. India practices federalism, which is a form of government where power is distributed between the centre, states, as well as local governments. This system helps to keep the balance between national unity and local interests. FUNCTION Each House of the Parliament has a presiding officer to ensure that debates and discussions are conducted in an orderly manner. In the Lok Sabha, the members elect a speaker, who conducts the sessions, allows members to speak, maintains discipline, and ensures that rules are followed. The Rajya Sabha is presided over by the Vice President of India, who acts as its chairperson. 6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive Governance and Democracy Sceptre: A decorated rod carried by a king or queen at ceremonies as asymbol of their power Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 SE | <q DON T MISS OUT