a speaker, who conducts the sessions, allows members to speak, maintains discipline, and ensures that rules are followed. The Rajya Sabha is presided over by the Vice President of India, who acts as its chairperson. 6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive Governance and Democracy Sceptre: A decorated rod carried by a king or queen at ceremonies as asymbol of their power Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 SE | <q DON T MISS OUT The Sengol, a gold-plated, silver sceptre was symbolically handed over to Pt. Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Prime Minister of India, on 14 August 1947 on the occasion of Indian Independence as a powerful symbol to mark the transfer of power. It is now placed near the Speaker s chair in the new Lok Sabha, and served as a symbol of righteous and just rule. Dating back to the Chola period, the Sengol was handed to new rulers as a reminder that power must be guided by dharma and righteousness. At its top sits Nandi, symbolising justice. Fig. 6.7. The Sengol To help make Parliamentary discussions accessible to all, translation services are provided in multiple Indian languages. Previously, simultaneous interpretation was available in 12 languages, namely, Hindi, English, Assamese, Bengali, Gujarati, Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi, Odia, Tamil, Punjabi and Telugu. Recently, six more languages were added: Bodo, Dogri, Maithili, Manipuri, Urdu, and Sanskrit. More languages are expected to be added in the future. The executive responsibility of the Parliament (i.e., ensuring that laws are implemented and enforced) is as important as its legislative function (i.e., the making of laws). The Union Executive gives life to the legislative functions and power of the Parliament. The Union Executive consists of the following members: = The President, = The Vice President, and | The Council of Ministers headed by the Prime Minister. The Council of Ministers is chosen from among the MPs of both houses of Parliament. These ministers are collectively responsible to the Lok Sabha. Let us now discuss the Legislative and Executive functions of the Parliament. LEGISLATIVE FUNCTIONS OF THE PARLIAMENT The Constitution lays down the key functions that the Parliament needs to fulfil. They can be broadly classified under the following heads: 1. Constitutional functions 2. Lawmaking 3. Executive accountability 4. Financial accountability We explore them briefly in the sections below. 1) Constitutional function > LET'S REMEMBER From your previous lessons on the theme of Democracy and Governance, name a few Constitutional functions of the Parliament. Did you list the election of President and Vice President? What about amendments to the Constitution? Indeed, these are vital constitutional functions of the Parliament. There are other important functions that we will explore in higher grades. The Parliament is directly entrusted with upholding the core values of the Indian Constitution, including: a. Enabling parliamentary democracy through universal adult suffrage, b. Following the separation of powers between the legislature, executive, and judiciary, c. Ensuring federalism, and d. Upholding Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of State Policy