overseeing the work of the Executive Can introduce some bills in the Parliament Keeps a check on the activities of the Executive by asking questions and seeking explanations Sanctions all government-related expenses Consults different Parliamentary committees Executive The Executive is composed of the President, the VicePresident, and the Council of Ministers headed by the Prime Minister. Enforcing the laws made by the Legislature Most of the bills are introduced by the Executive in the Parliament Provides information and explanations to the Legislature on its decisions and actions. Aids and advises the President on important matters, including calling sessions of Parliament. Prepares and implements the budget approved by Parliament. Can function independently in day-to-day matters and may consult committees when required. 6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive Governance and Democracy 05-07-2025 17:26:59 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Chapter 6.indd 154 THE JUDICIARY ROLE OF CHECKS AND BALANCES The Judiciary is the branch of government that is responsible for interpreting and applying the laws of the land, including in specific cases of disputes. The Judiciary functions through a system of courts and plays a pivotal role in maintaining the democratic nature of society and governance. The Judiciary acts as the custodian of the Constitution, ensuring that all branches of the government operate within the principles and parameters enshrined in the Constitution. It keeps a check on the effective functioning of society and institutions of the government by interpreting laws, resolving disputes, and safeguarding fundamental rights. The Constitution not only describes how the Legislature and Executive are given power to govern the country, but it also lists the specific responsibilities of these organs. To ensure that the powers of the Legislature are used properly and responsibilities are followed, the Judiciary is given the unique and critical responsibility of checking that the laws passed by Parliament have not violated the Constitutional framework. Similarly, if a violation of the Constitution occurs when the laws are implemented by the Executive, the Judiciary again has the power to step in. Just as the Parliament functions through its Legislature and the Executive arms, the Judiciary functions through its Courts. In this chapter, we have explored how the organs within the Parliament balance making of the law and executing it, and how the Judiciary checks these actions. These are all examples of the separation of powers and the system of checks and balances among the Legislature, the Executive, and the Judiciary, ensuring that no one organ becomes too powerful. LET'S EXPLORE > What might happen if one of the organs Legislature, Executive, Judiciary had all the power? How could it affect the rights of people? Discuss with your classmates 05-07-2025 17:26:59 how each organ checks the others. For example, how does the Legislature question the actions of the Executive? How | does the Judiciary make sure that laws and government | actions respect the Constitution? Do you think there might be ways in which the actions of the Judiciary itself are reviewed?