the matter, and in August 2009, I was passed in the Lok Sabha and received the President s assent, becoming an Act. Today, I ve enabled the creation of legal pathways for children to attend school, facilitated new school construction, and ensured free books and uniforms for children. 05-07-2025 17:26:58 From bill to act the process of lawmaking in the Parliament Standing : duction | Ref, d Committee: ntroduction in : eferred to i : Reading of Itisa either House of the bill Standing permanent the Parliament Committee committee consisting of MPs (the MPs may change, but the committee as a structure remains) that Taken up for scrutinises consideration government activities, makes recommendations and asks questions on actions taken by the government. Clause-by-clause discussion and amendments voted Vote on the Bill and passing Process repeated Presidential Gazette in other House assent notification Note: All bills may not be referred to Committees. Fig. 6.8. Process of lawmaking - a simplified diagram to illustrate key steps. Reading: The origins are in the British Parliament. Many MPs were illiterate, so a clerk would read out the contents of the bill for the MPs to discuss. Today MPs read the bill before the discussions take place. Clause: These are parts of a bill that explain the specific details of the bill; eg. RTE defines the age group to which it applies (6 to 14 years). Gazette: This is an official government publication that announces legal documents and official information. 6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive Governance and Democracy e Chapter 6.indd 147 05-07-2025 17:26:58 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 S| Draw a small chart to show the process of how RTE became an act. What do you think the process would be if RTE had been tabled in the Lok Sabha? DON'T MISS OUT Some types of bills have to be tabled only in the Lok Sabha. One example is a Money Bill that is concerned with financial matters (including taxation, government borrowing, etc.). It is essentially a draft law that can be introduced only in the Lok Sabha; however, the introduction of the bill requires the prior recommendation of the President. 3) Executive accountability The Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers are part of the Union Executive. They are: = primarily responsible for implementing and enforcing laws and overseeing the effective running of the government; = take decisions regarding the day-to-day functioning of the government based on the principles laid out in the Constitution and its laws; = answerable to the Lok Sabha, through mechanisms like the Question Hour which require ministers to justify their actions and decisions. The Question Hour in the Lok Sabha is a select period (typically the first hour of a Parliamentary session) where MPs can ask the ministers questions about government policies and activities. It is a process of the Parliament that holds the Executive accountable (i.e., it must justify all actions and decisions). Special committees also hold meetings where