= ABOC D C (?) Can this be used to find the angles BOA and /BOC formed by the diagonals? Since these angles are corresponding parts of congruent triangles, they are equal. Further, these angles together form a straight angle. So ZBOA + ZBOC = 180 . Thus, these angles have to be 90 each. Quadrilaterals This shows that the diagonals of a square bisect each other at right angles. This means that the diagonals have to be drawn such that they are of equal lengths and bisect each other at right angles. Since the endpoints of the diagonals uniquely determine the vertices of a quadrilateral, we will get a square when the diagonals are joined this way. 2 Using this fact, construct a square with a diagonal of length 8 cm. Properties of a Square Since a square is a special type of rectangle, all the properties of a rectangle hold true for a square. 2 Verify if this is true by going through geometric reasoning in Deduction 1 and Deduction 2, and see if they apply to a square as well. Property 1: All the sides of a square are equal to each other. Property 2: The opposite sides of a square are parallel to each other. Property 3: The angles of a square are all 90 . Property 4: The diagonals of a square are of equal length and they bisect each other at 90 . There is one more special property of a square. 2 What are the measures of 41, 72, 73, and 24? See if you can reason and/or experiment to figure this out! In AADC, we have, Z1+ 23 +90 = 180 Since AD = DC, we have 41 = 23. Thus, 71 = 23 = 45 . D Similarly, find 72 and 24. Thus, we have another property of a square Property 5: The diagonals of a square divide the angles of the square into equal halves. This can also be expressed as The diagonals of a square bisect the angles of the square. Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 2 Figure it Out 1. Find all the other angles inside the following rectangles. Soo Sa Fr A B (i P (ii . 2. Draw a quadrilateral whose diagonals have equal lengths of 8 cm that bisect each other, and intersect at an angle of (i) 30 (ii) 40 (iii) 90 (iv) 140 3. Consider a circle with centre O. Line segments PL and AM are two perpendicular diameters of the circle. What is the figure APML? Reason and/or experiment to figure this out. 4. We have seen how to get 90 using paper folding. Now, suppose /yj, he J we do not have any paper but two sticks of equal length, anda _ \ Talk thread. How do we make an exact 90 using these? sides are parallel. Can this be chosen as a definition of a rectangle? In other words, is every quadrilateral that has opposite sides parallel and equal, a