of lengths 4cm and 5 cm. Quadrilaterals 4.5 Playing with Quadrilaterals Geoboard Activity Take a geoboard and some rubber bands. If you do not have these, you could just use the dot grid papers given at the end of the book for this activity. Place two rubber bands perpendicular to each other, forming diagonals of equal length. Join the ends. 2 What is the quadrilateral that you get? Justify your answer. Extend one of the diagonals on both sides by 2 cm. 2 What quadrilateral will you get now? Justify your answer. Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 Joining Triangles 1. Take two cardboard cutouts of an equilateral triangle of sidelength 8 cm. & om & cs) 3 % % 8cm 8cm 2 Can you join them to get a quadrilateral? 2 What type of a quadrilateral is this? Justify your answer. 2. Take two cardboard cutouts of an isosceles triangle with sidelengths 8 cm, 8 cm, and 6 cm. g cs s e x i\ 6cm 6cm 2 Whatare the different ways they can be joined to geta quadrilateral? Joining them in this Joining them in this way you get way you get 6cm om ie) 8 on 8 Crm Fe) om 6cm (404) 2 What quadrilaterals are these? Justify your answers. Quadrilaterals 3. Take two cardboard cutouts of a scalene triangle with sides 6 cm, 9 cm, and 12 cm. 12cm 12cm 2 Whatare the different ways they can be joined to geta quadrilateral? Are you able to identify the different quadrilaterals that are obtained by joining the triangles? Justify your answer whenever you identify a quadrilateral. 4.6 Kite and Trapezium Kite One of the ways the two triangles of sides 6 cm, 9 cm and 12 cm can be joined together is as follows This quadrilateral looks like a kite. Observe that the adjacent sides are of the same length. Kite: A kite is a quadrilateral that can be labelled ABCD such that AB = BC, and CD = DA. A Cc 2 Property 1: In the kite, show that the diagonal BD (i) bisects ZABC and ZADC, (ii) bisects the diagonal AC, that is, AO = OC, and is perpendicular to it. Hint: Is AAOB ~ ACOB? Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 Trapezium Parallelograms are quadrilaterals that have parallel opposite sides. We get a new type of quadrilateral if we relax this condition. Trapezium: A trapezium is a quadrilateral with at least one pair of parallel opposite sides. S 2 Construct a trapezium. Measure the base angles (marked in the figure). 2 Can you find the remaining angles without measuring them? Since PQ| |SR, we have Property 1: 7 S + 7P = 180 and R + 2Q = 180 . Using these facts, the remaining angles can easily be found. Verify your answer after finding them. When the non-parallel sides of a trapezium have the same lengths, the trapezium is called an isosceles trapezium. 2 How do we construct an isosceles trapezium? 2 Construct an isosceles