geometric reasoning, as well as by construction and measurement. Find other ways of constructing a square within a square such that the vertices of the inner square lie on the sides of the outer square, as shown in Figure (b). Cc U A V X E W S (a) (b) 8. Ifa quadrilateral has four equal sides and one angle of 90 , will it be a square? Find the answer using geometric reasoning as well as by construction and measurement. 9. What type of a quadrilateral is one in which the opposite sides are equal? Justify your answer. Hint: Draw a diagonal and check for congruent triangles. 10. Will the sum of the angles in a quadrilateral such as the following one also be 360 ? Find the answer using geometric reasoning as I well as by constructing this figure and measuring. B A C 11. State whether the following statements are true or false. Justify your answers. (i) A quadrilateral whose diagonals are equal and bisect each other must be a square. Quadrilaterals (ii) A quadrilateral having three right angles must be a rectangle. (iii) A quadrilateral whose diagonals bisect each other must be a parallelogram. (iv) A quadrilateral whose diagonals are perpendicular to each other must be a rhombus. (v) A quadrilateral in which the opposite angles are equal must be a parallelogram. (vi) A quadrilateral in which all the angles are equal is a rectangle. (vii) Isosceles trapeziums are parallelograms. = Arectangle is a quadrilateral in which the angles are all 90 . Properties of a rectangle * Opposite sides of a rectangle are equal. * Opposite sides of a rectangle are parallel to each other. Diagonals of a rectangle are of equal length and they bisect each other. = A square is a quadrilateral in which all the angles are 90 , and all the sides are of equal length. Properties of a square The opposite sides of a square are parallel to each other. The diagonals of a square are of equal lengths and they bisect each other at 90 . The diagonals of a square bisect the angles of the square. = A parallelogram is a quadrilateral in which opposite sides are parallel. Properties of a parallelogram The opposite sides of a parallelogram are equal. Ina parallelogram, the adjacent angles add up to 180 , and the opposite angles are equal. The diagonals of a parallelogram bisect each other. = A rhombus is a quadrilateral in which all the sides have the same length. Properties of a rhombus The opposite sides of a rhombus are parallel to each other. Ina rhombus, the adjacent angles add up to 180 , and the opposite angles are equal. The diagonals of a rhombus bisect each other at right angles. The diagonals of a rhombus bisect its angles. A kite is a quadrilateral with two non-overlapping adjacent pairs of sides having the same length. A trapezium is a quadrilateral having at least one pair of parallel opposite