connected at their midpoints. This method is actually used in practice to make rectangles. Carpenters in Europe use this method to get a rectangular frame. It is also known that farmers in Mozambique, a country in Africa, use this method while constructing houses to get the base of the house in a rectangular shape. The Process of Finding Properties As we have been seeing from lower grades, properties of geometric objects such as parallel lines, angles, and triangles can be deduced through geometric reasoning. We will continue to deduce properties of special types of quadrilaterals in this chapter. Once you have deduced a property of a quadrilateral, it is good to verify it with a real-world quadrilateral, either the quadrilateral constructed on paper or simply a surface having the shape of the quadrilateral. If you are not able to figure out the property using deduction, you could experiment by taking real-world quadrilaterals and observing the property through measurement. Note that these observations give useful insights about the property, but with them, we can only form a conjecture, that is, a statement about which we are highly confident, but not yet sure if it always holds true. For example, constructing a few rectangles and observing through measurement that their diagonals bisect each other does not necessarily mean that this will always be the case can we be sure that the 1000th rectangle we construct will also have this property? The only way we can be sure of this property is by ; Note to the Teacher: Gently encourage students to deduce or justify properties. , 1 Whenever students face challenges in doing it, encourage them to experiment and | | observe, and use their intuition to figure out the properties. Quadrilaterals The Carpenter s Problem shows that rectangles can also be defined as follows Rectangle: A rectangle is a quadrilateral whose diagonals are equal and bisect each other. Observe how different this definition is from the earlier one. Yet, both capture the same class of quadrilaterals. Further, it turns out that the first definition can be simplified. 2 In the earlier definition, we stated that a rectangle has (a) opposite sides of equal length, and (b) all angles equal to 90 . Would we be wrong if we just define a rectangle as a quadrilateral in which all the angles are 90 ? 2 If you think that this definition is incomplete, try constructing a quadrilateral in which the angles are all 90 but the opposite sides are not equal. Are you able to construct such a quadrilateral? Let us prove why this is impossible. Deduction 4 What is the shape of a quadrilateral with all the angles equal to 90 ? (?) Consider a quadrilateral ABCD with all angles measuring 90 . What can we say about the opposite sides of such a quadrilateral? Join BD. ABAD and ADCB seem congruent. Can we justify this claim? B C Two equalities can be directly seen in the triangles. What can we