(marked in the figure). 2 Can you find the remaining angles without measuring them? Since PQ| |SR, we have Property 1: 7 S + 7P = 180 and R + 2Q = 180 . Using these facts, the remaining angles can easily be found. Verify your answer after finding them. When the non-parallel sides of a trapezium have the same lengths, the trapezium is called an isosceles trapezium. 2 How do we construct an isosceles trapezium? 2 Construct an isosceles trapezium UVWX, with UV| | XW. Measure 4U. \X : Wr, X W. U Vv U Vv Mark X and W such that UX = VW Can you find the remaining angles without measuring them? Does it appear that the angles opposite to the equal sides /U and ZV are also equal? Can we find congruent triangles here? Consider line segments XY and WZ perpendicular to UV. (?) What type of quadrilateral is XWZY? Since XW | | UV, a= 180 - XYZ = 90 , and b = 180 ZWZY = 90 (since the internal angles on the same side of a transversal add up to 180 ) Hence, XWZY is a rectangle. X W Quadrilaterals (?) Now, it can be shown that AUXY = AVWZ. (How?) Thus, ZU = ZV. Using this fact, the remaining angles of the isosceles trapezium can be determined. Verify the angles by measurement. Property 2: In an isosceles trapezium, the angles opposite to the equal sides are equal. 2 Figure it Out 1. Find all the sides and the angles of the quadrilateral obtained by joining two equilateral triangles with sides 4 cm. Construct a kite whose diagonals are of lengths 6 cm and 8 cm. Find the remaining angles in the following trapeziums oY Q CJ Draw a Venn diagram showing the set of parallelograms, kites, rhombuses, rectangles, and squares. Then, answer the following questions (i) What is the quadrilateral that is both a kite and a parallelogram? (ii) Can there be a quadrilateral that is both a kite anda rectangle? (iii) Is every kite arhombus? If not, what is the correct relationship between these two types of quadrilaterals? If PAIR and RODS are two rectangles, find ZIOD. P A O 5cm =) 5cm Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 6. Construct a square with diagonal 6 cm without using a protractor. 7. CASE is a square. The points U, V, W and X are the midpoints of the sides of the square. What type of quadrilateral is UVWX? Find this by using geometric reasoning, as well as by construction and measurement. Find other ways of constructing a square within a square such that the vertices of the inner square lie on the sides of the outer square, as shown in Figure (b). Cc U A V X E W S (a) (b) 8. Ifa quadrilateral has four equal sides and one angle of 90 , will it be a square? Find the answer using geometric reasoning as well as by construction and