Since the alternate angles are ; equal, GE| | AM. Quadrilaterals As opposite sides are parallel, GAME is also a parallelogram. Thus, every rhombus is a parallelogram, and the properties of a parallelogram hold true for a rhombus as well. Thus, the adjacent angles of arhombus add up to 180 , and the opposite angles are equal 8 (verify that the arguments in Deduction 6 can be applied to a rhombus as well!). Thus, in rhombus ABCD, ZA = ZC = 50 , and ZD = ZB = 180 50 = 130 . 2 So arhombus is a parallelogram, anda rectangle is also a parallelogram. How can this be represented using a Venn diagram? 2 Where will the set of squares occur in this diagram? We know that a square is a rectangle. Since the opposite sides of a square are parallel, a square is also a parallelogram. Further, since all the sides of a square have the same length, a square is also a rhombus. Thus, the Venn diagram will be as follows. Parallelogram Rectangle Rhombus Square Let us list the properties of a rhombus. Property 1: All the sides of a rhombus are equal to each other. Property 2: The opposite sides of a rhombus are parallel to each other. Property 3: In a rhombus, the adjacent angles add up to 180 , and the opposite angles are equal. 2 Are the diagonals of a rhombus equal? Property 4: The diagonals of a rhombus bisect each other. Property 5: The diagonals of a rhombus bisect its angles. (104) Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 2 Do the diagonals of arhombus intersect at any particular angle? Reason out and/or experiment to figure this out! Deduction 10 What can we say about the angles formed by the diagonals of a rhombus at their point of intersection? E M (?) In the rhombus GAME, we have AGEO =~ AMEO (why?). So, ZGOE = ZMOE, as they are corresponding parts of congruent triangles. As they add up to 180 , they should be 90 each. G s Property 6: Diagonals of a rhombus intersect each other at an angle of 90 . 2 Figure it Out 1. Find the remaining angles in the following quadrilaterals. (i) R A (ii) YA Pp E X Ww ww) 2. Using the diagonal properties, construct a parallelogram whose diagonals are of lengths 7 cm and 5 cm, and intersect at an angle of 140 . (iii) 3. Using the diagonal properties, construct a rhombus whose diagonals are of lengths 4cm and 5 cm. Quadrilaterals 4.5 Playing with Quadrilaterals Geoboard Activity Take a geoboard and some rubber bands. If you do not have these, you could just use the dot grid papers given at the end of the book for this activity. Place two rubber bands perpendicular to each other, forming diagonals of equal length. Join the ends. 2 What is the quadrilateral that you get? Justify your answer. Extend one of the diagonals on both sides by