i a a ee ee eS OOOO Saar aw eat ad deat dead ad dead dea dead dt Dd di dd In this chapter, we will study some interesting types of four-sided figures and solve problems based on them. Such figures are commonly known as quadrilaterals. The word quadrilateral is derived from Latin words quadri meaning four, and latus referring to sides. 2 Observe the following figures. LBA (ii) (iii) ana (iv) (v) Figs. (i), (ii), and (iii) are quadrilaterals, and the others are not. Why? The angles of a quadrilateral are the angles between its sides, as marked in Figs. (i), (ii), and (iii). We will start with the most familiar quadrilaterals rectangles and squares. Chapter 4 Quadrilaterals 06-07-2025.indd 82 ~~ 7/10/2025 3:19:32 PM Quadrilaterals 4.1 Rectangles and Squares We know what rectangles are. Let us define them. Rectangle: A rectangle is a quadrilateral in which (i) The angles are all right angles (90 ), and (ii) The opposite sides are of equal length. The definition precisely states the conditions a quadrilateral has to satisfy to be called a rectangle. 2 Are there other ways to define a rectangle? Let us consider the following problem related to the construction of rectangles. A Carpenter s Problem 2 A carpenter needs to put together B two thin strips of wood, as shown in Fig. 1, so that when a thread is passed through their endpoints, it forms a rectangle. She already has one 8 cm long strip. What should be the length of the other strip? Where should they both be joined? Let us first model the structure Fig. 1 that the carpenter has to make. The strips can be modelled as line segments. They are the diagonals of the quadrilateral formed by their endpoints. For the quadrilateral to be a rectangle, we need to answer the following questions (?) 1. What is the length of the other diagonal? (?) 2. What is the point of intersection of the two diagonals? (?) 3. What should the angle be between the diagonals? (?) Let us answer these questions using , geometric reasoning (deduction). If that is challenging, try to construct/ measure some rectangles. To find the answers to these AC=8cm questions, let us suppose that we have placed the diagonals such that their endpoints form the vertices of a rectangle, as shown in Fig. 2. A D Fig. 2 . o Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 Deduction 1 What is the length of the other diagonal? This can be deduced using congruence as follows B Cc Since ABCD is a rectangle, we have AB = CD ZBAD = ZCDA = 90 AD is common to both triangles. So, AADC = ADAB by the SAS congruence condition. A Common side Therefore, AC = BD, since they are corresponding parts of congruent triangles. This shows that the diagonals of a rectangle always have the same length. So the other diagonal must also be 8 cm long. You can verify this property by constructing/measuring some