paid thirty-five roubles a month. S %, The Beggar/ 59 meses. IN. 9. WPS Hl fod Reprint 2025-26 Thank Heaven! That s fine! I am delighted for your sake. I am very, very glad, Lushkoff. You see, you are my godson, in a sense. I gave you a push along the right path, you know. Do you remember what a roasting I gave you, eh? I nearly had you sinking into the ground at my feet that day. Thank you, old man, for not forgetting my words. Thank you, too. said Lushkoff. If I hadn t 7 come to you then I might | still have been calling myself a teacher or a student to this day. Yes, by flying to your protection I dragged myself out of a pit. Iam very glad, indeed. Thank you for your kind words and deeds. I am very grateful to you and to your cook. God bless that good and noble woman! You spoke finely then, and I shall be indebted to you to my dying day; but, strictly speaking, it was your cook, Olga, who saved me. How is that? When I used to come to your house to chop wood she used to begin: Oh, you sot, you! Oh, you miserable creature! There s nothing for you but ruin. And then she would sit down opposite me and grow sad, look into my face and weep. Oh, you unlucky man! There is no pleasure for you in this world and there will be none in the world to come. You drunkard! You will burn in hell. Oh, you unhappy one! And so she would carry on, you know, in that strain. I can t tell you how much misery she suffered, how 60 / Moments Reprint 2025-26 Ze) SP eyOse* used to chop the wood for me. Do you know, sir, that I did not chop one single stick of wood for you? She did it all. Why this saved me, why I changed, why I stopped drinking at the sight of her I cannot explain. I only know that, owing to her words and noble deeds, a change took place in my heart; she set me right and I shall never forget it. However, it is time to go now; there goes the bell. Lushkoff bowed and departed to the gallery. ANTON CHEKHOV Glossary copeck (also spelt kopeck): Russian coin equal to one hundredth of a rouble calumny: the making of false and defamatory statements about someone in order to damage his/her reputation suppliant (or supplicant): a person making a humble plea to someone in power or authority mendicant: beggar swindling: cheating a person of money perplexity: state of being puzzled; bewilderment irresolutely: hesitantly; undecidedly billet: here, a thick piece of wood waif: a homeless person shovel: remove snow with a shovel (a tool resembling a spade with a broad blade and typically upturned sides) roasting (an informal or humorous word): here, scolding sot: a habitual drunkard LE Tux Asour