he can come back and cut wood on the first day of each month. We can always find work for him. On the first of the month the waif made his appearance and again earned half a rouble, although he could barely stand on his legs. From that day on he often appeared in the yard and every 58 / Moments Reprint 2025-26 DO PES ORE time work was found for him. Now he would shovel snow, now put the wood-shed in order, now beat the dust out of rugs and mattresses. Every time he received from twenty to forty copecks, and once, even a pair of old trousers were sent out to him. When Sergei moved into another house he hired him to help in the packing and hauling of the furniture. This time the waif was sober, gloomy, and silent. He hardly touched the furniture, and walked behind the wagons hanging his head, not even making a pretence of appearing busy. He only shivered in the cold and became embarrassed when the carters jeered at him for his idleness, his feebleness, and his tattered, fancy overcoat. After the moving was over Sergei sent for him. Well, Iam happy that my words have taken effect, he said, handing him a rouble. Here s for your pains. I see you are sober and have no objection to work. What is your name? Lushkoff. Well, Lushkoff, I can now offer you some other, cleaner employment. Can you write? I can. Then take this letter to a friend of mine tomorrow and you will be given some copying to do. Work hard, don t drink, and remember what I have said to you. Goodbye! Pleased at having put a man on the right path, Sergei tapped Lushkoff kindly on the shoulder and even gave him his hand at parting. Lushkoff took the letter, and from that day forth came no more to the yard for work. Two years went by. Then one evening, as Sergei was standing at the ticket window of a theatre paying for his seat, he noticed a little man beside him with a coat collar of curly fur and a worn sealskin cap. This little individual timidly asked the ticket seller for a seat in the gallery and paid for it in copper coins. Lushkoff, is that you? cried Sergei, recognising in the little man his former wood-chopper. How are you? What are you doing? How is everything with you? All right. Iam a notary now and am paid thirty-five roubles a month. S %, The Beggar/ 59 meses. IN. 9. WPS Hl fod Reprint 2025-26 Thank Heaven! That s fine! I am delighted for your sake. I am very, very glad, Lushkoff. You see, you are my godson, in a sense. I gave you a push along the right path, you know. Do you remember what a roasting I gave you, eh? I nearly had you sinking into the ground at my feet that day. Thank you,