ke
* 9. If | Were You

O959CHI1

Before You READ

 Gerrard lives alone in a lonely cottage. An intruder, who is a
criminal, enters his cottage. He intends to murder Gerrard
and take on his identity. Does he succeed?

 The following words and phrases occur in the play. Do you
know their meanings? Match them with the meanings given,
to find out.

cultured an informal expression for a
fashionable vehicle

count on unnecessary and usually harmful
engaged exaggerated

melodramatic sophisticated; well mannered

to be smart here, a tone of voice

inflection avoid

wise guy an unexpected opportunity for
SUCCESS

a dandy bus trap

tradespeople a Christian religious teacher who
teaches on Sundays in Church

gratuitous (American English) a person who
pretends to know a lot

dodge depend on; rely on

lucky break (American English) an informal way
of saying that one is being too clever

Sunday-school teacher occupied; busy
frame merchants

ScENE: A small cottage interior. There is an entrance back right (which
may be curtained). Another door to the left must be a practical door. The
furniture is simple, consisting of a small table towards the left, a chair or
two, and a divan rather upstage on the right. On the table is a telephone.

Reprint 2025-26

(When the curtain rises Gerrard is standing by the table making a phone
call. He is of medium height, and wearing horn-rimmed glasses ... He
is dressed in a lounge suit and a great coat. His voice is cultured.)

GERRARD: ... Well, tell him to phone up directly. I must know...
Yes, I expect I'll still be here, but you mustn t count on
that... In about ten minutes time. Right-ho. Goodbye.

(He puts down the phone and goes to the divan on the left, where there
is a travelling bag, and starts packing. Whilst he is thus engaged, another
man, similar in build to Gerrard enters from the right silently revolver
in hand. He is flashily dressed in an overcoat and a soft hat. He bumps
accidentally against the table, and at the sound Gerrard turns quickly.)

GERRARD : (pleasantly) Why, this is a surprise, Mr er 

INTRUDER : I m glad you're pleased to see me. I don t think you'll be
pleased for long. Put those paws up!

GERRARD : This is all very melodramatic, not very original, perhaps,
but...

INTRUDER : Trying to be calm and er 

GerraRD : Nonchalant is your word, I think.

INTRUDER : Thanks a lot. You'll soon stop being smart. Pll make you

crawl. I want to know a few things, see.

Youll soon stop being smart. I'll make you crawl.

& 110 / Beehive

Reprint 2025-26

vb # *

GerraRD : Anything you like. I know all the answers. But before we
begin I should like to change my position; you may be
comfortable, but I am not.

INTRUDER : Sit down there, and no funny business. (Motions to a
chair, and seats himself on the divan by the bag.) Now
then, we'll have a nice little talk about yourself!

GerrarD : At last a sympathetic audience! I'll tell you the story of
my life. How as a child I was stolen by the gypsies, and
why at the age of thirty-two, I find myself in my lonely
Essex cottage, how...

InrRUDER : Keep it to yourself, and just answer my questions. You
live here alone? Well, do you?

GERRARD : I m sorry. I thought you were telling me, not asking me.
A question of inflection; your voice is unfamiliar.

INTRUDER : (with emphasis) Do you live here alone?

GerrarD : And if I don t answer?

INTRUDER : You've got enough sense not to want to get hurt.

GerRARD : I think good sense is shown more in the ability to avoid
pain than in the mere desire to do so. What do you think,
Mr er 

INTRUDER : Never mind my name. I like yours better, Mr Gerrard.
What are your Christian names?

GERRARD : Vincent Charles.

INTRUDER : Do you run a car?

GERRARD : No.

InrRUDER : That s a lie. You re not dealing with a fool. I'm as smart

as you and smarter, and I know you run a car. Better be
careful, wise guy!

GERRARD : Are you American, or is that merely a clever imitation?

InrRUDER : Listen, this gun s no toy. I can hurt you without killing
you, and still get my answers.

GerraRD : Of course, if you put it like that, I'll be glad to assist you.
I do possess a car, and it s in the garage round the corner.

INTRUDER : That s better. Do people often come out here?

GERRARD : Very rarely. Surprisingly few people take the trouble to
visit me. There s the baker and the greengrocer, of course;
and then there s the milkman quite charming, but no
one so interesting as yourself.

INTRUDER : I happen to know that you never see tradespeople.

IfI Were You/ 111 @

Reprint 2025-26

GERRARD

INTRUDER

GERRARD
INTRUDER

GERRARD

INTRUDER
GERRARD

INTRUDER
GERRARD

INTRUDER
GERRARD
INTRUDER
GERRARD
INTRUDER

GERRARD

INTRUDER

GERRARD

INTRUDER

GERRARD

& 112 / Beehive

You seem to have taken a considerable amount of trouble.
Since you know so much about me, won t you say
something about yourself? You have been so modest.

I could tell you plenty. You think you re smart, but I m
the top of the class round here. I ve got brains and I use
them. That s how I ve got where I have.

And where precisely have you got? It didn t require a
great brain to break into my little cottage.

When you know why I ve broken into your little cottage,
you'll be surprised, and it won t be a pleasant surprise.
With you figuring so largely in it, that is understandable.
By the way, what particular line of crime do you embrace,
or aren t you a specialist?

My speciality s jewel robbery. Your car will do me a treat.
It s certainly a dandy bus.

I'm afraid jewels are few and far between in the wilds of
Essex.

So are the cops. I can retire here nicely for a little while.
You mean to live with me? A trifle sudden isn t it; you ve
not been invited.

You won't be here long; so I didn t trouble to ask.

What do you mean?

This is your big surprise. I m going to kill you.

A little harsh, isn t it?

(with heavy sarcasm) Yeah, I'll be sorry to do it. I've taken
a fancy to you, but it s just got to be done.

Why add murder to your other crimes? It s a grave step
you're taking.

I'm not taking it for fun. I've been hunted long enough.
I'm wanted for murder already, and they can t hang me
twice.

You're planning a gratuitous double, so to speak. Admitted
you've nothing to lose, but what have you to gain?

I've got freedom to gain. As for myself, I m a poor hunted
rat. As Vincent Charles Gerrard I m free to go places and
do nothing. I can eat well and sleep and without having
to be ready to beat it at the sight of a cop.

In most melodramas the villain is foolish enough to delay
his killing long enough to be frustrated. You are much
luckier.

Reprint 2025-26

hl

INTRUDER

GERRARD
INTRUDER

GERRARD

INTRUDER
GERRARD

INTRUDER
GERRARD
INTRUDER

GERRARD
INTRUDER

GERRARD
INTRUDER

GERRARD
INTRUDER

GERRARD
INTRUDER

GERRARD

a *

I'm O.K. I ve got a reason for everything. I m going to be
Vincent Charles Gerrard, see. I ve got to know what he
talks like. Now I know. That posh stuff comes easy. This
is Mr V.C. Gerrard speaking. (Pantomime of phoning, in
imitation cultured voice.) And that s not all. (He stands
up.) Get up a minute (Gerrard stands.) Now take a look at
me.

You're not particularly decorative.

No! Well, that goes for you, too. I ve only got to wear
specs and I'll be enough like you to get away with it.
What about your clothes? They'll let you down if you re
not careful.

That'll be all right. Yours will fit me fine.

That is extremely interesting, but you seem to miss the
point of my remark. I said, you were luckier than most
melodramatic villains. It was not a tribute to your
intelligence. You won t kill me for a very good reason.
So that s what you think.

You'll let me go, and thank God you didn t shoot sooner.
Come on. What s on your mind! Better be quick. This
conversation bores me.

Your idea is to elude the police by killing me and taking
on my identity?

Yes, I like the idea.

But are you sure it s going to help you?

Now listen here. I ve got this all planned. I did a job in
town. Things went wrong and I killed a cop. Since then
I've done nothing but dodge.

And this is where dodging has brought you?

It brought me to Aylesbury. That s where I saw you in the
car. Two other people saw you and started to talk. I
listened. It looks like youre a bit queer kind of a mystery
man.

A mystery which I propose to explain.

(disregarding him) You phone your orders and sometimes
you go away suddenly and come back just the same.
Those are just the things I want to do. Hearing about you
was one of my luckiest breaks.

Apparently you haven't the intelligence to ask why I am
invested in this cloak of mystery.

ot

IfI Were You / 113 @&

Reprint 2025-26

INTRUDER
GERRARD

INTRUDER
GERRARD

INTRUDER

GERRARD

INTRUDER
GERRARD

INTRUDER
GERRARD

INTRUDER

GERRARD

& 114 / Beehive

(preparing to shoot) As I said before, this conversation
bores me.

Don t be a fool. If you shoot, you'll hang for sure. If not as
yourself, then as Vincent Charles Gerrard.

What is this?

This is your big surprise. I said you wouldn t kill me and
I was right. Why do you think I am here today and gone
tomorrow, never see tradespeople? You say my habits
would suit you. You are a crook. Do you think I am a
Sunday-school teacher?

The game s up as far as I m concerned. Things went
wrong with me. I said it with bullets and got away.
Unfortunately they got one of my men, and found things
the fool should have burnt. Tonight I m expecting trouble.
My bag s packed ready to clear off. There it is.

It s a bag all right and
this is a gun all right.
What s all this?

That s a disguise outfit;
false moustaches and
what not. Now do you
believe me?

(musingly) 1 don t know.
For God s sake clear
that muddled head of
yours and let s go.
Come with me in the
car. I can use you. If you
find it s a frame, you ve
got me in the car, and
you've still got your gun.
May be your're right.
Then don t waste time.
(Goes and picks up hat //
and bag.) ( |
Careful, boss, I m
watching you.

I have got a man posted
on the main road. He'll Gerrard gives him a push
ring up if he sees the into the cupboard...

Reprint 2025-26

hl

INTRUDER
GERRARD

INTRUDER
GERRARD

a *

police, but I don t want to leave... (telephone bell rings)
Come on! They re after us. Through here straight to
the garage.

How do I know that you are telling the truth?

Oh, don t be a fool. Look for yourself.

(Gerrard opens door and steps away. Intruder leans forward
to inspect it, with his side towards Gerrard, but with the
revolver ready. As he turns his head, Gerrard gives him a
push into the cupboard, knocking the revolver out of his
hand. He slams the door and locks it, picks up the revolver
and goes to the phone, where he stands with the gun pointed
at the cupboard door.)

(rattles door and shouts) Let me out of here!

Hello. Yes, speaking. Sorry I can t let you have the props
in time for rehearsal, I ve had a spot of bother quite
amusing. I think I'll put it in my next play. Listen, can
you tell our friend the Sergeant to come up here at once?
You'll probably find him in the Public Bar.

DOUGLAS JAMES

%
 Thinking about the Text

I. Answer these questions.

1. At last a sympathetic audience. 
(i) Who says this?
(ii) Why does he say it?
(iii) Is he sarcastic or serious?

2. Why does the intruder choose Gerrard as the man whose identity he wants
to take on?

3. I said it with bullets. 
(i) Who says this?
(ii) What does it mean?
(iii) Is it the truth? What is the speaker s reason for saying this?

4. What is Gerrard s profession? Quote the parts of the play that support your

answer.

5. You'll soon stop being smart. 
(i) Who says this?

IfI Were You / 115 @&

Reprint 2025-26

(ii) Why does the speaker say it?
(iii) What according to the speaker will stop Gerrard from being smart?

6. They can t hang me twice. 
(i) Who says this?
(ii) Why does the speaker say it?
7. A mystery I propose to explain. What is the mystery the speaker proposes
to explain?
8. This is your big surprise. 
(i) Where has this been said in the play?
(ii) What is the surprise?

3 Thinking about Language
I. Consult your dictionary and choose the correct word from the pairs given in
brackets.
1. The (site, cite) of the accident was (ghastly/ghostly).
Our college (principle/principal) is very strict.
I studied (continuously/continually) for eight hours.
The fog had an adverse (affect/effect) on the traffic.

Cezanne, the famous French painter, was a brilliant (artist/artiste).

oak wD

The book that you gave me yesterday is an extraordinary (collage/college) of
science fiction and mystery.

7. Our school will (host/hoist) an exhibition on cruelty to animals and wildlife
conservation.

8. Screw the lid tightly onto the top of the bottle and (shake/shape) well before
using the contents.

I

il

. Irony is when we say one thing but mean another, usually the opposite of what
we say. When someone makes a mistake and you say, Oh! that was clever! ,
that is irony. You re saying clever to mean not clever .

Expressions we often use in an ironic fashion are:
e Oh, wasn t that clever!/Oh that was clever!
e You have been a great help, I must say!

e You've got yourself into a lovely mess, haven t you?

e Oh, very funny!/ How funny!

We use a slightly different tone of voice when we use these words ironically.

Read the play carefully and find the words and expressions Gerrard uses in an
ironic way. Then say what these expressions really mean. Two examples have

& 116 / Beehive

Reprint 2025-26

hl

been given below. Write down three more such expressions along with what
they really mean.

What he means

What the author says

Why, this is a surprise, Mr er | He pretends that the intruder is a
social visitor whom he is welcoming.

In this way he hides his fear.

At last a sympathetic audience! He pretends that the intruder wants
to listen to him, whereas actually
the intruder wants to find out

information for his own use.

&

 % Dictionary Use
A word can mean different things in different contexts. Look at these three
sentences:
e The students are taught to respect different cultures.
e The school is organising a cultural show.
e His voice is cultured.
In the first sentence, culture (noun) means way of life; in the second, cultural 
(adjective) means connected with art, literature and music; and in the third,
 cultured (verb) means sophisticated, well mannered. Usually a dictionary helps
you identify the right meaning by giving you signposts.
Look at the dictionary entry on culture from Oxford Advanced Learner s

Dictionary, 2005.

cul-tural Or /KaltSaral/ adj. [usually before noun}

1 connected with the culture of a particular society or
group, its customs, beliefs, etc.: cultural differences between the two communities economic, social and cultural
factors 2 connected with art, literature, music, etc.: a
cultural event Europe s cultural heritage The orchestra
is very important for the cultural life of the city. cuf-tural-ly /-rali/ adv.

cul-ture Ow /kaltfacry/ noun, verb

@ noun

> WAY OF LIFE 1% [U] the customs and beliefs, art, way of
life and social organization of a particular country or
group: European/Islamic/African/American, etc. culture working-class culture 2 [Cc] a country, group, etc.
with its own beliefs, etc.: The children are taught to respect
different cultures. the effect of technology on traditional
cultures

 ART/MUSIC/LITERATURE 3 [U] art, music, literature, etc.,
thought of as a group: Venice is a beautiful city full of culture and history. o popular culture (= that is enjoyed bya
lot of people) the Minister for Culture

 BELIEFS/ATTITUDES 4 [C,U] the beliefs and attitudes
about sth that people in a particular group or organization share: The political cultures of the United States and
Europe are very different. A culture of failure exists in
some schools. company culture o We are living in a consumer culture.

* GROWING/BREEDING 5 [U] (technical) the growing of
plants or breeding of particular animals in order to get a
particular substance or crop from them: the culture of silkworms (= for silk)

 CELLS/BACTERIA 6 [C] (biology, medical) a group of ceils
or bacteria, especially one taken from a person or an animal and grown for medical or scientific study, or to produce food; the process of obtaining and growing these
cells: a culture of cells from the cumour Yogurt is made
from active cultures. to do/take a throat culture

@ verb [VN] (biology, medical) to grow a group of cells or
bacteria for medical or scientific study

cul-tured / kaltfad; NAmE -tJard/ adj. 1 (of people) well

educated and able to understand and enjoy art, literature, etc. EAI CULTIVATED 2 (of cells or bacteria) grown
for medical or scientific study 3 (of PEARLS) grown artificially

IfI Were You / 117 @

Reprint 2025-26

(Noun, verb, adjective, adverb, synonyms, etc. are signposts which help you
locate the right meaning and usage, and give information about the part of
speech that the word is.)

Look up the dictionary entries for the words sympathy, familiarity, comfort, care,
and surprise. Use the information given in the dictionary and complete the table.

Noun Adjective Adverb Verb Meaning
sympathy

familiarity

comfort

care

surprise

&
oi Speaking
1. Imagine you are Gerrard. Tell your friend what happened when the Intruder

broke into your house.

[Clues : Describe (i) the intruder his appearance, the way he spoke, his
plan, his movements, etc., (ii) how you outwitted him.]

2. Enact the play in the class. Pay special attention to words given in italics
before a dialogue. These words will tell you whether the dialogue has to be
said in a happy, sarcastic or ironic tone and how the characters move and
what they do as they speak. Read these carefully before you enact the play.

he
pe Writing

I. Which of the words below describe Gerrard and which describe the Intruder?

smart humorous clever
beautiful cool confident
flashy witty nonchalant

Write a paragraph each about Gerrard and the Intruder to show what qualities
they have. (You can use some of the words given above.)

II. Convert the play into a story (150-200 words). Your story should be as exciting
and as witty as the play. Provide a suitable title to it.

& 118 / Beehive

Reprint 2025-26