i a a ee ee eS
OOOO Saar aw eat ad deat dead ad dead dea dead dt Dd di dd

In this chapter, we will study some interesting types of four-sided
figures and solve problems based on them. Such figures are commonly
known as quadrilaterals. The word quadrilateral is derived from Latin
words quadri meaning four, and latus referring to sides.

2 Observe the following figures.

LBA

(ii) (iii)

ana

(iv) (v)

Figs. (i), (ii), and (iii) are quadrilaterals, and the others are not. Why?

The angles of a quadrilateral are the angles between its sides, as
marked in Figs. (i), (ii), and (iii).

We will start with the most familiar quadrilaterals rectangles and
squares.

Chapter 4 Quadrilaterals 06-07-2025.indd 82

~~ 

7/10/2025 3:19:32 PM

Quadrilaterals

4.1 Rectangles and Squares

We know what rectangles are. Let us define them.

Rectangle: A rectangle is a quadrilateral in which 
(i) The angles are all right angles (90 ), and
(ii) The opposite sides are of equal length.

The definition precisely states the conditions a quadrilateral has to
satisfy to be called a rectangle.

2 Are there other ways to define a rectangle?

Let us consider the following problem related to the construction of
rectangles.

A Carpenter s Problem

2 A carpenter needs to put together B
two thin strips of wood, as shown
in Fig. 1, so that when a thread is
passed through their endpoints, it
forms a rectangle.

She already has one 8 cm long
strip. What should be the length of
the other strip? Where should they
both be joined?

Let us first model the structure Fig. 1
that the carpenter has to make. The
strips can be modelled as line segments. They are the diagonals of the
quadrilateral formed by their endpoints. For the quadrilateral to be a
rectangle, we need to answer the following questions 

(?) 1. What is the length of the other diagonal?
(?) 2. What is the point of intersection of the two diagonals?
(?) 3. What should the angle be between the diagonals?

(?) Let us answer these questions using ,
geometric reasoning (deduction). If
that is challenging, try to construct/
measure some rectangles.

To find the answers to these AC=8cm
questions, let us suppose that we
have placed the diagonals such that
their endpoints form the vertices of
a rectangle, as shown in Fig. 2. A D

Fig. 2 .
o

Ganita Prakash | Grade 8

Deduction 1 What is the length of the other diagonal?

This can be deduced using congruence as follows 

B Cc

Since ABCD is a rectangle, we have
AB = CD

ZBAD = ZCDA = 90 

AD is common to both triangles.

So, AADC = ADAB by the SAS congruence
condition. A

Common side

Therefore, AC = BD, since they are corresponding parts of congruent
triangles. This shows that the diagonals of a rectangle always have the
same length.

So the other diagonal must also be 8 cm long. You can verify this
property by constructing/measuring some rectangles.

Deduction 2 Whatis the point of intersection of the two diagonals?

This can also be found using congruence. Since we need to know the
relation between OA and OC, and OB and OD, which two triangles of the
rectangle ABCD should we consider?

B C B Cc
A D A D

The blue angles are equal since In order to show congruence,
they are vertically opposite consider 71 and 72. Are they
angles. equal?
B C B C
A D A D
Since 4B = 90 , In ABCD, since
23+ Z1 = 90 . 23 + 22 + 90 = 180,

we have 43 +22 = 90 .

Quadrilaterals

So, 21 = 22 (= 90 - 43).
Thus, by the AAS condition for congruence, AAOB ~ ACOD.

Hence OA = OC and OB = OD, since they are corresponding parts of
congruent triangles. So, O is the midpoint of AC and BD.

This shows that the diagonals of a rectangle always intersect at
their midpoints.

Therefore, to get a rectangle, the diagonals must be drawn so that
they are equal and intersect at their midpoints.

When the diagonals cross at their midpoints, we say that the diagonals bisect
each other. Bisecting a quantity means dividing it into two equal parts.

Verify this property by constructing some rectangles and measuring
their diagonals and the points of intersection.

aa ,
(?) Can the following equalities be used to establish that AAOD ~ ACOB? (ath P
Ta

AO = CO (proved above)
ZAOB = ZCOD (vertically opposite angles)
AD = CB

Deduction 3 What are the angles between the diagonals?

Let us check what quadrilateral we get ifwe draw the A B
two diagonals such that their lengths are equal, they
bisect each other and have an arbitrary angle, say
60 , between them as shown in the figure to the right.

(?) Can you find all the remaining angles? )

OQ We can find the remaining angles between the
\ diagonals using our understanding of vertically
opposite angles and linear pairs.

In AAOB, since OA = OB, the angles opposite them
are equal, say a.

(?) Can you find the value of a?

 

Ganita Prakash | Grade 8

In AAOB, we have,

a+a+ 60 = 180 (interior angles of a triangle).
Therefore 2a = 120.

Thus a= 60.

Similarly, we can find the values of all the other angles.
A

D
(?) Can we now identify what type of quadrilateral ABCD is?
Notice that its angles all add up to 90 (30 + 60 ).
(?) What can we say about its sides?

yx om
D re D Cc

We can see that AAOB = ACOD and AAOD = ACOB. Hence, AB = CD, and
AD = CB, since they are corresponding parts of congruent triangles.

Therefore, ABCD is a rectangle since it satisfies the definition of a
rectangle.

A

Will ABCD remain a rectangle if the angles between the
diagonals are changed? Can we generalise this? x

Take one of the angles between the diagonals as x.

Quadrilaterals

We can compute the four angles between the
diagonals to be x, x, 180 x, and 180 x.

180 - x(X )180 - x (?) Can you find the other angles?

C
Since we know that AAOB is isosceles, we can A
denote the measures of both of its base angles by a.
(?) What is the value of a (in degrees) in terms of x?
We have,
at+a+x=180
(sum of the interior angles of a triangle)
2a = 180-x
_ (180 x)
a=

=90- 5 D
Similarly, in the isosceles AAOD, let the base angles be b.
b+b+180- x=180

2b = 180 - (180 x)
2b = 180-180 + x
2b=x

_x
b=5.

All the angles of the quadrilateral are a + b, which is

90-5 +5= 90.
Thus, all four angles of the quadrilateral ABCD are 90 .

(?) What can we say about AB and CD, and AD and BC? D

We have AAOB =~ ACOD and AAOD = ACOB. Hence, AB = CD, and AD = CB,
since they are the corresponding parts of congruent triangles.

Ganita Prakash | Grade 8

Hence, no matter what the angles between the diagonals are, if the
diagonals are equal and they bisect each other, then the angles of the
quadrilateral formed are 90 each, and the opposite sides are equal.
Thus, the quadrilateral is a rectangle.

Now we know how the wooden strips have to be put together to form
the vertices of a rectangle! They should be equal and connected at their
midpoints.

This method is actually used in practice to
make rectangles. Carpenters in Europe use
this method to get a rectangular frame. It is
also known that farmers in Mozambique,
a country in Africa, use this method while
constructing houses to get the base of the
house in a rectangular shape.

The Process of Finding Properties

As we have been seeing from lower grades,
properties of geometric objects such as parallel
lines, angles, and triangles can be deduced through geometric reasoning.
We will continue to deduce properties of special types of quadrilaterals
in this chapter.

Once you have deduced a property of a quadrilateral, it is good to verify
it with a real-world quadrilateral, either the quadrilateral constructed
on paper or simply a surface having the shape of the quadrilateral.

If you are not able to figure out the property using deduction, you
could experiment by taking real-world quadrilaterals and observing the
property through measurement. Note that these observations give
useful insights about the property, but with them, we can only form a
conjecture, that is, a statement about which we are highly confident,
but not yet sure if it always holds true. For example, constructing a
few rectangles and observing through measurement that their diagonals
bisect each other does not necessarily mean that this will always be the
case can we be sure that the 1000th rectangle we construct will also
have this property? The only way we can be sure of this property is by

; Note to the Teacher: Gently encourage students to deduce or justify properties. ,
1 Whenever students face challenges in doing it, encourage them to experiment and |

| observe, and use their intuition to figure out the properties.

Quadrilaterals

The Carpenter s Problem shows that rectangles can also be defined as
follows 

Rectangle: A rectangle is a quadrilateral whose diagonals are equal
and bisect each other.

Observe how different this definition is from the earlier one. Yet, both
capture the same class of quadrilaterals. Further, it turns out that the
first definition can be simplified.

2 In the earlier definition, we stated that a rectangle has (a) opposite sides
of equal length, and (b) all angles equal to 90 . Would we be wrong if we
just define a rectangle as a quadrilateral in which all the angles are 90 ?

2 If you think that this definition is incomplete, try constructing a
quadrilateral in which the angles are all 90 but the opposite sides are
not equal.

Are you able to construct such a quadrilateral?
Let us prove why this is impossible.

Deduction 4 What is the shape of a quadrilateral with all the
angles equal to 90 ?

(?) Consider a quadrilateral ABCD with all angles measuring 90 . What can
we say about the opposite sides of such a quadrilateral?
Join BD. ABAD and ADCB seem congruent. Can we justify this claim?
B C

Two equalities can be directly
seen in the triangles. What can we
say about 71 and 22?

A D

Recall that we tackled a very similar problem in Deduction 2. We can
use the same reasoning here.
B C

Since 4B = 90 , In ABCD, since :
23+ Z1 = 90 . 23 + 22 + 90 = 180 , (39)
oni 23+ 22 = 90 .

Ganita Prakash | Grade 8

So, 71 = 22.
Thus, by the AAS congruence condition, ABAD = ADCB.

Therefore, AD = CB, and DC = BA, since these are corresponding sides
of congruent triangles.

(?) Is it wrong to write ABAD = ACDB? Why?

Thus, we have established that if all the angles of a quadrilateral are
right angles, then the opposite sides have equal lengths. Therefore, the
quadrilateral is a rectangle. Thus, a rectangle can simply be defined as
follows 

Rectangle: A rectangle is a quadrilateral in which the angles are all 90 .
Let us list the properties of a rectangle.
Property 1: All the angles of a rectangle are 90 .

Property 2: The opposite sides of a rectangle are equal.

2 Are the opposite sides of a rectangle parallel?

They definitely seem so. This fact can be justified using one of the
transversal properties.

Noticethat ABactsasatransversaltoAD 8 Cc
and BC, and that 7A + 7B = 90 + 90 = 180 .

When the sum of the internal angles on
the same side of the transversal is 180 ,
the lines are parallel. We can use this fact
to conclude that the lines AD and BC are
parallel, which we represent as AD | | BC.

Can you similarly show that AB is A
parallel to DC (AB| | DC)?

Property 3: The opposite sides of a rectangle are parallel to each other.

Property 4: The diagonals of a rectangle are of equal length and they
bisect each other.

A Special Rectangle
In the quadrilaterals below, are there any non-rectangles?

3.6 cm.

4cm
5 o sn 4
Q
g cm 5 g 3 2 6
. S % 5m *
5 cm 3 <
4cm

3.6cm

c
eka

(i) Gi) (iii) (iv)

Quadrilaterals

All these quadrilaterals are rectangles, including (iv). Quadrilateral
(iv) is a rectangle because all its angles are 90 . However, it is a special
kind of rectangle with all sides of equal length. We know that this
quadrilateral is also called a square.

Square: A square is a quadrilateral in which all the angles are equal
to 90 , and all the sides are of equal length.

Thus, every square is also a rectangle, but clearly every rectangle is
not a square.

Wait, which one of

them are you an
Indian or a Malayali?
How can you be both?

Taman
Indian
andIama
Malayali.

This relation can be pictorially represented using a Venn diagram.
We have seen these diagrams before. In a Venn diagram, a set of objects
is represented as points inside a closed curve. Typically, these closed
curves are ovals or circles.

For example, the set of all squares is represented as

Each point in the region represents a square, thereby covering all the
possible squares.

Since every square is a rectangle, the Venn diagram representation of
these two sets would be as follows 

Ganita Prakash | Grade 8

2 Let us consider the Carpenter s Problem again. If the wooden strips
have to be placed such that the thread passing through their endpoints
forms a square, what must be done?

As in the previous case, let us try to
construct a square, one of whose diagonals is
of length 8 cm.

While solving the Carpenter s Problem for
the case of a rectangle, we have seen that to
get a quadrilateral with all angles 90 (and
opposite sides of equal length), the diagonals
have to be drawn such that 

(i) they are of equal lengths, and
A D (ii) they bisect each other.

B Cc

(?) What more needs to be done to get equal sidelengths as well? Can this be
achieved by properly choosing the angle between the diagonals?
See if you can reason and/or experiment to figure this out!

Deduction 5 What should be the angle formed by the diagonals?

The angle between the diagonals can be found using the notion of congruence!
Suppose we join the equal diagonals such that they bisect each other
and result in a square. Let us label the square ABCD.

To find the angle formed by the diagonals, what are the two triangles
we should consider for congruence?

A

B

By the SSS condition for congruence,
ABOA = ABOC

D C
(?) Can this be used to find the angles BOA and /BOC formed by the
diagonals?

Since these angles are corresponding parts of congruent triangles,
they are equal. Further, these angles together form a straight angle. So
ZBOA + ZBOC = 180 . Thus, these angles have to be 90 each.

Quadrilaterals

This shows that the diagonals of a square bisect each other at right
angles. This means that the diagonals have to be drawn such that they are
of equal lengths and bisect each other at right angles. Since the endpoints
of the diagonals uniquely determine the vertices of a quadrilateral, we
will get a square when the diagonals are joined this way.

2 Using this fact, construct a square with a diagonal of length 8 cm.

Properties of a Square

Since a square is a special type of rectangle, all the properties of a
rectangle hold true for a square.

2 Verify if this is true by going through geometric reasoning in Deduction
1 and Deduction 2, and see if they apply to a square as well.
Property 1: All the sides of a square are equal to each other.
Property 2: The opposite sides of a square are parallel to each other.
Property 3: The angles of a square are all 90 .

Property 4: The diagonals of a square are of equal length and they bisect
each other at 90 .
There is one more special property of a square.

2 What are the measures of 41, 72, 73, and 24? See if you can reason
and/or experiment to figure this out!

In AADC, we have,

Z1+ 23 +90 = 180

Since AD = DC, we have 41 = 23.
Thus, 71 = 23 = 45 .

D

Similarly, find 72 and 24.
Thus, we have another property of a square 

Property 5: The diagonals of a square divide the angles of the square into
equal halves. This can also be expressed as The diagonals
of a square bisect the angles of the square.

Ganita Prakash | Grade 8

2 Figure it Out
1. Find all the other angles inside the following rectangles.

Soo Sa
Fr
A B
(i P (ii .
2. Draw a quadrilateral whose diagonals have equal lengths of 8 cm
that bisect each other, and intersect at an angle of

(i) 30 (ii) 40 (iii) 90 (iv) 140 

3. Consider a circle with centre O. Line segments PL and AM are two
perpendicular diameters of the circle. What is the figure APML?
Reason and/or experiment to figure this out.

4. We have seen how to get 90 using paper folding. Now, suppose /yj, he J
we do not have any paper but two sticks of equal length, anda _ \ Talk

thread. How do we make an exact 90 using these?

sides are parallel. Can this be chosen as a definition of a rectangle?
In other words, is every quadrilateral that has opposite sides
parallel and equal, a rectangle? ;

5. Wesaw that one of the properties ofa rectangle is thatits opposite |
ap

4.2 Angles in a Quadrilateral

2 Is it possible to construct a quadrilateral with three angles equal to 90 
and the fourth angle not equal to 90 ?

You might have observed through constructions that this may not be
possible.

2 But why not?

This is due to a general property of quadrilaterals related to their
angles.

We have seen that the sum of the angles of a triangle is 180 . There is
a similar regularity in the sum of the angles of a quadrilateral.

Consider a quadrilateral SOME. al
Draw a diagonal SM. We get two S
triangles ASEM and ASOM. 2

In ASEM, we have 41 + 22 + 23 = 180 .
And in ASOM, 24 + 25 + 26 = 180 .

What do we get when we add all six
angles?

We will have A\
Alt 22+ 23+ 24+ 25 + 26= 180" + 180 A (N
= 360 .
Or, (21+ 24) + (23 + 26) +22 + 25 = 360 .
Since (41+ 24),(23+ 26), 72 and 45 are the angles ofthis quadrilateral,
we have the following result 

The sum of all angles in any quadrilateral is 360 .

This explains why it is impossible for a quadrilateral to have three
right angles, with the fourth angle not right angle.

E

4.3 More Quadrilaterals with Parallel Opposite
Sides

Rectangles (and therefore squares) have parallel opposite sides.

2 Are there quadrilaterals that have parallel opposite sides that are not

rectangles?
Let us try constructing one.

This can be easily done by drawing two pairs of parallel lines, ensuring
that they do not meet at right angles.

2 Construct such a figure by recalling how parallel lines can be

constructed using a ruler and a set-square,
or a compass and a ruler.

Observe the quadrilateral ABCD. It has
parallel opposite sides but is not a rectangle.

Thus, a larger set of quadrilaterals exists
in which the opposite sides are parallel. Such
quadrilaterals are called parallelograms.

Ganita Prakash | Grade 8

2 Is a rectangle a parallelogram?

A rectangle has opposite sides parallel. So, it satisfies the
parallelogram s definition. Hence, it is indeed a parallelogram. More
specifically, a rectangle is a special kind of parallelogram with all its
angles equal to 90 .

Let us represent this relation using a Venn diagram.

To understand the relations between the sides and the angles of a
parallelogram, let us construct the following figure.

D
2 Draw a parallelogram with adjacent 5cm

sides of lengths 4 cm and 5 cm, and

an angle of 30 between them.

A 4cm B D

. 5cm
Step 1: Draw line segments AB = 4
cm and AD = 5 cm with an angle of ;
30 between them. %0 F

A
4cm

Step 2: Draw a line parallel to AB D C
through the point D, and a line
parallel to AD through B. Mark the 5cem
point at which these lines intersect
as C. Z )
A 4cm B

ABCD is the required parallelogram.

2 What are the remaining angles of the parallelogram? What are the
lengths of the remaining sides? See if you can reason out and/or

experiment to figure these out.
6)

Quadrilaterals

2 Deduction 6 What can we say about the angles of a parallelogram?
In the parallelogram ABCD, AB| | CD, and AD is a transversal to them.

ZA + ZD = 180 (sum of the D

internal angles on the same side of

a transversal). scm
Therefore,

ZD = 180 ZA = 180 30 = 150 . a
Similarly, AD||BC, and AB and

CD are transversals to them. A 4cm

So, ZA + ZB = 180 .

So, ZC + ZD = 180 .
Using these equations, we get 7B = 150 and /C = 30 .

We see that in this parallelogram, the adjacent pairs of angles add
up to 180 and opposite pairs of angles are equal.
Thus,

ZA + ZB = 180 , ZA + ZD = 180 , ZC + ZD = 180 , and ZB + ZC = 180 .
And,
ZA = ZC, and ZB = ZD.

Since the adjacent angles are the interior angles on the same side of
a transversal to a pair of parallel lines, they must add up to 180 .

(?) What about the opposite angles? Will they be equal in all parallelograms?
If yes, how can we be sure? R

Let us take one of the angles to be x.
What are the other angles?
Since ZP + ZR = 180 ,
ZR= 180- ZP = 180 -x.
Similarly, since 7A + ZR = 180 ,
ZA=180- ZR= 180 - (180 x) = 180-180 + x=x.
Thus, 7P = ZA =x. P E
Similarly, we can deduce that 7 R= ZE= 180-x.
Therefore, this shows that the opposite angles of a parallelogram
are always equal.

2 Deduction 7 What can we say about the sides of a parallelogram?

By looking at a parallelogram, it appears that the opposite sides are
equal.

Can we again use congruence to show this? Which two triangles can
be considered for this?

Ganita Prakash | Grade 8

In AABD and ACDB, the angles
marked with a single arc are equal
as they are the opposite angles of a
parallelogram.

Since AD | | BC,and BDisatransversal
to it, the angles marked with double
arcs are equal as they are alternate
angles. A B

So, by the AAS condition, the
triangles are congruent, that is, AABD = ACDB.

Therefore, AD = CB, and AB = CD.
Thus, the opposite sides of a parallelogram are equal.

(?) Is it wrong to write AABD = ACBD? Why?

From these deductions we can find the remaining sides and angles of
the parallelogram.

Let us list the properties of a parallelogram.
Property 1: The opposite sides of a parallelogram are equal.
Property 2: The opposite sides of a parallelogram are parallel.
Property 3: In a parallelogram, the adjacent angles add up to 180 , and
the opposite angles are equal.

2 Are the diagonals of a parallelogram always equal? Check with the
parallelogram that you have constructed.
We see that the diagonals of a parallelogram need not be equal.

2 Do they bisect each other (do they intersect at their midpoints)? Reason
and/or experiment to figure this out.

Deduction 8 What is the point of intersection of the two diagonals
in a parallelogram?

As in the case of a rectangle, we can find out if the diagonals bisect
each other by examining the congruence of AAOE and AYOS in the
parallelogram EASY.

Quadrilaterals

S
AE = YS (as they are the opposite sides

of the parallelogram)

The angles marked using a single arc
are equal, and so are the angles marked
using a double arc, since they are alternate
angles of parallel lines.

Thus, by the ASA condition, the triangles
are congruent, that is,

AAOE = AYOS.
Therefore, OA = OY, and OE = OS, since they are corresponding parts
of congruent triangles.

Thus, O is the midpoint of both diagonals.
(?) Is it wrong to write AAOE = ASOY? Why?
Property 4: The diagonals of a parallelogram bisect each other.

2 Do the diagonals of a parallelogram intersect at a particular angle?

4.4 Quadrilaterals with Equal Sidelengths

2 Are squares the only quadrilaterals that have
equal sidelengths? Let us explore this question D
through construction.

Draw two equal sides AD and AB, that are
not perpendicular to each other.
A B

2 Can we complete this quadrilateral so that all its sides are of the same
length?
Mark a point C whose distance from
B and Dis equal to AB (or AD). To do this,
measure AB using a compass. Keeping
this length as the radius, cut arcs from
B and D.

/\

Now we have a quadrilateral with , B
equal sidelengths and one of its angles
50 . Note that we could have constructed
such a quadrilateral by taking any angle less than 180 (in place of 50 ).

A quadrilateral in which all the sides have the same length is a
rhombus.

Ganita Prakash | Grade 8

2 What are the other angles of the rhombus ABCD that we have
constructed? Reason and/or experiment to figure this out.

Deduction 9 What can we say about the angles in a rhombus?

Consider a rhombus GAME. M

In AGAE, since GE = GA, a= d.
Similarly, in AMAE, since ME = MA,
b=c.

(?) It can be seen that AGAE = AMAE

(How?) (\/

So,a=b,c=dand 4G = ZM (since 
they are corresponding parts of congruent triangles).
Thus, we have, a=b=c=d.

These facts hold for any rhombus. Let us apply them to the rhombus
ABCD that we constructed earlier. Let the four equal angles formed by
the diagonal be a, as shown in the figure

In AADB, we have
at+a+50=180 .
So, a= 65 .

Thus, the angles of the rhombus ABCD
are 50 , 130 , 50 , and 130 .

So, in a rhombus opposite angles are
equal to each other.

Interestingly, there is one more way by

which we could have figured out the other
angles of the rhombus ABCD. We have

shown that in a general rhombus GAME, the four angles formed by a
diagonal are equal to each other.

WD
G Cy G

Consider the lines EM and GA andits Similarly consider the lines GE
transversal AE. Since the alternate and AM and its transversal AE.
angles are equal, EM| |GA. Since the alternate angles are

; equal, GE| | AM.

Quadrilaterals

As opposite sides are parallel, GAME
is also a parallelogram. Thus, every
rhombus is a parallelogram, and the
properties of a parallelogram hold
true for a rhombus as well. Thus, the
adjacent angles of arhombus add up to
180 , and the opposite angles are equal 8
(verify that the arguments in Deduction 6 can be applied to a rhombus
as well!).

Thus, in rhombus ABCD,

ZA = ZC = 50 , and
ZD = ZB = 180 50 = 130 .

2 So arhombus is a parallelogram, anda rectangle is also a parallelogram.
How can this be represented using a Venn diagram?

2 Where will the set of squares occur in this diagram?

We know that a square is a rectangle. Since the opposite sides of a
square are parallel, a square is also a parallelogram. Further, since all
the sides of a square have the same length, a square is also a rhombus.
Thus, the Venn diagram will be as follows.

Parallelogram

Rectangle Rhombus

Square

Let us list the properties of a rhombus.
Property 1: All the sides of a rhombus are equal to each other.
Property 2: The opposite sides of a rhombus are parallel to each other.
Property 3: In a rhombus, the adjacent angles add up to 180 , and the
opposite angles are equal.
2 Are the diagonals of a rhombus equal?

Property 4: The diagonals of a rhombus bisect each other.
Property 5: The diagonals of a rhombus bisect its angles. (104)
Ganita Prakash | Grade 8

2 Do the diagonals of arhombus intersect at any particular angle? Reason

out and/or experiment to figure this out!

Deduction 10 What can we say about the angles formed by the
diagonals of a rhombus at their point of intersection?

E M
(?) In the rhombus GAME, we have
AGEO =~ AMEO (why?).
So, ZGOE = ZMOE, as they are
corresponding parts of congruent
triangles. As they add up to 180 ,
they should be 90 each. G s

Property 6: Diagonals of a rhombus intersect each other at an angle of
90 .

2 Figure it Out

1. Find the remaining angles in the following quadrilaterals.
(i) R A (ii)

YA

Pp E

X Ww ww)

2. Using the diagonal properties, construct a parallelogram whose
diagonals are of lengths 7 cm and 5 cm, and intersect at an angle of
140 .

(iii)

3. Using the diagonal properties, construct a rhombus whose diagonals
are of lengths 4cm and 5 cm.

Quadrilaterals

4.5 Playing with Quadrilaterals

Geoboard Activity

Take a geoboard and some rubber bands. If you do not have these, you
could just use the dot grid papers given at the end of the book for this
activity.

Place two rubber bands perpendicular to each other, forming
diagonals of equal length. Join the ends.

2 What is the quadrilateral that you get? Justify your answer.
Extend one of the diagonals on both sides by 2 cm.

2 What quadrilateral will you get now? Justify your answer.

Ganita Prakash | Grade 8

Joining Triangles

1. Take two cardboard cutouts of an equilateral triangle of sidelength

8 cm.
& om & cs)
3 % %

8cm 8cm

2 Can you join them to get a quadrilateral?

2 What type of a quadrilateral is this? Justify your answer.

2. Take two cardboard cutouts of an isosceles triangle with sidelengths
8 cm, 8 cm, and 6 cm.

g cs s e
x i\
6cm 6cm

2 Whatare the different ways they can be joined to geta quadrilateral?
Joining them in this Joining them in this
way you get way you get
6cm

om
ie) 8 on
 
8 Crm Fe) om
6cm

(404) 2 What quadrilaterals are these? Justify your answers.
Quadrilaterals

3. Take two cardboard cutouts of a scalene triangle with sides 6 cm,
9 cm, and 12 cm.

12cm 12cm
2 Whatare the different ways they can be joined to geta quadrilateral?
Are you able to identify the different quadrilaterals that are

obtained by joining the triangles? Justify your answer whenever
you identify a quadrilateral.

4.6 Kite and Trapezium
Kite

One of the ways the two triangles of sides 6 cm, 9 cm and 12 cm can be
joined together is as follows 

This quadrilateral looks like a kite. Observe that
the adjacent sides are of the same length.

Kite: A kite is a quadrilateral that can be labelled
ABCD such that AB = BC, and CD = DA. A Cc

2 Property 1: In the kite, show that the diagonal BD
(i) bisects ZABC and ZADC,

(ii) bisects the diagonal AC, that is,
AO = OC, and is perpendicular to it.
Hint: Is AAOB ~ ACOB?

Ganita Prakash | Grade 8

Trapezium

Parallelograms are quadrilaterals that have
parallel opposite sides. We get a new type
of quadrilateral if we relax this condition.
Trapezium: A trapezium is a quadrilateral
with at least one pair of parallel opposite
sides. S

2 Construct a trapezium. Measure the base angles (marked in the figure).

2 Can you find the remaining angles without measuring them?
Since PQ| |SR, we have

Property 1: 7 S + 7P = 180 and R + 2Q = 180 .
Using these facts, the remaining angles can easily be found. Verify
your answer after finding them.

When the non-parallel sides of a trapezium have the same lengths,
the trapezium is called an isosceles trapezium.

2 How do we construct an isosceles trapezium?

2 Construct an isosceles trapezium UVWX, with UV| | XW. Measure 4U.

\X : Wr, X W.

U Vv U Vv

Mark X and W such
that UX = VW

Can you find the remaining angles without measuring them?

Does it appear that the angles opposite to the equal sides /U and
ZV are also equal? Can we find congruent triangles here?
Consider line segments XY and WZ perpendicular to UV.

(?) What type of quadrilateral is XWZY?

Since XW | | UV,

a= 180 - XYZ = 90 , and

b = 180 ZWZY = 90 (since the internal
angles on the same side of a transversal
add up to 180 )

Hence, XWZY is a rectangle.

X W

Quadrilaterals

(?) Now, it can be shown that AUXY = AVWZ. (How?)
Thus, ZU = ZV.

Using this fact, the remaining angles of the isosceles trapezium can be

determined. Verify the angles by measurement.

Property 2: In an isosceles trapezium, the angles opposite to the equal

sides are equal.

2 Figure it Out

1.

Find all the sides and the angles of the quadrilateral obtained by
joining two equilateral triangles with sides 4 cm.

Construct a kite whose diagonals are of lengths 6 cm and 8 cm.

Find the remaining angles in the following trapeziums 

oY

Q CJ

Draw a Venn diagram showing the set of parallelograms, kites,
rhombuses, rectangles, and squares. Then, answer the following
questions 

(i) What is the quadrilateral that is both a kite and a
parallelogram?
(ii) Can there be a quadrilateral that is both a kite anda rectangle?

(iii) Is every kite arhombus? If not, what is the correct relationship
between these two types of quadrilaterals?

If PAIR and RODS are two rectangles, find ZIOD.
P A
O
5cm
=)

5cm

Ganita Prakash | Grade 8

6. Construct a square with diagonal 6 cm without using a protractor.

7. CASE is a square. The points U, V, W and X are the midpoints of the
sides of the square. What type of quadrilateral is UVWX? Find this
by using geometric reasoning, as well as by construction and
measurement. Find other ways of constructing a square within a
square such that the vertices of the inner square lie on the sides of
the outer square, as shown in Figure (b).

Cc U A
V X
E W S

(a) (b)

8. Ifa quadrilateral has four equal sides and one angle of 90 , will it be
a square? Find the answer using geometric reasoning as well as by
construction and measurement.

9. What type of a quadrilateral is one in which the opposite sides are
equal? Justify your answer.

Hint: Draw a diagonal and check for congruent triangles.

10. Will the sum of the angles in a quadrilateral such as the following
one also be 360 ? Find the answer using geometric reasoning as I
well as by constructing this figure and measuring.
B

A C
11. State whether the following statements are true or false. Justify your
answers.

(i) A quadrilateral whose diagonals are equal and bisect each
other must be a square.

Quadrilaterals

(ii) A quadrilateral having three right angles must be a rectangle.

(iii) A quadrilateral whose diagonals bisect each other must be a
parallelogram.

(iv) A quadrilateral whose diagonals are perpendicular to each
other must be a rhombus.

(v) A quadrilateral in which the opposite angles are equal must
be a parallelogram.

(vi) A quadrilateral in which all the angles are equal is a rectangle.
(vii) Isosceles trapeziums are parallelograms.

= Arectangle is a quadrilateral in which the angles are all 90 .
Properties of a rectangle 
* Opposite sides of a rectangle are equal.
* Opposite sides of a rectangle are parallel to each other.

 Diagonals of a rectangle are of equal length and they bisect
each other.

= A square is a quadrilateral in which all the angles are 90 , and
all the sides are of equal length.

Properties of a square 
 The opposite sides of a square are parallel to each other.

 The diagonals of a square are of equal lengths and they
bisect each other at 90 .

 The diagonals of a square bisect the angles of the square.

= A parallelogram is a quadrilateral in which opposite sides are
parallel.

Properties of a parallelogram 
 The opposite sides of a parallelogram are equal.

 Ina parallelogram, the adjacent angles add up to 180 , and
the opposite angles are equal.

 The diagonals of a parallelogram bisect each other.

= A rhombus is a quadrilateral in which all the sides have the
same length.

Properties of a rhombus 
 The opposite sides of a rhombus are parallel to each other.

 Ina rhombus, the adjacent angles add up to 180 , and the
opposite angles are equal.

 The diagonals of a rhombus bisect each other at right
angles.

 The diagonals of a rhombus bisect its angles.

A kite is a quadrilateral with two non-overlapping adjacent
pairs of sides having the same length.

A trapezium is a quadrilateral having at least one pair of
parallel opposite sides.

The sum of the angle measures in a quadrilateral is 360 .

Trapezium

Quadrilaterals

Gameplay
1. Fold a sheet into half. | f_.
|

3. Make a triangular crease at the corner 
that is at the middle of the paper. ?
BS me
ra = > 4. Openthe sheet. What is the shape
a formed by the creases?
Va ws

5. How would you fold the quarter paper to get the kinds of creases
shown in the following image.

ASS

Pigs

 I 9

Avr ry rave 6 bd a

Chapter 4 Quadrilaterals 06-07-2025.indd 111 7/10/2025 3:19:37 PM