Village Palampur "***"sesrss*s 5 e Modern farming methods require the farmer to start with more cash than before. Why? ais Suggested Activity During your field visit talk to some farmers of your region. Find out: 1. What kind of farming methods modern or traditional or mixed do the farmers use? Write a note. 2. What are the sources of irrigation? 3. How much of the cultivated land is irrigated? (very little/nearly half/ majority /all) 4. From where do farmers obtain the inputs that they require? 3. Will the land sustain? Land being a natural resource, it is necessary to be careful in its use. Scientific reports indicate that the modern farming methods have overused the natural resource base. In many areas, Green Revolution is associated with the loss of soil fertility due to increased use of chemical fertilisers. Also, continuous use of groundwater for tubewell irrigation has led to the depletion of the water-table. Environmental resources, like soil fertility and groundwater, are built up over years. Once destroyed it is very difficult to restore them. We must take care of the environment to ensure future development of agriculture. oe Suggested Activity e After reading the following reports from newspapers/magazines, write a letter to the Agriculture Minister in your own words telling him how the use of chemical fertilisers can be harmful. ..Chemical fertilisers provide minerals which dissolve in water and are immediately available to plants. But these may not be retained in the Fr i Zz 3 4 z g 3 Z % Z Z Z j z 7 & rs rs ~ , 3 a = r 4 + a r 4 & 4 & a r4 Z 4 2 S 3 $ % r r 4 3 a z 4 z pA Z rs r 4 5 z Picture soil for long. They may escape from the soil and pollute groundwater, rivers and lakes. Chemical fertilizers can also kill bacteria and other microorganisms in the soil. This means some time after their use, the soil will be less fertile than ever before....(Source: Down to Earth, New Delhi) veeee The consumption of chemical fertilizers in Punjab is highest in the country. The continuous use of chemical fertilizers has led to degradation of soil health. Punjab farmers are now forced to use more and more chemical fertilizers and other inputs to achieve the same production level. This means cost of cultivation is rising very fast..... (Source: The Tribune, Chandigarh) 4. How is land distributed between the farmers of Palampur? You must have realised how important land is for farming. Unfortunately, not all the people engaged in agriculture have sufficient land for cultivation. In Palampur, about one third of the 450 families are landless, i.e. 150 families, most of them dalits, have no land for cultivation. Of the remaining families who own PG RPPTEUESHOS SH ECONOMICS Fes eee rege nega gg nrc ehh PR eaePnneeeeee ganna ne Pere gn eee seen Pesan annnenannngnrs 1.5 Palampur village: Distribution of cultivated land land,