Chapter 0970CHO1 Overview The purpose of the story is to introduce some basic concepts relating to production and this we do through a story of a hypothetical village called Palampur.* Farming is the main activity in Palampur, whereas several other activities such as_ small scale manufacturing, dairy, transport, etc. are carried out on a limited scale. These production activities need various types of resources natural resources, manmade items, human effort, money, etc. As we read through the story of Palampur, we will learn how various resources combine to produce the desired goods and services in the village. Introduction Palampur is well-connected with neighbouring villages and towns. Raiganj, a big village, is 3 kms from Palampur. An all weather road connects the village to Raiganj and further on to the nearest small town of Shahpur. Many kinds of transport are visible on this road starting from bullock carts, tongas, bogeys (wooden cart drawn by buffalos) loaded with jaggery (gur) and other commodities to motor vehicles like motorcycles, jeeps, tractors and trucks. This village has about 450 families belonging to several different castes. The 80 upper caste families own the majority of land in the village. Their houses, some of them quite large, are made of brick with cement plastering. The SCs (dalits) comprise one third of the population and live in one corner of the village and in much smaller houses some of which are of mud and straw. Most of the houses have * The narrative is partly based on a research study by Gilbert Etienne of a village in Bulandshahr district in Western Uttar Pradesh. PENS SSS SSH HoH eS eHeeheHegugeceggnecsei Perret The Story of Village Palampur "**8ssessress= 1 Reprint 2025-26 Picture 1.1 Scene of a village electric connections. Electricity powers all the tubewells in the fields and is used in various types of small business. Palampur has two primary schools and one high school. There is a primary health centre run by the government and one private dispensary where the sick are treated. e The description above shows that Palampur has fairly well-developed system of roads, transport, electricity, irrigation, schools and health centre. Compare these facilities with those in your nearby village. The story of Palampur, an imaginary village, will take us through the different types of production activities in the village. In villages across India, farming is the main production activity. The other production activities, referred to as nonfarm activities include small manufacturing, transport, shop-keeping, etc. We shall take a look at both these types of activities, after learning a few general things about production. z * z 3 i A Z = * Z z = 3 7 4 4 s Z 3 4 z a Z P4 Z Zz Z s r4 y 4 z 4 yA 4 * 2 j 5 = 4 r 3 s 4 3 & q 5 4 $ Ss 74 % . r 4 = Z 1 54 rd Z Z & Z 3 y 4 Zz 2 z