good roads, transport and telephone, it is possible that the opportunities for non-farm activities in the village would increase in the coming years. See ANREP ANNE NERNN EN DIANNE Ge De pa RPA RTOR DDE Dap pd perEPP NOOR R REE Reprint 2025-26 j i F4 4 Fi F4 yd % $ Z : F3 Z 6 10. Exercises . Every village in India is surveyed once in ten years during the Census and some of details are presented in the following format. Fill up the following based on information on Palampur. a. LOCATION: b. TOTAL AREA OF THE VILLAGE: c. LAND USE (in hectares): Cultivated Land Land not available for cultivation Irrigated Unirrigated (Area covering dwellings, roads, ponds, grazing ground) d. FACILITIES: Educational Medical Market Electricity Supply Communication Nearest Town . Modern farming methods require more inputs which are manufactured in industry. Do you agree? . How did the spread of electricity help farmers in Palampur? . Is it important to increase the area under irrigation? Why? . Construct a table on the distribution of land among the 450 families of Palampur. . Why are the wages for farm labourers in Palampur less than minimum wages? . In your region, talk to two labourers. Choose either farm labourers or labourers working at construction sites. What wages do they get? Are they paid in cash or kind? Do they get work regularly? Are they in debt? . What are the different ways of increasing production on the same piece of land? Use examples to explain. . Describe the work of a farmer with 1 hectare of land. How do the medium and large farmers obtain capital for farming? How is it different from the small farmers? . Onwhat terms did Savita get a loan from Tajpal Singh? Would Savita condition be different if she could get a loan from the bank at a low rate of interest? . Talk to some old residents in your region and write a short report on the changes in irrigation and changes in production methods during the last 30 years. (Optional) Reprint 2025-26 13. What are the non-farm production activities taking place in your region? Make a short list. 14. What can be done so that more non-farm production activities can be started in villages? & References ETIENNE, GILBERT. 1985. Rural Development in Asia: Meetings with Peasants, Sage Publications, New Delhi. ETIENNE, GILBERT. 1988. Food and Poverty: India s Half Won Battle, Sage Publications, New Delhi. Ray, K.N. 1991. Village India and its Political Economy in C.T. Kurien (Edited) Economy, Society and Development, Sage Publications, New Delhi THORNER, DANIEL AND ALICE THORNER. 1962. Land and Labour in India, Asia Publishing House, Bombay. http://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/policy/government-hikesminimumwage-for-agriculture-labourer/articleshow/57408252.cms Fas eoeegatynnronagenssnteninnebegegeqnggnronainnginnnrsggomverenrennrrs . The Story of Village Palampur *s*eeseres"s 15 era Reprint 2025-26