tough conditions as she knows getting a loan is difficult for a small farmer. & 2. In contrast to the small farmers, the medium and large farmers have their own savings from farming. They are thus able to arrange for the capital needed. How do these farmers have their own savings? You shall find the answer in the next section. '> Lay Let's discuss the story so fav... We have read about the three factors of production land, labour and capital and how they are used in farming. Let us fill in the blanks given below. Among the three factors of production, we found that labour is the most abundant factor of production. There are many people who are willing to work as farm labourers in the villages, whereas the opportunities of work are limited. They belong to either landless families or . They are paid low wages, and lead a difficult life. In contrast to labour, is a scarce factor of production. Cultivated land area is . Moreover, even the existing land is distributed (equally / unequally) among the people engaged in farming. There are a large number of small farmers who cultivate small plots of land and live in & 2 r z q * 74 4 4 Z bs Fi 5 4 a Z 4 3 = z 4 % z Zz 74 Z 74 Zz r4 z 4 Senne Ne ole PNANIN ee phe Dae R RAO ROD e be PApange Qe ODADAS Ere conditions not much better than the landless farm labourer. To make the maximum use of the existing land, farmers use and . Both these have led to increase in production of crops. Modern farming methods require a great deal of Small farmers usually need to borrow money to arrange for the capital, and are put to great distress to repay the loan. Therefore, capital too is a scarce factor of production, particularly for the small farmers. Though both land and capital are scarce, there is a basic difference between the two factors of production. is a natural resource, whereas is man-made. It is possible to increase capital, whereas land is fixed. Therefore, it is very important that we take good care of land and other natural resources used in farming. 7. Sale of Surplus Farm Products Let us suppose that the farmers have produced wheat on their lands using the three factors of production. The wheat is harvested and production is complete. What do the farmers do with the wheat? They retain a part of the wheat for the family s consumption and sell the surplus wheat. Small farmers like Savita and Gobind s sons have little surplus wheat because their total production is small and from this a substantial share is kept for their own family needs. So it is the medium and large farmers who supply wheat to the market. In the Picture 1.1, you can see the bullock cart streaming into the market each carrying loads of wheat. The