must have realised how important land is for farming. Unfortunately, not all the people engaged in agriculture have sufficient land for cultivation. In Palampur, about one third of the 450 families are landless, i.e. 150 families, most of them dalits, have no land for cultivation. Of the remaining families who own PG RPPTEUESHOS SH ECONOMICS Fes eee rege nega gg nrc ehh PR eaePnneeeeee ganna ne Pere gn eee seen Pesan annnenannngnrs 1.5 Palampur village: Distribution of cultivated land land, 240 families cultivate small plots of land less than 2 hectares in size. Cultivation of such plots doesn t bring adequate income to the farmer family. In 1960, Gobind was a farmer with 2.25 hectares of largely unirrigated land. With the help of his three sons Gobind cultivated the land. Though they didn t live very comfortably, the family managed to feed itself with a little bit of extra income from one buffalo that the family possessed. Some years after Gobind s death, this land was divided among his three sons. Each one now has a plot of land that is only 0.75 hectare in size. Even with improved irrigation and modern farming method, Gobind s sons are not able to make a living from their land. They have to look for additional work during part of the year. You can see the large number of small plots scattered around the village in the picture. These are cultivated by the small farmers. On the other hand, more than half the area of the village is covered by plots that are quite large in size. In Palampur, there are 60 families of medium and large farmers who cultivate more than 2 hectares of land. A few of the large farmers have land extending over 10 hectares or more. Reprint 2025-26 Picture 1.6 Work on the fields: Wheat crop ploughing by bullocks, sowing, spraying of insecticides, cultivation by traditional method, cultivation by modern method, and cutting of crops. 2, se Let s Discuss e In the Picture 1.5, can you shade the land cultivated by the small farmers? e Why do so many families of farmers cultivate such small plots of land? e The distribution of farmers in India and the amount of land they cultivate is given in the following Graph 1.1. Discuss in the classroom. Graph 1.1: Distribution of Cultivated Area and Farmers Cultivated Area Number of Farmers 55.4% 44.6% 85% > 15% Marginal & Small farmers | Medium, Semi-Medium & (Less than 2 ha.) Large Farmers (More than 2 ha.) Source: Pocket Book of Agriculture Statistics 2020 and State of Indian Agriculture 2020, Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare. >, ae Let s Discuss e Would you agree that the distribution of cultivated land is unequal in Palampur? Do you find a similar situation for India? Explain. 5. Who will provide the labour? After land, labour is the next necessary factor for production. Farming requires a great deal of hard work. Small farmers along with their families cultivate