of the space to open small shops. They sell eatables. Kareem has opened a computer class centre in the village. In recent years a large number of students have been attending college in Shahpur town. Kareem found that a number of students from the village are also attending computer classes in the town. There were two women in the village who had a degree in computer applications. He decided to employ them. He bought computers and set up the classes in the front room of their house overlooking the market. High school students have started attending them in good numbers. & & Za? e's Discuss In what ways is Kareem s capital and labour different from Mishrilal s? e Why didn t someone start a computer centre earlier? Discuss the possible reasons. 4. Transport: a fast developing sector There are variety of vehicles on the road connecting Palampur to Raiganj. Rickshawallahs, tongawallahs, jeep, tractor, truck drivers and people driving the traditional bullock cart and bogey are people in the transport services. They ferry people and goods from one place to another, and in return get paid for it. The number of people involved in transport has grown over the last several years. Kishora is a farm labourer. Like other such labourers, Kishora found it difficult to meet his family s needs from the wages that he received. A few years back Kishora took a loan from the bank. This was under a government programme which was giving cheap loans to poor landless households. Kishora bought a buffalo with this money. He now sells the buffalo s milk. [QD RETESET SSs LH CONOMICS ~TeBBeeabowaho nn geese Gene eeKag gn nnesayweygneenyweyen nnn vOnennwnn yen gone yygnyngonyes Reprint 2025-26 >, \ > 9 . Further, he has attached a wooden cart Lay Let s Discuss to his buffalo and uses it to transport What is Kishora s fixed capital? various items. Once a week, he goes to * What do you think would be his the river Ganga to bring back clay for . ; working capital? the potter. Or sometimes he goes to . . gs Shahpur with a load of jaggery or other In how many production activities is commodities. Every month he gets some Kishora involved? work in transport. As a result, Kishora e Would you say that Kishora has is able to earn more than what he used benefitted from better roads in to do some years back. Palampur? Lb Summary Farming is the main production activity in the village. Over the years there have been many important changes in the way farming is practiced. These have allowed the farmers to produce more crops from the same amount of land. This is an important achievement, since land is fixed and scarce. But in raising production a great deal of pressure has been put on land and other natural resources. The new ways of farming need less land, but much more of capital. The medium and large farmers are able