consumption of wheat by each farmer family is the same (Column 3). The whole of surplus wheat this year is used as capital for next year s production. Also suppose, production is twice the capital used in production. Complete the tables. Farmer 1 Production Consumption Surplus = Capital for the Production next year Consumption Year 2 Farmer 2 Production Consumption Surplus Capital for the next Year 1 >, se Let s Discuss e Compare the production of wheat by the three farmers over the years. e What happens to Farmer 3 in Year 3? Can he continue production? What will he have to do to continue production? 2. An example of small-scale . . Unlike the manufacturing that takes manufacturing in Palampur place in the big factories in the towns At present, less than fifty people are and cities, manufacturing in Palampur engaged in manufacturing in Palampur. involves very simple production methods 2? meentatiognrnnageteeadefienehegegageggnnogeghny gern trsrrgnevrrrnrrnr "The Story of Village Palampur ertsserrss= 11 Reprint 2025-26 yey , a ae and are done on a small scale. They are carried out mostly at home or in the fields with the help of family labour. Rarely are labourers hired. Mishrilal has purchased a mechanical sugarcane crushing machine run on electricity and has set it up on his field. Sugarcane crushing was earlier done with the help of bullocks, but people prefer to do it by machines these days. Mishrilal also buys sugarcane from other farmers and processes it into jaggery. The jaggery is then sold to traders at Shahpur. In the process, Mishrilal makes a small profit. id Lay Let s Discuss e What capital did Mishrilal need to set up his jaggery manufacturing unit? e Who provides the labour in this case? e Can you guess why Mishrilal is unable to increase his profit? e Could you think of any reasons when he might face a loss? e Why does Mishrilal sell his jaggery to traders in Shahpur and not in his village? 3. The shopkeepers of Palampur People involved in trade (exchange of goods) are not many in Palampur. The traders of Palampur are shopkeepers who buy various goods from wholesale markets in the cities and sell them in the village. You will see small general stores in the village selling a wide range of items like rice, wheat, sugar, tea, oil, biscuits, soap, toothpaste, batteries, candles, notebooks, pen, pencil, even some cloth. A few of the families whose houses are close to the bus stand have used a part of the space to open small shops. They sell eatables. Kareem has opened a computer class centre in the village. In recent years a large number of students have been attending college in Shahpur town. Kareem found that a number of students from the village are also attending computer classes in the town. There were two women in the village who had a degree in computer applications. He decided to employ them. He bought computers and set up the classes