ha.) Source: Pocket Book of Agriculture Statistics 2020 and State of Indian Agriculture 2020, Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare. >, ae Let s Discuss e Would you agree that the distribution of cultivated land is unequal in Palampur? Do you find a similar situation for India? Explain. 5. Who will provide the labour? After land, labour is the next necessary factor for production. Farming requires a great deal of hard work. Small farmers along with their families cultivate their own fields. Thus, they provide the labour required for farming themselves. Medium and large farmers hire farm labourers to work on their fields. >. ae Let s Discuss e Identify the work being done on the field in the Pictures 1.6 and arrange them in a proper sequence. Farm labourers come either from landless families or families cultivating small plots of land. Unlike farmers, farm labourers do not have a right over the sehenatyee tan edenessterseneDegegeqegarregsiyngrnnnraggnnverrnrnnree = The Story of Village Palampur **''8erss"s 7 Reprint 2025-26 ed It is difficult to find work these days. Only the large farmers hire us. And that too for very limited number of days. ( 4 7 7 Yoh RE 1 Merah 3) wy dy) cing Sih My for dentine Even for removing weeds, some farmers spray weedicide. //, i, 9 This year I will have re sok Comer lender Rs.2000. I had / taken Rs.1000 last summer when no work was available in the fields. How will I ever repay? I hardly earn enough for two square mes BM Waly? My situation is not much better. Due to past debt the moneylenders refuse to give me any loan. Picture 1.7 The conversation between Dala and Ramkali crops grown on the land. Instead they are paid wages by the farmer for whom they work. Wages can be in cash or in kind e.g. crop. Sometimes labourers get meals also. Wages vary widely from region to region, from crop to crop, from one farm activity to another (like sowing and harvesting). There is also a wide variation labourer might be employed on a daily basis, or for one particular farm activity like harvesting, or for the whole year. Dala is a landless farm labourer who works on daily wages in Palampur. This means he must regularly look for work. The minimum wages for a farm labourer set by the government is Rs 300 per day (March ) in the duration of employment. A farm 2019), but Dala gets only Rs 160. There is ee GB PETG CEES KHCOMOMICS TABWWERH Wag Han emer Geee~~nnagngnenqneewelIengynweenn nnn vGnennnnnneennnnnygnnngQnnynygnnnyes Reprint 2025-26 heavy competition for work among the farm labourers in Palampur, so people agree to work for lower wages. Dala complains about his situation to Ramkali, who is another farm labourer. Both Dala and Ramkali are among the poorest people in the village. >. xe Let s Discuss e Why are farm labourers like Dala and Ramkali poor? e Gosaipur and Majauli are two villages in North Bihar.