after learning a few general things about production. z * z 3 i A Z = * Z z = 3 7 4 4 s Z 3 4 z a Z P4 Z Zz Z s r4 y 4 z 4 yA 4 * 2 j 5 = 4 r 3 s 4 3 & q 5 4 $ Ss 74 % . r 4 = Z 1 54 rd Z Z & Z 3 y 4 Zz 2 z j Organisation of Production The aim of production is to produce the goods and services that we want. There are four requirements for production of goods and services. The first requirement is land, and other natural resources such as water, forests, minerals. The second requirement is labour, i.e. people who will do the work. Some production activities require highly educated workers to perform the necessary tasks. Other activities require workers who can do manual work. Each worker is providing the labour necessary for production. The third requirement is physical capital, i.e. the variety of inputs required at every stage during production. What are the items that come under physical capital? (a) Tools, machines, buildings: Tools and machines range from very simple tools such as a farmer s plough to sophisticated machines such as generators, turbines, computers, etc. Tools, machines, buildings can be used in production over many years, and are called fixed capital. (b) Raw materials and money in hand: Production requires a variety of raw materials such as the yarn used by the weaver and the clay used by the potter. Also, some money is always required during production to make payments and buy other necessary items. Raw materials and money in hand are called working capital. Unlike tools, machines and buildings, these are used up in production. There is a fourth requirement too. You will need knowledge and enterprise to be able to put together land, labour and physical capital and produce an output either to use yourself or to sell in the market. This these days is called human y capital. We shall learn more about human capital in the next chapter. e Inthe picture, identify the land, labour and fixed capital used in production. my a a bee! Picture 1.2 A factory, with several labourers and machines Every production is organised by combining land, labour, physical capital and human capital, which are known as factors of production. As we read through the story of Palampur, we will learn more about the first three factors of production. For convenience, we will refer to the physical capital as the capital in this chapter. Farming in Palampur 1. Land is fixed Farming is the main production activity in Palampur. 75 per cent of the people who are working are dependent on farming for their livelihood. They could be farmers or farm labourers. The wellbeing of these people is closely related to production on the farms. But remember that there is a basic constraint in raising farm production. Land area