ritus or seasons. The crops we grow, the food we eat, the clothes we wear, and so on, change with the season. Depending on the region, some trees and shrubs bloom with the onset of vasanta or spring, in some places they shed their leaves or change their colour as sharad or autumn approaches and some animals develop thick fur in the cold winter months. LET'S EXPLORE > Which are your favourite seasons? Write a short essay explaining your reasons. > Discuss in groups of three or four and find out whether there are specific events connected to the seasons in your region. Collect information about them songs, feasts with specific types of food, practices in different seasons, etc. Document these and share your discoveries with your class. > Do you know which trees in your area change colours before the onset of winter? Are there trees that shed their leaves around this time? Why do you think this happens? Find out and document the local names of these trees. Usually, the climate remains stable over long periods of time. However, scientists have been recording changes in the climates of the world in the recent decades. Studies show that many of these changes have been caused by human actions. Let us recapitulate: = Weather is what we experience from day to day windy, rainy, hot, dry, etc. = Seasons recur every year and the weather of a place is different in every season. = Climate is the long-term pattern in a particular region. There are many types of climates in the world. We will now survey the main types found in India. India and the World: Land and the People 3 - Climates of India 08-04-2025 12:45:33 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 S Chapter 3.indd 48 Types of Climates in India We have often seen how India is a land of diversity. This is equally true of its climate: In the north, the Himalayan mountains have an alpine climate with cold, snowy winters and cool summers (the word alpine comes from the Alps, a mountain range of Europe). That s probably where you will see the thickest clothing in India! Lower in the Himalayas, and in many hilly areas of India, the climate is often said to be temperate, as the winters are moderately cold and the summers not too hot. That is where we find many hill stations , much frequented by people seeking relief from the heat in the plains below. =" Inthe northern plains, the climate is subtropical, with very hot summers and cold winters. This is where most of India s wheat is grown. = In the west, the Thar Desert has an arid climate featuring extremely hot days, cool nights, and very little rainfall. People there have had to develop unique ways to collect and Fig. 3.3 save water. The western coastal strip receives heavy rainfall during monsoon months, creating a tropical wet climate, which is favourable to the growing