equator exposure to the sun's rays is concentrated, but near the poles it is dispersed India and the World: Land and the People 3 - Climates of India 08-04-2025 12:45:35 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 3.indd 50 b) Altitude We mentioned hill stations above, which are popular tourist centres because of their cooler climate. India has many including Munnar, Theni, Udhagamandalam (Ooty), Madikeri, Mahabaleshwar, Mount Abu, Shimla, Nainital, Darjeeling, Tawang, Shillong, etc. We know they are located at a higher altitude than the plains below, but how does that explain their cooler temperature? You will later learn the full answer in your Science classes. To keep things simple for now, the temperature decreases as the altitude increases because: Darjeeling Udhagamandalam (Ooty) Munnar Fig. 3.5 1. The atmospheric pressure, and therefore the air density, decreases as the altitude increases (as we saw in the chapter Understanding the Weather ), and as the air gets less dense, it gets cooler. 2. Thesunheatsthesurface ofthe Earth, andso the farther away from the surface, the less hot the air will be. The Himalayas are so high that many peaks maintain a temperature below water s freezing point, keeping them covered in snow. 08-04-2025 12:45:37 Chapter 3.indd 51 LET'S EXPLORE Udhagamandalam (Ooty) and Coimbatore are almost at the same latitude. The range of summer temperatures in Ooty is 10 -25 while that in Coimbatore is 25-38 . Why do you think there is such a difference in temperature between these two places? c) Proximity to the sea Temperatures in coastal areas do not vary much; the summers are not too hot and the winters are not too cold. That is because the sea acts as a moderator for the temperature. This diagram sums up the phenomenon, and your Science textbook explains this further while discussing the heating and _ cooling of land and water in coastal regions. The result is that those Distance from the sea vy 44 C (warm) Summer Incoming heat from the Sun Coastal region cooled by sea air 32 C (cool) Winter Outgoing heat from the Earth AAA Coastal region warmed by sea air 10 C (cold) 18 C (cool) Fig. 3.6 regions tend to be more temperate. As you move inland from the coast, the temperatures get more extreme summer temperatures will be higher and winter temperatures lower. For instance, Mumbai and Nagpur are located at a similar latitude, but Mumbai, being near the sea, has cooler summers (around 32 C) and milder winters (around 18 C), while Nagpur, away from the coast, experiences up to 44 C in summer and about 10 C in winter. As you can see, Mumbai s range of temperature (i.e. the difference between the maximum and the minimum) is about 14 C while the range at Nagpur reaches 34 C. India and the World: Land and the People 3 - Climates of India 08-04-2025 12:45:37 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 3.indd 52 d)