18 C), while Nagpur, away from the coast, experiences up to 44 C in summer and about 10 C in winter. As you can see, Mumbai s range of temperature (i.e. the difference between the maximum and the minimum) is about 14 C while the range at Nagpur reaches 34 C. India and the World: Land and the People 3 - Climates of India 08-04-2025 12:45:37 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 3.indd 52 d) Winds Wind can move masses of warmer or cooler air. States like Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh often receive winds blowing from the west. Having travelled over the deserts of Arabia to Afghanistan, they bring dry and hot air that causes severe heat waves in summer. In winter cold winds from across the Himalayas creep into the Himalayan foothills, resulting in Lf | cyclonic circulation 1,000 km T 60 E Topography: The totality of the physical surface features of an area. This may include mountains, hills, valleys, slopes, coasts, etc. T 70 E Fig. 3.7 LET'S REMEMBER cold waves. Winds affect not only temperature, but also humidity, and in turn, precipitation. We saw dry winds coming from distant deserts; in contrast, winds coming from the sea bring moisture over the land, which may result in rainfall. We will soon see the case of the monsoon winds. In your Grade 6 Science textbook Curiosity you studied the water cycle! The water from the ocean and the Earth s surface evaporates into the atmosphere as vapour and returns as rain, hail or snow.... e) Topography Finally, the topography of a region also plays an important role in determining its climate. For instance, the Himalayas and the Karakoram ranges protect, to some extent, the Indian 08-04-2025 12:45:41 subcontinent from the winds of the cold deserts of Central Asia. The nearly flat topography of the Thar desert, on the other hand, has nothing to protect it from hot and dry winds. In the next section, we will see the role of the Western Ghats in India s southwest monsoon. Putting it all together... The climate of any region is determined collectively by all the above factors. Describing the climate involves a description of the patterns of temperature, precipitation (rain or snowfall, occurrence of fog or mist) and wind conditions in a region over three decades or more. A microclimate is a climate localised in a small area, which differs from the climate in the surrounding region. It has a Chapter 3.indd 53 Fig. 3.8. Aravallis and urban heat islands unique pattern of temperature, humidity, precipitation, etc., ina small geographical area. For instance, enclosed valleys and some forests have microclimates of their own. So do urban heat islands , that is, some cities that have a large number of buildings and other concrete structures and very little vegetation; all this traps the heat and they are often much warmer than the surrounding region. Microclimates can influence the local flora and fauna, the crops grown,