7 Part 1 e Chapter 3.indd 62 c) Landslides A landslide is the sudden collapse of rock, soil, or debris, often triggered by heavy rain, earthquakes or volcanic activity. Landslides are common in hilly and mountainous regions such as Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh, as well as the Western Ghats and hilly regions. These events often occur during the monsoon. In those regions, the chances of landslides have increased due to human activities such as the cutting down of forests, building infrastructure without following approved methods and the construction of too many buildings that block the natural flow of water. d) Forest fires Forest fires are uncontrolled fires that spread rapidly across vegetation, often fuelled by dry climatic conditions, droughts or high winds. Human carelessness is another frequent cause. Forest fires are common in states with large forested or grassland areas such as Uttarakhand, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh, as well as mountain ranges such as the Western Ghats. Apart from destroying large areas of forest, fires harm wildlife, degrade the ecosystem, spoil the air quality and displace local communities. The consequences are therefore both environmental and economic. LET'S EXPLORE > Observe Fig. 3.15. Describe the effects they may have on people, plants, animals and economic life. > In groups of four or five, identify in each of the above disasters the part of natural causes and the part of human causes. Compare your conclusions. > Discuss in the same groups series of preventive measures that could help avoid the above disasters. 08-04-2025 12:45:50 Chapter 3.indd 63 Climate Change Climate change refers to significant, long-term changes in the climate. This may be on the scale of the planet or on a regional scale, and it involves shifts in temperature, precipitation and weather events. In past millennia (we can go back millions of years, in fact), natural processes drove climate change. Since the 19th century, however, climate change has been largely driven by human activities, particularly the burning of fossil fuels, deforestation, environmentally harmful industrial practices, and production and patterns of excessive or wasteful consumption. # eae AQ re " ia Fossil fuels: Sources of energy that were formed from the remains of plants and animals that died millions of years ago and were buried deep under layers of soil and rock or under the sea, where heat and pressure slowly turned them into coal, petroleum oil and natural gas. India and the World: Land and the People 3 - Climates of India 08-04-2025 12:45:54 Resilience: The capacity to withstand or recover quickly from difficulties. Mitigation: The adoption of steps to help slow down global warming and reduce the causes of climate change. Sustainable: Something which can be maintained over a Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 long period of time. Chapter 3.indd 64 Why does the burning of fossil fuels affect the climate? In the Earth s natural carbon cycle, carbon dioxide (CO,) and other gases are released gradually into the atmosphere and