Chapter 3.indd 45 Climates of India ~ Lu o. < U kale varshatu parjanyaha prithivi sasyashalint deshoyam kshobharahitah brahmanasantu nirbhayah May the rains be timely, may the Earth be lush with vegetation May this country be free from turmoil, may good people be fearless! Subhashita What makes India s climate so diverse? What are the monsoons? How are they formed? . What is the effect of climate on o7sicv0s economy, culture and society? How can understanding the climate help us to prepare for natural disasters? What is climate change? What are its consequences? Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 3.indd 46 Weather, Seasons and the Climate Climate is a word people use in everyday conversations. But, quite often, what they really mean is weather , and not climate . What s the difference? Weather is what we experience every hour or day: it might be raining, or there could be bright sunshine, a lot of wind, etc. The weather keeps changing. Climate, on the other hand, is the pattern of weather an area or a region experiences over a long period of time several decades at least. This pattern varies from region to region. Before we come to the various types of climates, let us briefly stop to introduce seasons. Seasons occur as the Earth revolves around the Sun. Each season lasts for a few months and recurs every year. As we know, there are several seasons in the year spring, summer, monsoon, autumn and winter that occur in a cycle. Are seasons related to the weather or to the climate? The answer is: to both. The weather changes with the season, that is, it can be dry and hot in the summer months, or humid and rainy during the monsoon. Further, the pattern of seasons in a region is closely connected with the climate. There are four main seasons across most regions of the world spring, summer, autumn and winter. However, India receives rainfall during a specific period of the year the rainy season or monsoon along with the other four. Fig. 3.2 Traditionally, in many parts of India, the year is divided into six seasons or ritus vasanta (spring), grishma (summer), varsha (rainy season), sharad (autumn), hemanta (pre-winter), shishir (winter). Specific rituals and festivals are associated with these six ritus, such as Vasanta Pafichami or Sharad Parnima. 08-04-2025 12:45:33 Chapter 3.indd 47 If we observe the world around us, we will notice that human, plant and animal life are in rhythm with the ritus or seasons. The crops we grow, the food we eat, the clothes we wear, and so on, change with the season. Depending on the region, some trees and shrubs bloom with the onset of vasanta or spring, in some places they shed their leaves or change their colour as sharad or autumn approaches and some animals develop thick fur in the cold winter months. LET'S EXPLORE > Which are your favourite seasons? Write a short essay explaining your reasons.