the east receive less, and often with interruptions. This is commonly called the summer or southwest monsoon ( southwest reflecting the direction the winds come from). As winter approaches, the winds reverse and blow from the land to the ocean, as we just saw. These are dry winds that bring cold weather to south India, but a part of them, passing over the Bay of Bengal, collect some moisture and bring rainfall to parts of east and south India. This is called the winter or northeast monsoon. DON'T MISS OUT > Mawsynram, located in Meghalaya, receives the highest average annual rainfall in the world, about 11,000 mm (which is the same as 11 metres!). Fig. 3.10. > The monsoons have inspired many ragas in both Carnatic and Hindustani classical music. Meghamalhar and amruthavarshini are names of a couple of them. India and the World: Land and the People 3 - Climates of India 08-04-2025 12:45:42 LET'S EXPLORE Since the ability to predict the monsoon rainfall has been an important aspect of life in India, our ancestors observed Nature around them carefully. They developed local traditional knowledge through their experience. This traditional knowledge is an important heritage we must preserve. For example, fishermen on the Konkan coast predict the onset of the monsoon when fishes that normally stay under water are seen at the surface; in parts of southern India monsoon is said to arrive within 50 days after the Golden Shower tree (Cassia fistula) blossoms. Some communities also believe that when crows build their nests high on tree-tops, it indicates less rainfall, whereas if the nests are lower, rainfall is likely to be heavy. Make a list of such local knowledge about rain, fog, snow or hail in your area. Climate and our Lives Our lives are deeply connected with the climate and dependent on it. The impact of climate is visible in local cultures for instance, and India has many festivals associated with seasons and agricultural activities. LET'S EXPLORE Reach out to your grandparents or elders in your neighbourhood. Ask them about the traditional festivals and dances they remember from their childhood and youth, especially those related to agriculture and rain. What rituals did they participate in? Then organise a cultural fest with your friends. You can showcase some of the dances, songs and activities your elders shared with you. Whether it is a dance, harvest ritual, or a simple story about a prayer to rain gods, try to bring these traditions to life for your classmates. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 The climate also has a direct impact on the economy. For instance, you may have heard the phrase monsoon failure , which refers Chapter 3.indd 56 08-04-2025 12:45:42 Cinapter 3 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 3.indd 58 to poor rainfall during the monsoon season; in such a case, the agriculture suffers, people (women, generally) have to walk long distances in search of water, and agricultural labourers