answer is simple water. | But not just any water; clouds are masses of water droplets, ice crystals, or a mixture of both, that are suspended in the atmosphere. ? clouds formed - ry . 2 Y R f low pressure centre 4 12a - 2 > Be winds bringing moist air from sea Fig. 3.13. Cyclone Fani India and the World: Land and the People 3 - Climates of India 08-04-2025 12:45:47 va . . 7 "9 Ce eee wa Fig. 3.14. Eye of the storm b) Floods A flood occurs when water overflows into normally dry land. This could be due to heavy rainfall generating huge run-off water that the land cannot absorb, or due to excessive accumulation of water in bodies like rivers and lakes, until the water overflows or their banks are breached. Floods occur frequently during the monsoons. States such as Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Kerala, Andhra Pradesh and Assam are particularly vulnerable to floods. Have you seen or read about floods? Look at the physical map of India. Discuss in pairs why you think floods occur in the areas mentioned above. In the Himalayan regions, on the other hand, floods occur when glacial lakes overflow. Glacial lakes form a barrier of rocks and ice to hold their water, which often comes from melting glaciers. If the glaciers melt too fast (as is increasingly the case) or if there is too much rainfall, the build-up of pressure can cause the water Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 | Chapter 3.indd 60 08-04-2025 12:45:48 Fig, 3.15 to break through the barrier this is called a glacial burst and it often has devastating consequences for people and property. DON'T MISS OUT Chapter 3.indd 61 In 2013, Uttarakhand experienced a sudden glacial burst caused by continuous heavy rain over several days. Many landslides followed. Areas around one of India s important sacred sites, the Kedarnath temple, were completely destroyed. Several villages were washed away in the floods, along with many roads and bridges. Altogether about 6,000 people, many of them pilgrims, lost their lives. Many cities experience flooding when there is heavy rainfall. This may be due to an overburdened drainage system or poorly planned construction encroaching on the waterways and blocking the flow of water. Besides, urban surfaces of concrete or asphalt do not allow water to be absorbed by the earth. India and the World: Land and the People 3 - Climates of India 08-04-2025 12:45:50 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 e Chapter 3.indd 62 c) Landslides A landslide is the sudden collapse of rock, soil, or debris, often triggered by heavy rain, earthquakes or volcanic activity. Landslides are common in hilly and mountainous regions such as Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh, as well as the Western Ghats and hilly regions. These events often occur during the monsoon. In those regions, the chances of landslides have increased due to human activities such as the cutting down