northern plains, the climate is subtropical, with very hot summers and cold winters. This is where most of India s wheat is grown. = In the west, the Thar Desert has an arid climate featuring extremely hot days, cool nights, and very little rainfall. People there have had to develop unique ways to collect and Fig. 3.3 save water. The western coastal strip receives heavy rainfall during monsoon months, creating a tropical wet climate, which is favourable to the growing of rice and spices. The central Deccan Plateau has a semi-arid climate with hot summers, mild winters and moderate rainfall during the rainy season. Eastern India and the southern peninsula experience a tropical climate with a mild winter and distinct wet and dry periods controlled by monsoon winds (more on them soon). Note: You will understand later the meaning of the terms tropical and subtropical , which are related to two special parallels of latitude called the tropics . 08-04-2025 12:45:34 Chapter 3.indd 49 Factors Determining the Climate What creates those different climates? There are many factors at work. Some are general ones on the scale of the planet while others are regional or even local. Let s examine a few. a) Latitude LET'S REMEMBER o We studied about latitudes in Grade 6. Do you remember that latitudes measure the distance from the Equator, increasing as we move away from it (either northward or southward)? While the climate around the Equator is extremely hot, as the latitude increases it becomes temperate and then cold or frigid. Why is this so? Places near the Equator, that is, at low latitudes, are warmer, while those near the poles (high latitudes) are colder. This happens due to the angle at which the sun s rays hit a_ particular area. At the Equator, the rays are nearly perpendicular, and so all their energy is focused on a smaller area of the over a wide area Earth s surface. In the Fig. 3.4 polar regions, the rays are inclined or oblique, and the energy is distributed over a larger surface. Moreover, they have to pass through more of the Earth s atmosphere, as the diagram shows, which further dissipates their energy. As a result, the polar regions receive less heat than the equatorial zone. We can see this in India too: Kanniyakumari and the Nicobar Islands being close to the Equator are warm or hot almost throughout the year, whereas places in the north, such as Srinagar, are much cooler. Solar radiation Atmosphere At the equator exposure to the sun's rays is concentrated, but near the poles it is dispersed India and the World: Land and the People 3 - Climates of India 08-04-2025 12:45:35 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 3.indd 50 b) Altitude We mentioned hill stations above, which are popular tourist centres because of their cooler climate. India has many including Munnar, Theni, Udhagamandalam (Ooty), Madikeri, Mahabaleshwar, Mount Abu, Shimla, Nainital, Darjeeling, Tawang, Shillong, etc. We know