3.8. Aravallis and urban heat islands unique pattern of temperature, humidity, precipitation, etc., ina small geographical area. For instance, enclosed valleys and some forests have microclimates of their own. So do urban heat islands , that is, some cities that have a large number of buildings and other concrete structures and very little vegetation; all this traps the heat and they are often much warmer than the surrounding region. Microclimates can influence the local flora and fauna, the crops grown, and impact human health and well-being. India and the World: Land and the People 3 - Climates of India 08-04-2025 12:45:41 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 3.indd 54 The Monsoons The monsoon season is central to life in India. During the monsoon months, the rivers fill up, the soil is soaked with water, crops grow and life thrives. Strictly speaking, the word monsoon , which comes from the Arabic word mausim, meaning season , refers to seasonal winds over a large area of the Indian Ocean and surrounding regions, including Australia, Africa and South Asia. There is a yearly pattern to the monsoons. Their mechanism is complex, but based on the simple fact that land heats up or cools down faster than the ocean. Monsoons bring out the fundamental relationship between temperature, pressure and wind movement. To put it simply, as summer begins, the Asian landmass heats up, creating a powerful low-pressure system over it. Since air always flows from high pressure to low pressure, winds are drawn from the cooler, high-pressure ocean towards the hot land. These ocean winds carry moisture that condenses over the warmer land and falls in the form of heavy monsoon rains. (That is why monsoon commonly refers to the seasonal rains rather than the winds.) Fig. 3.9 The pattern reverses in winter, when the landmass cools down more rapidly than the ocean. Now the land has a high-pressure system while the ocean remains warmer with relatively lower pressure. This causes the winds to blow in the opposite direction from the land towards the ocean bringing dry conditions to much of Asia. 08-04-2025 12:45:41 Chapter 3.indd 55 Coming to India, the monsoon rains typically advance from the southern tip of India in early June, moving northward over several weeks until they cover the entire subcontinent by midJuly. It is not a smooth progression, though the Western Ghats (remember our brief survey of topography) act as a natural barrier; their western slopes receive much rainfall, while the Deccan plateau to the east receive less, and often with interruptions. This is commonly called the summer or southwest monsoon ( southwest reflecting the direction the winds come from). As winter approaches, the winds reverse and blow from the land to the ocean, as we just saw. These are dry winds that bring cold weather to south India, but a part of them, passing over the Bay of Bengal, collect some moisture and bring rainfall to parts of east and south India. This