India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 The climate also has a direct impact on the economy. For instance, you may have heard the phrase monsoon failure , which refers Chapter 3.indd 56 08-04-2025 12:45:42 Cinapter 3 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 3.indd 58 to poor rainfall during the monsoon season; in such a case, the agriculture suffers, people (women, generally) have to walk long distances in search of water, and agricultural labourers are likely to migrate to the cities; food (grains, vegetables and fruits, to begin with) becomes costlier, fuelling inflation. Industrial activity also often depends on a predictable weather and the availability of water. The world over, we can easily detect such connections between the climate and socioeconomic conditions. Those conditions get especially strained when climate disasters strike. Climates and Disasters India s diverse weather patterns can bring about extreme conditions such as cyclones, floods, landslides and other such climate-related disasters. These events affect people s lives, disrupt agriculture, damage infrastructure and disturb local economies. a) Cyclones Every year, the Indian coastline, especially the eastern coast, witness several cyclones. In past years, some of them have been highly destructive, resulting in the loss of human and animal life, damaging property and infrastructure, uprooting trees and causing soil erosion. The India Meteorological Department (IMD) keeps track of coming cyclones and provides information on their formation, evolution, place of landing, etc. DON T MISS OUT The National Disaster Response Force (NDRF) is specially trained to respond to natural as well as human-made disasters. NDRF battalions are located at 12 different locations in India. The NDRF has played a key role in rescue and evacuation during disasters like Fig. 3.12 cyclones, landslides and floods. 08-04-2025 12:45:46 Chapter 3.indd 59 How are cyclones formed? We saw that in some special situations, the atmospheric pressure near the sea becomes lower than the surrounding areas, creating a low-pressure system. This is an invitation to the air from surrounding areas to come into the low-pressure area, and the air from the sea moves in, bringing with it moisture and rain. When the lowpressure system is intense and the wind speeds are high, this may result in a cyclone. As winds collect moisture, they form clouds and rotate inwards towards the centre of the depression. This centre, which is cloudless, is called the eye of the cyclone . THINK ABOUT IT What are clouds? White lumps in the sky, you might say. But what are they made of? The answer is simple water. | But not just any water; clouds are masses of water droplets, ice crystals, or a mixture of both, that are suspended in the atmosphere. ? clouds formed - ry . 2 Y R f low pressure centre 4 12a - 2 > Be winds bringing moist air from sea Fig. 3.13. Cyclone Fani India and the World: Land and the People 3 - Climates of India 08-04-2025 12:45:47 va . . 7 "9 Ce eee