to withstand or recover quickly from difficulties. Mitigation: The adoption of steps to help slow down global warming and reduce the causes of climate change. Sustainable: Something which can be maintained over a Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 long period of time. Chapter 3.indd 64 Why does the burning of fossil fuels affect the climate? In the Earth s natural carbon cycle, carbon dioxide (CO,) and other gases are released gradually into the atmosphere and trap heat from the Sun. This natural greenhouse effect warms Earth enough to support life. However, human activities like industry, transportation, and agriculture have released enormous amounts of these greenhouse gases in just a few centuries. This sudden increase traps extra heat, causing rapid global warming and disrupting the climate patterns that plants, animals, and human societies have adapted to over thousands of years. In India, rising temperatures are perceptible in many regions. Early in 2025, for instance, the country s average temperature was 1 to 3 C above normal, as a result of which the winter was much shorter and milder than usual. This affects not only agricultural production but also many small-scale industries. This is only one example showing how a warmer planet will present us with increasing challenges. Understanding the relationship between the causes of climate change and disasters can help us to prepare better for these challenges. It also supports the need for more environmentfriendly practices and building resilience and adaptation in communities. Governments worldwide, including India s, attempt to promote measures of climate mitigation, such as cutting down on greenhouse gas emissions, planting trees, boosting renewable energy and improving energy efficiency, promoting sustainable lifestyles, etc. But these often clash with a desire for economic growth and increased consumption. Before we move on... > India s diverse climate is shaped by its geography, including mountains, deserts, and plateaus. +> Weather is short-term, seasons recur on a yearly basis, and climate reflects long-term patterns over decades. > Factors such as latitude, altitude, proximity to the sea, wind and topography determine the climate. > Monsoons are vital for agriculture, influencing crop cycles and livelihoods. 08-04-2025 12:45:54 Chapter 3.indd 65 > Climate is connected with cultural traditions, festivals, agriculture and economic activity. > Understanding the climate helps prepare for natural disasters like floods and cyclones. > Climate change leads to extremes of weather or temperature and can have severe consequences on the natural and human worlds. Questions and activities 1. Match the climatic factors with their effects: Column A Column B ; Brings wet air to India durin summer a) . Creates different climates in (2) altitude ) the north and south (3) Proximity to the ocean (c) Keeps higher places cooler (4) Monsoon winds (d) Moderates the temperature 2. Answer the following questions: a) What is the difference between weather and climate? b) Why do places near the ocean have milder temperatures than places far away from it? c) What role do monsoon winds play in affecting India