both aspects : mutual trust and agreement to live together. The exact balance of power between the central and the state government varies from one federation to another. This balance depends mainly on the historical context in which the federation was formed. There are two kinds of routes through which federations have been formed. The first route involves independent States coming together on their own to form a bigger unit, so that by pooling sovereignty and retaining identity, they can increase their security. This type of coming together federations include the USA, Switzerland and Australia. In this first category of federations, all the constituent States usually have equal power and are strong vis-a-vis the federal government. The second route is where a large country decides to divide its power between the constituent States and the national government. India, Spain and Belgium are examples of this kind of holding together federations. In this second category, the Central Government tends to be more powerful vis-avis the States. Very often different constituent units of the federation have unequal powers. Some units are granted special powers. Reprint 2025-26 ssary Jurisdiction: The area over which someone has legal authority. The area may be defined in terms of geographical boundaries or in terms of certain kinds of subjects. eaeraiism = oa 08-04-2022 nN 5) w [o) ae s) w w _ z) [o) ) am) 7 mma r % 8, a= Us ? Some Nepalese citizens were discussing the proposals on the adoption of federalism in their new constitution. This is what some of them said: Khag Raj: I don t like federalism. It would lead to reservation of seats for different caste groups as in India. Sarita: Ours in not a very big country. We don t need federalism. Babu Lal: I am hopeful that the Terai areas will get more autonomy if they get their own state government. Ram Ganesh: I like federalism because it will mean that powers that were earlier enjoyed by the king will now be exercised by our elected representatives. If you were participating in this conversation, what would be your response to each of these? Which of these reflect a wrong understanding of what federalism is? What makes India a federal country? Isn t that strange? Did our constitution makers not know about federalism? Or did they wish to avoid talking about it? r2.indd 16 What makes India a federal country? We have earlier seen how small countries like Belgium and Sri Lanka face so many problems of managing diversity. What about a vast country like India, with so many languages, religions and regions? What are the power sharing arrangements in our country? Let us begin with the Constitution. India had emerged as an independent nation after a painful and bloody partition. Soon after Independence, several princely states became a part of the country. The Constitution declared India as a Union of States. Although it did not use the word federation, the Indian Union is based on the principles