Chapter 2.indd 13 Federalism Overview In the previous chapter, we noted that vertical division of power among different levels of government is one of the major forms of power-sharing in modern democracies. In this chapter, we focus on this form of powersharing. It is most commonly referred to as federalism. We begin by describing federalism in general terms. The rest of the chapter tries to understand the theory and practice of federalism in India. A discussion of the federal constitutional provisions is followed by an analysis of the policies and politics that has strengthened federalism in practice. Towards the end of the chapter, we turn to the local government, a new and third tier of Indian federalism. Reprint 2025-26 =i] 1o72CHO2 Chapter 2 08-04-2022 eaeralism = wo nN 5) w [o) ae s) w w _ z) [o) ) am) a. I am confused. What do we call the Indian government? Is it Union, Federal or Central? Federal political systems Canada United States JB of America What is federalism? Let us get back to the contrast between Belgium and Sri Lanka that we saw in the last chapter. You would recall that one of the key changes made in the Constitution of Belgium was to reduce the power of the Central Government and to give these powers to the regional governments. Regional governments existed in Belgium even earlier. They had their roles and powers. But all these powers were given to these governments and could be withdrawn by the Central Government. The change that took place in 1993 was that the regional governments were given constitutional powers that were no longer dependent on the central government. Thus, Belgium shifted from a unitary to a federal form of government. Sri Lanka continues Germany yr , gt Ae : AP t Belgium Switzerland Spain IA ae St. Kitts Herzegovina to be, for all practical purposes, a unitary system where the national government has all the powers. Tamil leaders want Sri Lanka to become a federal system. Federalism is a system of government in which the power is divided between a central authority and various constituent units of the country. Usually, a federation has two levels of government. One is the government for the entire country that is usually responsible for a few subjects of common national interest. The othersare governments at the level of provinces or states that look after much of the dayto-day administering of their state. Both these levels of governments enjoy their power independent of the other. Mexico at and Nevis Nigeria om o PACIFIC OCEAN ~ | ; nited ee 5 Venezuela ww a Ys /* SF Ethiopia , Errated : - ie ATLANTI omoros Malaysia=~ ~ | PACIFIC OCEAN aon t noun ee aS 2 j OCEAN 1 Micronesia we . Argentina South Africa os J / f Source: Montreal and Kingston, Handbook of Federal Countries: 2002, McGill-Queen s University Press, 2002. Though only 25 of the world s 193 countries have federal political systems, their citizens