government has helped to deepen democracy in our country. It has also \ increased women s representation and voice in our democracy. At the same time, there are many difficulties. While elections are held regularly and enthusiastically, gram sabhas are not held regularly. Most state governments have not transferred significant powers to the local governments. Nor have they given adequate resources. We are thus still a long way from realising the ideal of self-government. . . . . . . St's find Find out about the local government in the village or town you live in. If you live in a village, find out the names of the following: your panch or ward member, your sarpanch, your panchayat samiti, the chairperson of your zilla parishad. Also find out when did the last meeting of the gram sabha take place and how many people took part in that. If you live in urban areas, find out the name of your municipal councillor, and the municipal chairperson or mayor. Also find out about the budget of your municipal corporation, municipality and the major items on which money was spent. Reprint 2025-26 08-04-2022 12:31:19 Chapter 2.indd 27 Locate the following States on a blank outline political map of India: Manipur, Sikkim, Chhattisgarh and Goa. Identify and shade three federal countries (other than India) on a blank outline political map of the world. Point out one feature in the practice of federalism in India that is similar to and one feature that is different from that of Belgium. What is the main difference between a federal form of government and a unitary one? Explain with an example. State any two differences between the local government before and after the Constitutional amendment in 1992. Fill in the blanks: Since the United States is a type of federation, all the constituent States have equal powers and States are vis-a-vis the federal government. But India is a type of federation and some States have more power than others. In India, the government has more powers. Here are three reactions to the language policy followed in India. Give an argument and an example to support any of these positions. Sangeeta: The policy of accommodation has strengthened national unity. Arman: Language-based States have divided us by making everyone conscious of their language. Harish: This policy has only helped to consolidate the dominance of English over all other languages. The distinguishing feature of a federal government is: (a) National government gives some powers to the provincial governments. (b) Power is distributed among the legislature, executive and judiciary. (c) Elected officials exercise supreme power in the government. (d) Governmental power is divided between different levels of government. A few subjects in various Lists of the Indian Constitution are given here. Group them under the Union, State and Concurrent Lists as provided in the table below. A. Defence; B. Police; C. Agriculture; D. Education; E. Banking; F. Forests; G. Communications; H. Trade; I. Marriages Union List State List Concurrent List Reprint 2025-26