special status. States such as Assam, Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram enjoy special powers under certain provisions of the Constitution of India (Article 371) due to their peculiar social and historical circumstances. These special powers are especially enjoyed in relation to the protection of land rights of indigenous peoples, their culture and also preferential employment in government services. Indians who are not permanent residents of this State cannot buy land or house here. Similar special provisions exist for some other States of India as well. vet Us ysten te adig Chapter 2.indd 17 There are some units of the Indian Union which enjoy very little power. These are areas which are too small to become an independent State but which could not be merged with any of the existing States. These areas, like Chandigarh, or Lakshadweep or the capital city of Delhi, are called Union Territories. These territories do not have the powers of a State. The Central Government has special powers in running these areas. This sharing of power between the Union Government and the State Governments is basic to the structure of the Constitution. It is not easy to make changes to this power sharing arrangement. The Parliament cannot on its own change this arrangement. Any change to it has to be first passed by both the Houses of Parliament with at least two-thirds majority. Then it has to be ratified by the legislatures of at least half of the total States. The judiciary plays an important role in overseeing the implementation of constitutional provisions and procedures. In case of any dispute about the division of powers, the High Courts and the Supreme Court make a decision. The Union and State Governments have the power to raise resources by levying taxes in order to carry on the government and the responsibilities assigned to each of them. es Listen to one national and one regional news bulletin broadcast by All India ( Radio daily for one week. Make a list of news items related to government policies or decisions by classifying these into the following categories: @ News items that relate only to the Central Government, @ News items that relate only to your or any other State Government, @ News items about the relationship between the Central and State Governments. eaeraiism _ N Reprint 2025-26 08-04-2022 ff nN 5) w [o) ae s) w w _ z) [o) ) am) r2.indd 18 C) Pokharan, the place where India conducted its nuclear tests, lies Us rr? in Rajasthan. Suppose the Government of Rajasthan was opposed to the Central Government s nuclear policy, could it prevent the Government of India from conducting the nuclear tests? @ Suppose the Government of Sikkim plans to introduce new textbooks in its schools. But the Union Government does not like the style and content of the new textbooks. In that case, does the state government need to take permission from the Union Government before these textbooks can be launched? @ Suppose the Chief Ministers