the Government of Rajasthan was opposed to the Central Government s nuclear policy, could it prevent the Government of India from conducting the nuclear tests? @ Suppose the Government of Sikkim plans to introduce new textbooks in its schools. But the Union Government does not like the style and content of the new textbooks. In that case, does the state government need to take permission from the Union Government before these textbooks can be launched? @ Suppose the Chief Ministers of Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Orissa have different policies on how their state police should respond to the naxalites. Can the Prime Minister of India intervene and pass an order that all the Chief Ministers will have to obey? {Ay Cones A oon aga DS HYDERABAD vi ie frye Vishokhapatnom O fF BENGAL : + Internatione! Boundary ~ Pokiston (entire Sind, Baluchistan, : NW.F.P Greater part of Punjab and Rengicnere) Bengol Bahawolpur Stote) indian Protected States ARABIAN SEA Hyderabad rh Goa ee S F 4 (Portuquese) My Nellore Madras Calicut %7*"" C e on TRAVEMORE? Trivondrum &% INDIAN = Reprint 2025-26 08-04-2022 12:30:55 How is federalism practised? Constitutional provisions are necessary for the success of federalism but these are not sufficient. If the federal experiment has succeeded in India, it is not merely because of the clearly laid out constitutional provisions. The real success of federalism in India can be attributed to the nature of democratic politics in our country. This ensured that the spirit of federalism, respect for diversity and desire for living together became shared ideals in our country. Let us look at some of the major ways in which this happened. Linguistic States The creation of linguistic States was the first and a major test for democratic politics in our country. If you look at the political map of India when it began its journey as a democracy in 1947 and that of 2019, you will be surprised by the extent of the changes. Many old States have vanished and many new States have been created. Areas, boundaries and names of the States have been changed. In 1947, the boundaries of several old States of India were changed in order to create new States. This was done to ensure that people who spoke the same language lived in the same State. Some States were created not on the basis of language but to recognise differences based on culture, ethnicity or geography. These include States like Nagaland, Uttarakhand and Jharkhand. @ = Has your village/town/ city remained under the same State since Independence? If not, what was the name of the earlier State? @ Can you identify names of three States in 1947 that have been changed later? @ Identify any three States which have been carved out of bigger States. eaeralism = K<e) Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 2.indd 19 08-04-2022 Why Hindi? Why not Bangla or Telugu? ssary Coalition government: A government formed by the coming together of at least two political parties. Usually partners in a coalition