and Nevis Nigeria om o PACIFIC OCEAN ~ | ; nited ee 5 Venezuela ww a Ys /* SF Ethiopia , Errated : - ie ATLANTI omoros Malaysia=~ ~ | PACIFIC OCEAN aon t noun ee aS 2 j OCEAN 1 Micronesia we . Argentina South Africa os J / f Source: Montreal and Kingston, Handbook of Federal Countries: 2002, McGill-Queen s University Press, 2002. Though only 25 of the world s 193 countries have federal political systems, their citizens make up 40 per cent of the world s population. Most of the large countries of the world are federations. Can you notice an exception to this rule in this map? r2.indd 14 Reprint 2025-26 08-04-2022 12:30:50 Chapter 2.indd 15 In this sense, federations are contrastedwithunitary governments. Under the unitary system, either there is only one level of government or the sub-units are subordinate to the central government. The central government can pass on orders to the provincial or the local government. But in a federal system, the central government cannot order the state government to do something. State government has powers of its own for which it is not answerable to the central government. Both these governments are separately answerable to the people. Let us look at some of the key features of federalism : There are two or more levels (or tiers) of government. Different tiers of government govern the same citizens, but each tier has its own JURISDICTION in specific matters of legislation, taxation and administration. Thejurisdictionsofthe respective levels or tiers of government are specified in the constitution. So the existence and authority of each tier of government is constitutionally guaranteed. The fundamental provisions of the constitution cannot be unilaterally changed by one level of government. Such changes require the consent of both the levels of government. Courts have the power to interpret the constitution and the powers of different levels of government. The highest court acts as an umpire if disputes arise between different levels of government in the exercise of their respective powers. WA Sources of revenue for each level of government are clearly specified to ensure its financial autonomy. The federal system thus has dual objectives: to safeguard and promote unity of the country, while at the same time accommodate regional diversity. Therefore, two aspects are crucial for the institutions and practice of federalism. Governments at different levels should agree to some rules of power-sharing. They should also trust that each would abide by its part of the agreement. An ideal federal system has both aspects : mutual trust and agreement to live together. The exact balance of power between the central and the state government varies from one federation to another. This balance depends mainly on the historical context in which the federation was formed. There are two kinds of routes through which federations have been formed. The first route involves independent States coming together on their own to form a bigger unit, so that by pooling sovereignty and retaining identity, they can