Exploring the Investigative World of Science 0877CHOI Probe and ponder Dear Young Scientists, Welcome back! On the first page of each chapter, you will find a set of questions. These are not meant for any exam they are unique invitations to spark your curiosity to explore the world of science! Why is one side of a puri thinner than the other? Are there more grains of sand on all the beaches and deserts of the world, or more stars in our galaxy? Right from Grade 6, we ve observed the incredible diversity of plants and animals around us. From the different shapes of leaves to the many kinds of insects why has nature created such a vast variety? Is there such a question that makes you curious about the world? Write it here! Chapter l.indd 1 6/28/2025 11:38:53 AM | Our journey with Curiosity, into the world of science continues in Grade 8. We hope you bring along the spirit of adventure and exploration that has guided us so far. In Grade 6, we discovered how science begins with wonder, with simple Why? and How? questions about the world around us. In Grade 7, we learnt that science is always evolving that each answer opens new questions, and how our ideas can slowly change as we explore deeper. Now, in Grade 8, we take the next step: entering the Investigative World of Science, where wonder and evolution come together to form the heart of how science works. We don t want you to just learn new facts, we want you to learn how to find new facts. Investigation in science means more than just looking at something and asking only simple questions. Now you can ask more focused questions, and design ways to perhaps do simple experiments to answer those questions, and then use your observations to improve your understanding. Step by step, we will learn how to use questions as starting points to try to observe carefully, experiment thoughtfully, and explain clearly what we see. In doing so, each of you won t just be learners but also investigators, young scientists, exploring real-world puzzles. These may range from everyday life like why does dough rise? to the bigger mysteries of Earth and beyond like is the world getting warmer? As you turn each page of this book, we hope you notice the interesting design of our page numbers once again. On the left-hand pages, at the bottom, you'll find the image of a root, symbolising the deep, solid foundation of knowledge that keeps us connected to our environment, traditions, and our cultural and natural heritage. On the right-hand pages, in the top corner, you ll find a kite soaring in the sky, reminding us that curiosity must take flight if we are to explore the unknown. Together, these two symbols the root and the kite invite you to stay grounded in real observations, while allowing your ideas to soar towards new horizons. Remember, investigation in science works best only