when ty) the brakes are applied. This also leads us to the idea of pressure how the force is distributed over an object. The same concepts of force and pressure also decide how air moves. A small difference in pressure can result in a gentle breeze while a stronger pressure difference can lead to strong winds, and sometimes even cyclones. Chapter l.indd 3 6/28/2025 11:39:02 AM Chapter l.indd 4 So, these forces are connected to powerful weather events like storms and cyclones that affect our daily lives, agriculture, and even our safety. To truly understand how air can exert pressure or why water boils at a certain temperature we need to zoom into these materials and see what kind of particles they are made up of, and how they move around. Everything around us is made of tiny particles. In materials that are solid these particles cannot move much, while in gases they can move around freely. Classifying things around us is an important feature of science. We can also classify materials around us into elements (pure substances), compounds (two or more elements bonded together), and mixtures (combinations that can be separated physically). Once we know how particles combine or mix, we can then understand solutions for example, how sugar dissolves in tea to make it sweet. From the world of particles and mixtures, we then move into the world 20 , of light. We'll study how light rays reflect oO%e'o o > off flat and curved mirrors, and bends 25 2eOeSes when passing through lenses and helps us understand the working of many objects around us. The bending of light explains what happens when we see an image in a shiny metal spoon or how corrective glasses help many of us see clearly. It s not just a polished mirror that reflects light, rough surfaces reflect light as well, and so does the Moon. Depending on the relative positions of the Earth, Moon and Sun, a slightly different part of the Moon is illuminated each night, giving rise to the beautiful phases of the Moon that we see in the sky. Watching the periodic cycles of the Moon s phases allowed humans to come up with the first calendars. By combining careful observations of sunrises, sunsets, and lunar cycles, various calendars came into being. Isn t it fascinating that the calendars which determine our routines on Earth are linked to the motions of objects far beyond our planet? uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade SIERRA On nC ataeee 6/28/2025 11:39:12 AM ADPDINS SMS TILIL crate 1 Exploring the Investigative World of science) But it s not just calendars or the movements of the Sun and Moon that are linked. Right here on Earth, there are marvellous and complex patterns of relationships between living Chaitra (March 22 - April 20, 2025) SUN MON TUE WED THU FRI SAT 526 6 27 7 28 8 29 12, 133 14, 155 19, 20 21; 22... 2615 2717 2812 291 organisms and their