up when placed in hot oil? Or how a phulka_ swells when put directly on the flame. Why does it puff up like a balloon? And why is one side thinner than the other? These are questions a scientist might ask and you can too! Let s see how we can investigate this simple everyday phenomenon like a scientist would. First, we will try to ask a scientific question. What are the different things that may change the way a puri puffs up when fried? To answer this, we may want to do some simple experiments. For that, we try and find out two main things what all can we change or control when we do the experiment, and what all can we observe to see if these changes made any difference. In this case, we can perhaps think of the changing the thickness and the size of the rolled dough. We could also try to use different types of flour (atta, maida, etc.). While frying the puri, we can also change the temperature of the hot oil, or try and drop the rolled dough into the oil in different ways (drop it vertically? slide it at an angle? slide it slowly?) Notice that these are things that we can control. However, to make sense of the changes, we also need to think of what we can observe or measure. Some of these may have just yes/no answers, in some cases there might be a number we can measure. Maybe we can start by checking whether the puri puffs up (yes/no), or we can measure the time it takes to puff up (seconds). We can check whether a very thick layer of dough still gives a thin side to the puri. Further, while doing such experiments, it is better to change only one thing at a time while keeping the other conditions same. For example, if we wanted to see the effect of boiling hot, hot, and not very hot oil, we would uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade SIERRA On nC ataeee Chapter l.indd 6 6/28/2025 11:39:20 AM Chapter l.indd 7 ADPDINS SMS TILIL crate 1 Exploring the Investigative World of science) use circles of dough of the same thickness, and drop them in the same way. It is also a good idea to keep notes of everything that you see and sense when doing an experiment. Did the oil splatter, smell, or smoke? And after doing one round of experiments, you may think of more questions. Do puris puff better when made fresh or from stored dough? What happens if I prick a hole in the puri before frying? This is exactly how all scientific experiments, from simple to the most complicated are done. This is the idea of systematic investigation. And just so you know, even this simple everyday observation of a puri swelling is not really completely understood by scientists today! So, whether it is the swelling of a puri or the shrinking bright part of