of knowledge that keeps us connected to our environment, traditions, and our cultural and natural heritage. On the right-hand pages, in the top corner, you ll find a kite soaring in the sky, reminding us that curiosity must take flight if we are to explore the unknown. Together, these two symbols the root and the kite invite you to stay grounded in real observations, while allowing your ideas to soar towards new horizons. Remember, investigation in science works best only when we balance the solid ground of careful observation with the freedom of creative thinking. You will also notice some patterns in the lines at the bottom of the page. There are some hidden scientific thoughts in these as well. But don t worry, they are mainly to make the page a little less boring. Let us now take a brief look at the various stops on our journey this year, and see where our curiosity, supported by strong roots and lifted by soaring ideas, might take us! uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade SIERRA On nC ataeee Chapter l.indd 2 6/28/2025 11:38:53 AM ADPDINS SMS TILIL crate 1 Exploring the Investigative World of science) This year, our investigative adventure will take us on a journey from the tiny microbes we can t see to planet-wide challenges we can t ignore. We will start by examining something as small as a single drop of water, and uncover a hidden world of tiny organisms, unseen but deeply linked to us. Some of these are invisible helpers, that help us digest our food or produce medicines, while others can be harmful, causing infections. But what does our body need to stay healthy? How do we fight these infections? We ll find out how nutritious food, exercise, medicines, and vaccines help us stay healthy and fight infections. But that s just the beginning. In today s world, science does play a major role in improving our lives. For example, we use electric current in many ways to help make our lives easier. We depend on the heating effect of electric current to keep us warm, while the magnetic effect helps motors run and machines function. These phenomena depend on fundamental forces. So after watching electricity do work, we move on to study these forces themselves, starting with those that make objects speed up, slow down, or change direction. Understanding forces helps explain why a ball thrown up | / \ in the air falls back to the ground, or why a car stops when ty) the brakes are applied. This also leads us to the idea of pressure how the force is distributed over an object. The same concepts of force and pressure also decide how air moves. A small difference in pressure can result in a gentle breeze while a stronger pressure difference can lead to strong winds, and sometimes even cyclones. Chapter l.indd 3 6/28/2025 11:39:02 AM Chapter l.indd 4 So, these forces are connected to powerful weather events like storms