to keep dogs quiet was to call them by their right names, and show them love. The safe was in the drawing room, behind a rather poor painting. Horace wondered for a moment whether he should collect pictures instead of books. But they took up too much room. In a small house, books were better. There was a great bowl of flowers on the table, and Horace felt his nose tickle. He gave a little sneeze and then put down his bag. He carefully arranged his tools. He had four hours before the servants returned. The safe was not going to be hard to open. After all, he had lived with locks and safes all his life. The burglar alarm was poorly built. He went into the hall to cut its wire. He came back and sneezed loudly as the smell of the flowers came to him again. How foolish people are when they own valuable things, Horace thought. A magazine article had described this house, giving a plan of all the rooms and a picture of this room. The writer had even mentioned that the painting hid a safe! But Horace found that the flowers were hindering him in his work. He buried his face in his handkerchief. Then he heard a voice say from the doorway, What is it? A cold or hay fever? Before he could think, Horace said, Hay fever, and found himself sneezing again. The voice went on, You can cure it with a special treatment, you know, if you find out just what plant gives you the disease. I think you'd better see a doctor, if you re serious about your work. I heard you from the top of the house just now. A Quegtion of Trust 91 Reprint 2025-26 r\ READ AND FIND OUT Who is speaking to Horace Danby? Who is the real culprit in the story? It was a quiet, kindly voice, but one with firmness in it. A woman was standing in the doorway, and Sherry was rubbing against her. She was young, quite pretty, and was dressed in red. She walked to the fireplace and straightened the ornaments there. Down, Sherry, she said. Anyone would think I d been away for a month! She smiled at Horace, and went on, However, I came back just in time, though I didn t expect to meet a burglar. Horace had some hope because she seemed to be amused at meeting him. He might avoid trouble if he treated her the right way. He replied, I didn t expect to meet one of the family. She nodded. I see what an inconvenience it is for you to meet me. What are you going to do? Horace said, My first thought was to run. Of course, you could do that. But I would telephone the police and tell them all about you. They d get you at once. 99 Footprints without Feat Reprint 2025-26 Horace said, I would, of course, cut the telephone