young lady. Just leave it to me and you'll have them within an hour. But Ill have to break your safe. Don t worry about that. My husband won t be here for a month, and I'll have the safe mended by that time. A Quegtion of Trust 93 Reprint 2025-26 And within an hour Horace had opened the safe, given her the jewels, and gone happily away. For two days he kept his promise to the kind young lady. On the morning of the third day, however, he thought of the books he wanted and he knew he would have to look for another safe. But he never got the chance to begin his plan. By noon a policeman had arrested him for the jewel robbery at Shotover Grange. His fingerprints, for he had opened the safe without gloves, were all over the room, and no one believed him when he said that the wife of the owner of the house had asked him to open the safe for her. The wife herself, a gray-haired, sharp-tongued woman of sixty, said that the story was nonsense. Horace is now the assistant librarian in the prison. He often thinks of the charming, clever young lady who was in the same profession as he was, and who tricked him. He gets very angry when anyone talks about honour among thieves . VICTOR CANNING GLOSSARY hay fever: a disorder affecting the nose and throat, caused by allergy to pollen or dust 94 Footprints without Feat Reprint 2025-26 Think dbo i 1. Did you begin to suspect, before the end of the story, that the lady was not the person Horace Danby took her to be? If so, at what point did you realise this, and how? 2. What are the subtle ways in which the lady manages to deceive Horace Danby into thinking she is the lady of the house? Why doesn t Horace suspect that something is wrong? 83. Horace Danby was good and respectable but not completely honest . Why do you think this description is apt for Horace? Why can t he be categorised as a typical thief? 4. Horace Danby was a meticulous planner but still he faltered. Where did he go wrong and why? Talk abou il 1. Do you think Horace Danby was unfairly punished, or that he deserved what he got? 2. Do intentions justify actions? Would you, like Horace Danby, do something wrong if you thought your ends justified the means? Do you think that there are situations in which it is excusable to act less than honestly? Cogaedad iden e The Unexpected by Ella Edkin e The Confession by Anton Chekhov e A Case for the Defence by Graham Greene r\ A Question of Trust 95 Reprint 2025-26