Storage of =< Fig. 3.10: From farm to plate Grinding of grains and packing The entire distance travelled by a bag of wheat or any other food item, from the producer to the consumer, is known as its food miles. Reducing food miles is important because it helps to cut down the cost and pollution during its transport; it helps support local farmers; and it also keeps our food fresh and healthy. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:21:27 PM Chapter 3.indd 55 Many people waste food, leaving it unconsumed on their plates. One must remember the time and effort put by our farmers and other community members in getting the food from the farm to our plate. We must take only as much food as we can consume. It would reduce food wastage. Try to find the timeline for the various processes How would eating local food help reduce food miles? involved in getting the food from farm to plate (Fig. 3.10). Eat healthy, share, and respect food. Support local producers! various food components. @ People across India eat diverse types of food, containing Choice of food may vary according to the cultivation of food crops in a region, taste preferences, culture and traditions, and so on. Reprint 2025-26 Mindful Eating: A Path to a Healthy Body 10/4/2024 3:21:46 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 3.indd 56 Culinary practices have changed over time. There is a significant difference between traditional and modern methods of cooking food. Food provides us energy, support growth, repairs our bodies and protects us from diseases. The major nutrients in our food are carbohydrates, fats, proteins, vitamins, and minerals. In addition, food also contains dietary fibres and water. Carbohydrates and fats are primary energy sources, while proteins are body-building nutrients. Vitamins and minerals strengthen our body, protect us from infections, and keep us healthy. A balanced diet provides all the essential nutrients in the right quantities, along with adequate roughage and water. Deficiency of one or more nutrients in our diet for a long time can lead to deficiency diseases and disorders. Junk foods are unhealthy as they contain high levels of sugar and fats but little protein, minerals, vitamins, and dietary fibres. Millets are known as nutri-cereals as they provide most of the nutrients required for the normal functioning of our bodies. They can be easily cultivated in different climatic conditions. Eating food that is locally grown and plant-based, to the extent possible, is not only healthy for our bodies but is also good for our environment and our planet. The distance travelled by a food item, from the place of its production to the consumer, is called food miles. We must aim to minimise food miles. We should never waste food and only take as much as we can consume. vay Let us enhance our learning Pick the odd one out and give reasons: (i) Jowar, Bajra, Ragi, Chana (ii) Kidney beans, Green gram, Soya bean, Rice Reprint 2025-26 10/7/2024 9:52:32 AM