rasam, rice . Rice, eromba (chutney), . ae utti (yellow peas and Manipur bamboo, . i Black Tea green onion curry) singju, soya bean k . angsoi Any other Why do we see diversity in traditional food consumed in various states of our country? Analyse the data collected by you in Table 3.2. Are there food items that are common across states? Make a list of those food items. You may find that some food items are common in many states while some are eaten only in a particular state. What relation do you find between the traditional food items and the locally grown crops? You must have observed that the traditional food of any state is usually based on the crops grown in that state. India is an agricultural country with diverse soil and climate types. Various crops are grown in its different regions depending on the soil types and climatic conditions. In various regions of India, the choice of food may vary according to the cultivation of food crops in that particular region, taste preferences, culture, and traditions. Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 3.indd 37 Mindful Eating: A Path to a Healthy Body 10/4/2024 3:16:48 PM 3 1 2 How have cooking practices changed over time? You have learnt that food habits vary across states. Our food choices as well as practices of food preparation may differ from one another. Have our food habits and cooking practices changed over time? Activity 3.3: Let usinteract and find out @ Prepare a list of questions for gathering information from elderly people about their food habits and cooking practices. Following are some of the sample questions = What kind of food do you still eat and what is new? =m Whatare the changes in cooking practices over time? = What has caused these changes? Conduct interviews with some elderly people based on the questions prepared. (a) Chulha (Traditional stove) (b) Modern gas stove Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 (c) Sil-batta (Stone grinder) (d) Electrical grinder Fig. 3.1: Change in cooking tools over time Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 3.indd 38 10/4/2024 3:17:01 PM What are your findings from the interviews you conducted? Cooking practices, also called culinary practices, have changed over time. There is a significant difference between traditional and modern culinary practices. Earlier, most cooking was done using a chulha (Fig. 3.1a). Nowadays, most of us cook using a modern gas stove (Fig. 3.1b). Earlier, most grinding was done manually using a sil-batta (Fig. 3.10). These days, we use an electrical grinder for ease of grinding (Fig. 3.1d). Find out what were the other ways of cooking and grinding. Why have these culinary practices changed over time? These changes may be due to factors such as technological development, improved transportation and better communication. mum 3.2 What are the Components of Food? Medu and Mishti visit the Traditional Food Festival organised in their school. The theme of the festival is Eat Healthy, Live Healthy . The festival features various stalls displaying different