tubes turn violet? This violet colour indicates the presence of proteins in the food item. Write your observations in Table 3.3. What conclusions can you draw from Table 3.3? Which food items show the presence of more than one nutrient? Which food items show the presence of both proteins and fats? Peanuts show the presence of both proteins and fats. This indicates that any food which we eat may contain multiple nutrients. Is there a food item that lacks any of these nutrients? Which of these foods do you consume daily? Try to find out other foods that are good sources of starch, fats, and proteins. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:20:30 PM Table 3.3: Exploring nutrients present in various food items Starch Fat Protein Oily patch for fat Colour of the food item present present present test for protein test (Yes/ (Yes/ (Yes/ No) No) No) Name of Colour of the the food food item for item starch test Before After Predic- Observa- Before After iodine iodine tion tion protein protein test test (Yes/No) (Yes/No) test test Potato Cucumber Boiled rice Boiled gram Peanuts Bread/ Chapati Butter Coconut Any other mus 3.4 Balanced Diet Are nutritional requirements the same for everyone? Do you and your grandparents need the same type or the same amount of nutrients? Requirements of the type and amount of nutrients in a diet may vary according to age, gender, physical activity, health status, lifestyle, and so on. Activity 3.8: Let us find OUt You have listed food consumed by you during the week in Activity 3.1. Check whether your food contains all the nutrients and other essential components necessary for growth and development. If not, check which nutrients or other food components need to be added. A diet that has all essential nutrients, roughage, and water in the right amount for proper growth and development of the body is known as a balanced diet. What changes would you make in your diet to make it a balanced diet? Mindful Eating: A Path to a Healthy Body Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 3.indd 51 10/4/2024 3:20:31 PM Activity 3.9: Let us COmpare) = Read the nutritional information given below for a packet of potato wafers and a packet of roasted chana shown here. (a) Potato wafers (b) Roasted chana Nutritional Information Nutritional Information (per 100 g) (per 100 g) 536 kcal 355 kcal Energy ; ; Energy ; ; (kilocalories) (kilocalories) Fats 35.0 g Fats 6.26 g Carbohydrates 53.0 g Carbohydrates 58.58 g Proteins 7.0 g Proteins 18.64 g Dietary Fibre 4.82 Dietary Fibre 16.8 g Based on the nutritional information on the food packets given above, which food would you choose? Why? Some foods have high calories due to high sugar and fat content. Moreover, they contain very low amounts of proteins, minerals, vitamins, and dietary fibres. These foods are called junk foods. These foods include potato wafers, candy bars and carbonated drinks. Consuming these foods frequently is not good as these are not healthy for our body. They