the food items. Have they turned blue-black? Record your observations in Table 3.3. A blue-black colour indicates the presence of starch. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 3.indd 48 10/4/2024 3:20:27 PM mu 3.3.2 Test for fats Activity 3.6: Let us investigate - - = Take a small part of the food items that you tested for the presence of starch in Activity 3.5. @ Place each food item on a separate piece of paper. @ Wrap the paper around the food and press it. Be careful not to tear the paper. Ifa food item contains a little water, allow the paper to dry. Does the paper develop an oily patch? What do you think = is the reason for this patch? If oil or butter is present in the food item, it leaves an oily patch on the paper. Now, hold the paper against light. Can you see the light faintly shining through this patch? An oily patch on the paper shows that the food item contains fat. Which of these items contain fats? Record your observations in Table 3.3. mu 3.3.3 Test for proteins Activity 3.7: Let us investigate ~~ ammmmmmmmmmeeeeeeeeS This activity may be demonstrated by the teacher. @ Take the food items tested in previous activities. @ Make a paste or powder of the food item using pestle and mortar (Fig. 3.8). @ Put about half teaspoon of each food item in a separate clean test tube. Precautions These chemicals are harmful and need to be handled with care. Do not touch any of these chemicals unless asked to do so. If any chemical gets spilled on your body, immediately wash the affected area with water. Mindful Eating: A Path to a Healthy Body * Do not put any of these chemicals into your mouth, or try to smell them. 3) Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 3.indd 49 10/4/2024 3:20:29 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 3.indd 50 @ Add 2-3 teaspoons of water to each test tube and shake them well. @ Add two drops of copper sulphate solution to each test tube using a dropper. @ Now, take another dropper and add 10 drops of caustic soda solution to each tube (Fig. 3.8). @ Shake well and leave the test tubes undisturbed for a few minutes. Soya bean Peas Pestle and mortar. Bread Rice Peanuts Fig. 3.8: Testing for the presence of protein in various food items What did you observe? Did the content of some test tubes turn violet? This violet colour indicates the presence of proteins in the food item. Write your observations in Table 3.3. What conclusions can you draw from Table 3.3? Which food items show the presence of more than one nutrient? Which food items show the presence of both proteins and fats? Peanuts show the presence of both proteins and fats. This indicates that any food which we eat may contain multiple nutrients. Is there a food item that lacks any