good for our environment and our planet. The distance travelled by a food item, from the place of its production to the consumer, is called food miles. We must aim to minimise food miles. We should never waste food and only take as much as we can consume. vay Let us enhance our learning Pick the odd one out and give reasons: (i) Jowar, Bajra, Ragi, Chana (ii) Kidney beans, Green gram, Soya bean, Rice Reprint 2025-26 10/7/2024 9:52:32 AM Chapter 3.indd 57 Discuss traditional versus modern culinary practices in India. A teacher says that good food may act as medicine. Ravi is curious about this statement and has some questions for his teacher. List at least two questions that he can ask. Not all delicious foods are necessarily healthy, while not all nutritious foods are always enjoyable. Share your thoughts along with a few examples. Medu does not eat vegetables but enjoys biscuits, noodles and white bread. He often has stomach ache and constipation. What changes should he make in his diet to get rid of these problems? Explain your answer. Reshma had trouble seeing things in dim light. The doctor tested her eyesight and prescribed a particular vitamin supplement. He also advised her to include a few food items in her diet. (i) Which deficiency disease is she suffering from? (ii) Which food component may be lacking in her diet? (iii) Suggest some food items that she should include in her diet to overcome this problem (any four). You are provided the following: (i) Canned fruit juice (ii) Fresh fruit juice (iii) Fresh fruit Which one would you prefer and why? Gourav got a fracture in his leg. His doctor aligned the bones and put ona plaster. The doctor also gave him calcium tablets. On the second visit, the doctor gave him Vitamin D syrup along with calcium tablets. Refer to Fig. 3.5 and answer the following questions: (i) Why did the doctor give calcium tablets to Gourav? (ii) On the second visit, why did the doctor give Vitamin D syrup along with calcium tablets? (iii) What question arises in your mind about the choices made by the doctor in giving the medicines? Reprint 2025-26 Mindful Eating: A Path to a Healthy Body 10/4/2024 3:21:53 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 3.indd 58 10. 11. 12. 13. Sugar is an example of carbohydrates. Sugar is tested with iodine solution but it does not change to blue-black colour. What can be a possible reason? What do you think of Raman s statement, All starches are carbohydrates but not all carbohydrates are starches. Describe the design of an activity to test your answer. While using iodine in the laboratory, a few drops of iodine fell on Mishti s socks and a few fell on her teacher s saree. The drops of iodine on the saree turned blue-black while the colour on the socks did not change. What can be a possible reason? Why are millets considered