Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 3.indd 42 10/4/2024 3:19:26 PM What do you infer from Case 2? You may have learnt about iodised salt through newspapers, advertisements or by reading about it on a salt packet. What does it mean? Iodised salt is simply common salt mixed with required quantities of salts of iodine. Chapter 3.indd 43 How would you find out more about other food components that protect our body from various diseases? Activity 3.4: Let us conduct a survey . Study the chart given in Fig. 3.5 to explore the functions and sources of various food components. Find out more sources of vitamins and minerals. Also, understand the symptoms of the diseases caused by the lack of these food components. Visit your neighbourhood, interact with people and find out if any individual shows the symptoms listed on the chart (an investigatory project of this kind can be taken by the students under the guidance of a teacher). Correlate these symptoms with their diet and identify the deficiency disease(s) or disorder(s). Suggest the possible cause(s) for the symptoms observed and changes required in the diet for improvement. Suggest them to visit a doctor for further advice. Reprint 2025-26 Mindful Eating: A Path to a Healthy Body 10/4/2024 3:19:49 PM Food component Deficiency (Vitamin/ disease/ Mineral) Functions Some sources disorder Symptoms Poor vision, loss of vision in darkness Vitamin A pened es Papaya, carrot, Loss of (night health mango, milk vision blindness), y sometimes complete loss of vision Keeps heart owen, healthy and L t b Sung supports whole grains, sensation Vitamin B body to re Beriberi . perform oducts. oh Oe various P ble i functions promi 'e in breathing Helps body Amla, guava, eens Vitamin C to fight green chilli, Scurvy = ealin 3 of diseases orange, lemon wounds Helps body absorb Exposure to : : calcium for sunlight, milk, . Soft and bent VME CaNN 1D bone and butter, fish, Rickets bones teeth eggs health Keeps Milk/soya milk, Calc; hones curd, cheese, ae and Weak bones, abcrun and teeth paneer deca tooth decay 2 healthy y i Helps to Seaweed, Swelling at S perform water chestnut the fr ae of 3 Iodine physical (singhada), Goitre ire aed s and mental _ iodised salt 8 activities E = portant Green leafy EY SUES 5 3 componen vegetables, . shortness 0 2 Iron of blood cen Anaemia _ reath pomegranate Fig. 3.5: Chart of vitamins and minerals, their functions, some sources, related deficiency disease(s)/disorder(s) and symptoms Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 3.indd 44 10/4/2024 3:19:49 PM Chapter 3.indd 45 From Fig. 3.5, you have learnt that vitamins (A, B,, C and D) and minerals (calcium, iodine, and iron) are two groups of food components that protect our body from various diseases. But, how can we overcome vitamin and mineral deficiency diseases or disorders? Papaya Flax seeds Mango Paneer Carrot (a) Some sources of Vitamin A (b) Some sources of Vitamin B, Orange Guava Eggs Amla Lemon Pumpkin