grinder for ease of grinding (Fig. 3.1d). Find out what were the other ways of cooking and grinding. Why have these culinary practices changed over time? These changes may be due to factors such as technological development, improved transportation and better communication. mum 3.2 What are the Components of Food? Medu and Mishti visit the Traditional Food Festival organised in their school. The theme of the festival is Eat Healthy, Live Healthy . The festival features various stalls displaying different kinds of traditional dishes. Dr Poshita, a nutritional expert, explains to students that Health is the Ultimate Wealth . Mindful Eating: A Path to a Healthy Body Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 3.indd 39 10/4/2024 3:17:16 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 3.indd 40 Potato Let us understand what Dr Poshita means by this statement. Have you ever missed a meal? How do you feel when you miss a meal? We feel tired and less energetic when we do not eat for some time. Why do you think a marathon runner drinks glucose water during and after a race? Glucose provides instant Sugarcane Banana energy. Glucose is an example of a carbohydrate. Carbohydrates are one of the primary sources of energy in our diet. Cereals like wheat, rice, and maize, vegetables like potato and sweet potato, and fruits like banana, pineapple, and mango are some sources of Fig. 3.2: Some sources of carbohydrates carbohydrates (Fig. 3.2). Do you know that common sugar is also a type of carbohydrate? Why do you think we prefer to have laddoos as a part of our traditional diet in winters? Besan or wheat flour (aata) and ghee are among the main ingredients of laddoos along with goond (edible gum), nuts, and seeds. Ghee and various kinds of oils are grouped under another kind of food component, which is called fat. Sources of fats can be from plants or animals (Fig. 3.3). Nuts, such as groundnuts, walnuts, coconuts, and almonds, and seeds, such as pumpkin seeds and sunflower seeds, are some sources of fat. Fat is a source of stored energy. Yes, my grandma told me that laddoos rich in ghee and nuts provide energy to keep us warm. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:17:26 PM Butter Pistachios Sunflower seeds Walnut Cashew nut Groundnut Sesame seeds Soya bean Fig. 3.3: Some sources of fats Carbohydrates and fats provide us energy for performing various activities. Therefore, they are called energy-giving foods. Identify more food items that are rich sources of carbohydrates and fats . More to know! Proteins are also an important part of our food. Milk products and pulses are good sources of protein. Sportspersons need proteins in larger quantities to build their muscles. People get proteins from plants as well as animals. Some excellent plant sources of protein are pulses, beans, peas and nuts (Fig. 3.4a). Animal sources of protein are milk, paneer, egg, fish and meat (Fig. 3.4b). Protein-rich foods help in growth and repair of our body. These are, therefore, called body-building