know! Proteins are also an important part of our food. Milk products and pulses are good sources of protein. Sportspersons need proteins in larger quantities to build their muscles. People get proteins from plants as well as animals. Some excellent plant sources of protein are pulses, beans, peas and nuts (Fig. 3.4a). Animal sources of protein are milk, paneer, egg, fish and meat (Fig. 3.4b). Protein-rich foods help in growth and repair of our body. These are, therefore, called body-building foods. Moong Tuar Dal Kidney beans Chicken Gram <2 Pa Paneer 2 Peas = Sx * Soyabean Fish Eggs g 8 (a) Plant sources (b) Animal sources Fig. 3.4: Some sources of proteins , 5 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 3.indd 41 10/4/2024 3:18:02 PM The right amount of protein must be included in the diet of growing children for their proper growth and development. Which of these food components are part of your daily diet? Q@ Have you ever seen mushrooms? They grow woe mostly in dark and moist places. Edible More to mushrooms are good sources of protein. : know! Mushroom Why do you think we are advised to include servings of fruits, vegetables and other plant-based foods in our daily diet? Let us understand the importance of some other food components by reading the following two cases Case 1 In earlier times, during long voyages, sailors often suffered from bleeding and swollen gums. During a voyage in 1746, Scottish physician James Lind observed that sailors who consumed lemons and oranges recovered from these symptoms. Bleeding and swollen gums are symptoms of a disease called scurvy. What do you interpret by reading Case 1? What cures scurvy? Lemons and oranges help in curing scurvy. Scurvy is caused due to deficiency of Vitamin C. Vitamin C present in citrus fruits like lemons and oranges helps in curing this disease. Case 2 In the 1960s, Indian scientists found that among the human population in the Himalayan region and the Northern plains of India, symptoms of swelling at the front of the neck were prevalent. As per norms of the Government of India, an effort was made to supplement common salt with iodine for preparing iodised salt. Consumption of iodised salt visibly reduced the above symptoms. These symptoms were due to a deficiency of iodine in the soil of this region resulting in a lack of iodine in the local food and water supply. Swelling 42 | at the front of the neck is a symptom of a disease called goitre. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 3.indd 42 10/4/2024 3:19:26 PM What do you infer from Case 2? You may have learnt about iodised salt through newspapers, advertisements or by reading about it on a salt packet. What does it mean? Iodised salt is simply common salt mixed with required quantities of salts of iodine. Chapter 3.indd 43 How would you find out more about other food components that protect our body from various diseases? Activity 3.4: