do you think of Raman s statement, All starches are carbohydrates but not all carbohydrates are starches. Describe the design of an activity to test your answer. While using iodine in the laboratory, a few drops of iodine fell on Mishti s socks and a few fell on her teacher s saree. The drops of iodine on the saree turned blue-black while the colour on the socks did not change. What can be a possible reason? Why are millets considered a healthy choice of food? Can eating just millets suffice for the nutritional requirements of the body? Discuss. You are given a sample of a solution. How would you check the possibility of it being an iodine solution? e s Learning further , Help your mother in unpacking the packets of various food items after shopping for grocery next time. Read the nutritional information of at least three fortified food items and analyse those. The Apatani tribe of Arunachal Pradesh produces a salt called tapyo to fulfil their dietary requirements. Collect more information from the internet about their salt making process and the need to make their own salt. Collect pictures and paste them on a chart paper. Also, write a paragraph about the process of making this salt and its usefulness. Vegetables or fruits that grow naturally in the forest or nearby fields without being cultivated by farmers are considered wild varieties. Traditionally, many tribal groups in India depend on these wild varieties, which form a part of their food. Read about ranbhajis from Maharashtra and edible mushrooms from Himachal Pradesh. Are you aware of any such wild varieties of food from your region? Discuss in class. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:22:16 PM Chapter 3.indd 59 List junk foods you eat frequently. Ask your friends also to make such lists. On the basis of these lists, write a letter to your principal requesting to ban certain junk foods inside the school campus. Suggest some healthy options. Find out the variation in nutritional requirements of different individuals based on age, physical activity and health conditions. Record your observations. Discuss and analyse. Prepare a diet chart to provide a balanced diet to a twelve-year-old child. The diet chart should include food items that are not expensive and are commonly available in your area. Reprint 2025-26 Mindful Eating: A Path to a Healthy Body 10/4/2024 3:22:16 PM Chapter 3.indd 60 Notes Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:22:16 PM