Fibre 4.82 Dietary Fibre 16.8 g Based on the nutritional information on the food packets given above, which food would you choose? Why? Some foods have high calories due to high sugar and fat content. Moreover, they contain very low amounts of proteins, minerals, vitamins, and dietary fibres. These foods are called junk foods. These foods include potato wafers, candy bars and carbonated drinks. Consuming these foods frequently is not good as these are not healthy for our body. They make a person obese. Such a person may suffer from several health problems. You should always remember Dr Poshita s statement that Health is the Ultimate Wealth. We should take care of our body to stay healthy. Eating a balanced diet and avoiding junk food contribute towards Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 3.indd 52 10/4/2024 3:20:38 PM Chapter 3.indd 53 a healthy body. Good health is essential for leading a happy life. Which of the two foods you studied in Activity 3.9 could be labelled as junk food? 3.5 Millets: Nutrition-rich Cereals You may have heard of jowar, bajra, ragi, and sanwa (Fig. 3.9). These are native crops of India (Fig. 3.9). These can be easily cultivated in different climatic conditions. These highly nutritious grains are also called millets. Have you ever had food items made from these millets? Fig. 3.9: Sanwa (Barnyard millet) Millets are small-sized grains and have been an integral part of the Indian diet for centuries. They have regained popularity due to their numerous health benefits. They are good sources of vitamins, minerals like iron and calcium, and dietary fibres as well. That is the reason they are also called nutri-cereals. They contribute significantly to a balanced diet required for the normal functioning of our body. Reprint 2025-26 Mindful Eating: A Path to a Healthy Body 10/4/2024 3:20:58 PM es 36 FOOd Miles: From Farm to Our Plate Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 3.indd 54 How does food reach from a farm to our plate? What are the steps involved in this process? Who are the people involved in this process? Do you know how much time and effort is required to get the wheat flour once seed grains germinate in the farm? Let us look at Fig. 3.10 to understand the entire process of making the chapati that we eat. ~~ Farmer growing wheat < Food on our plate Threshing and winnowing of grains STORY OF CHAPATIT: FROM FARM TO am Transport to retail shop Storage of =< Fig. 3.10: From farm to plate Grinding of grains and packing The entire distance travelled by a bag of wheat or any other food item, from the producer to the consumer, is known as its food miles. Reducing food miles is important because it helps to cut down the cost and pollution during its transport; it helps support local farmers; and it also keeps our food fresh and healthy. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:21:27 PM Chapter 3.indd 55