symptoms Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 3.indd 44 10/4/2024 3:19:49 PM Chapter 3.indd 45 From Fig. 3.5, you have learnt that vitamins (A, B,, C and D) and minerals (calcium, iodine, and iron) are two groups of food components that protect our body from various diseases. But, how can we overcome vitamin and mineral deficiency diseases or disorders? Papaya Flax seeds Mango Paneer Carrot (a) Some sources of Vitamin A (b) Some sources of Vitamin B, Orange Guava Eggs Amla Lemon Pumpkin seeds Edible Mushroom (c) Some sources of Vitamin C (d) Some sources of Vitamin D Fig. 3.6: Some sources of different vitamins Food components that provide energy, support growth, help repair and protect our body from diseases, and maintain various bodily functions are called nutrients. The major nutrients in our food include carbohydrates, proteins, fats, vitamins and minerals. Vitamins and minerals are also called protective nutrients. These nutrients protect our body from diseases and keep us healthy. Your parents may have advised you to have Reprint 2025-26 Mindful Eating: A Path to a Healthy Body 10/4/2024 3:19:54 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 3.indd 46 milk, green vegetables, fruits and wholegrains regularly. These food items are some sources of vitamins (Fig.3.6) and minerals. Although vitamins and minerals are required in small amounts, they are essential to keep our body healthy. What differences do you observe in raw and cooked vegetables? Have you ever noticed that vegetables sometimes lose their bright colour, or become softer and less crisp when cooked? Some nutrients like vitamin C and others are lost during cooking due to high heat. Would it not be wise to include fruits and uncooked vegetables into our diet? Washing cut or peeled vegetables and fruits may also result in the loss of some vitamins. However, it is highly recommended that all fruits and vegetables be thoroughly washed before consumption. Po We obtain al Nutrients from Nutrients like ined from ocks. No, Medu. galt can be obta r seawater or from Also, Vitamin D can be naturally produced by our body upon exposure to sunlight. Fruits and vegetables are rich in dietary fibres. Let us see how dietary fibres are beneficial for us. In addition to the essential nutrients, our body needs dietary fibres and water. Dietary fibres, also known as roughage, do not provide any nutrients to our body. However, they are an essential component of our food. They help our body get rid of undigested food and ensure smooth passage of stools. Roughage in our food is provided mainly by suitable plant products. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:19:56 PM Green leafy vegetables ; in . . difficulty 1 fresh fruits, wholegrains, My grandma [ understand pulses and nuts are good passing Stoo advised her to why the doctor abv > fibre. sources of roughage. high in od that is Eating food that is ean locally grown and _ plant based, to the extent possible, is not only healthy for the body but is also good for