Mindful Eating: A Path to a Healthy Body | {4 STH? BSH? THSTH? < von von NOVI N (aurfea) Who is healthy? Who is healthy? Who is healthy? One o677cHo3 who eats food that is wholesome, in moderate quantities, .] and appropriate for the season, time, and place. (Wise saying) y mp: a Medu and Mishti read ou . I aaa ara sata . thought of the day on annena jatani jivanti the school noticeboard . every day. Today s thought, annena jatani jivanti , makes them _ curious. Mishti tells Medu that it is a Sanskrit saying which means food gives life to living beings. Let us try to understand the significance of this saying. mee 35.1 What Do We Eat? All of us eat food every day. Food is an essential component of our daily life. List the food items you have consumed over the week in Table 3.1. Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 3.indd 35 10/4/2024 3:16:48 PM Table 3.1: Food items consumed over a week Day Food items Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Sunday What observations can you make about your food from the data collected in Table 3.1? Do you eat the same kind of food in every meal or do your choices vary? Compare your list with those prepared by your friends. Find similarities and differences in the food consumed by you and your friends. What did you find? Record your findings in your notebook. You may have noticed that there is a variety in the food eaten by you and your friends. Do you think that such diversity in food exists in all states of our country? mu 3.1.1 Food in different regions Activity 3.2: Let us explore = Find out the types of food traditionally consumed and the crops grown in various states of India. You may refer to books in your library, search the internet, and interact with your friends, family and neighbours to collect information. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 3.indd 36 10/4/2024 3:16:48 PM @ InTable 3.2, add more states and fill the collected data. A few examples are already given. Table 3.2: Some traditional food items in various states of India Locally grown Traditional food items State crops Aare Beverages ee Makki di roti, sarson da Lassi, chhach Punjab 7 saag, chhole bhature, (buttermilk), chickpea, . parantha, halwa, kheer milk, tea pulses Buttermilk, . . Idli, dosa, sambhar, ff Rice, ragi, . coffee, Karnataka coconut chutney, ragi urad, coconut ; tea mudde, palya, rasam, rice . Rice, eromba (chutney), . ae utti (yellow peas and Manipur bamboo, . i Black Tea green onion curry) singju, soya bean k . angsoi Any other Why do we see diversity in traditional food consumed in various states of our country? Analyse the data collected by you in Table 3.2. Are there food items that are common across states? Make a list of those food items. You may find that some food items are common in many