by costs, in the short term as well as in the long term. We have examples from across the world of people living in resource-rich areas who have been displaced from their homes to facilitate such 95 E N oSL N 002 N oS2 N oOL India and the World: Land and the People 1 - Natural Resources and Their Use Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Fig. 1.12. Shared waters of the Brahmaputra river developments. In some cases their sacred places are under threat, leading to conflicts. National and international trade depend on the geographical location of natural resources. Combined with human knowledge and skills, these can create unique products like the Wootz steel. As we know, trade fuelled the development of large empires in India. > Select any two natural resources. Gather information about their availability across different parts of India. Mark them on a map. What do you observe about their distribution? What are the types of economic activities connected with them? > Discuss the implications of extracting the natural resources in those parts for current and future generations. Suggest ways in which we can use Nature s gifts in responsible ways. Nature does not pay attention to political boundaries. This leads to tensions regarding the sharing of natural resources across states as well as countries. One example is the sharing of Kaveri River water among Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Puducherry; negotiations and deft management were required to maintain peace and fair sharing. Of course, reaching such | agreements between neighbouring countries is not easy. Find out about such a conflict in the international context. Discuss your findings in the class. Fig. 1.13. Mettur dam in Tamil Nadu built on the Kaveri river Having abundant natural resources does not guarantee economic prosperity. Some regions rich in natural resources can experience slower economic growth and development a phenomenon economists call the natural resource curse or the paradox of plenty . Put very simply, this means that often having plenty of natural resources does not automatically mean that a country is rich. Frequently, economies are unable to develop industries that convert the resources into products of higher value; the chapter Factors of Production in the latter part of this book will give you an understanding of this. India has generally avoided this curse by investing in the development of such industries to meet our growing needs. What do you think are the different inputs required to enable the use of the natural resources available in different geographical areas? However, the challenge of balancing resource extraction with sustainability remains. Understanding and managing natural resources is a valuable starting point, but human knowledge, good governance, and strategic planning determine whether they become lasting benefits or temporary windfalls. India and the World: Land and the People 1 - Natural Resources and Their Use Biodiversity loss: The decline in the variety of life on Earth Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Chapter l.indd 12