about five years, Pema s farm was thriving. She was able to sell her cardamom, ginger, and traditional vegetables at premium prices. In 2016, Sikkim became a 100 per cent organic state with all of its farmland certified organic. The effects were transformational local biodiversity flourished, with beneficial insects and birds returning; tourism increased as visitors came to see the organic farming model, and farmers incomes grew by 20 per cent on average. Today, Sikkim serves as a global model, demonstrating that an entire region can successfully transition to sustainable agricultural practices while improving both ecological and economic outcomes. Responsible and judicious use of resources In the case of non-renewables we need to ensure that we use the resources so that they can last long enough for humanity to find more sustainable alternatives. For example, we need to make the switch to renewable sources of energy for as many purposes as we can. ee f) ver Fig. 1.21. Satellite image of one of the largest solar parks in the world located in Rajasthan. It can generate enough electricity to power about 15% of the current needs of Rajasthan. India and the World: Land and the People 1 - Natural Resources and Their Use 05-07-2025 16:47:54 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Chapter l.indd 18 Pi ener ovis) tn Wm SEED ESD EY ED OE EN TE Fig. 1.22. Solar farm near Raichur, Karnataka The International Solar Alliance India s leadership in renewable energy India and France launched the International Alliance for Solar Energy (IASE) in 2015 a coalition of sunshine-rich countries committed to harnessing solar power. The alliance focuses on countries blessed with abundant sunlight throughout the year. India has helped channel billions of dollars into solar projects across developing nations, sharing technical expertise and creating affordable financing options. The Bhadla Solar Park is a symbol of India s solar ambitions, demonstrating how a country can transition from traditional energy sources to renewable alternatives. For Indians, this alliance represents both environmental responsibility and economic opportunity. Even as we deal with these issues we must be mindful that the distribution and access to resources, including basic ones like water and clean air, is often unfair to some sections of society. In cities, many areas do not receive adequate and regular supply of drinking water. Air pollution caused by industries and excessive use of fossil fuels, affects those who are unable to protect themselves from these hazards. We must remember our relationship with Nature and act as stewards of natural resources toward restoration, regeneration, and sustainability. The Bhagavad Gita refers to lokasangraha, ES BBA ETT AE BEDE AIT 05-07-2025 16:47:55 the idea that everyone must transcend personal desires and act for the wellbeing of all. Has the time come for us to consider this seriously? Before we move on... > > Natural resources are materials and substances that occur in Nature and are valuable to humans. There are different ways of categorising resources; renewable and non-renewable are useful