of natural resources toward restoration, regeneration, and sustainability. The Bhagavad Gita refers to lokasangraha, ES BBA ETT AE BEDE AIT 05-07-2025 16:47:55 the idea that everyone must transcend personal desires and act for the wellbeing of all. Has the time come for us to consider this seriously? Before we move on... > > Natural resources are materials and substances that occur in Nature and are valuable to humans. There are different ways of categorising resources; renewable and non-renewable are useful categories. The resource curse can be overcome through investments in the development of technology and skills. We need to become vigilant about the rate at which we use renewables so as not to overexploit them; judicious and wise use of non-renewables will enable stretching their use for a longer period of time. Questions and activities 1. What can make what is today a renewable resource nonrenewable tomorrow? Describe some actions that can prevent this from happening. Name five ecosystem functions that serve humans. What are renewable resources? How are they different from non-renewable ones? What can people do to ensure that renewable resources continue to be available for our use and that of future generations? Give two examples. Identify cultural practices in your home and neighbourhood that point to mindfulness in the use of natural resources. What are some considerations to keep in mind in the production of goods for our current use? India and the World: Land and the People 1 - Natural Resources and Their Use Chapter l.indd 20 A NOTE ON HISTORY S DARKER PERIODS History sometimes seems to be full of wars and destruction; it is true that it rarely focuses on periods when the society is, on the whole, harmonious and peaceful. But while every country may have had such peaceful eras and some benevolent rulers, history seems peopled by incompetent, corrupt or cruel rulers. We find them especially in what we may call the darker chapters or periods of history, when war, abuse, fanaticism, bloodshed, etc., suddenly dominate the landscape and inflict suffering and misery on the whole society or country. The world over, historians have faced this dilemma: how much attention should we draw to such darker periods? Should we omit them entirely? Should we mention them in passing, with most atrocious details left out? Or should we face them and analyse them so as to understand what made such developments possible and, hopefully, help avoid their recurrence in future? The third option is, in our opinion, the best, if it can be done with enough detachment and sensitivity; it is important to know our past, pleasant or unpleasant, since the past continues to live with us and shapes the present. What do we mean by detachment and sensitivity ? Simply that it is important to study those darker developments dispassionately, without blaming anyone living today for them. For instance, you will learn later that World War II (1939-1945) resulted in millions of deaths worldwide; Germany then followed a cruel ideology (known as