Natural Resources and Their Use Concerned social scientists are clear on what we need to do: we must move toward a regenerative economy, an economy that operates in harmony with nature, repurposing used resources, minimizing waste, and replenishing depleted resources. We must return to the innate wisdom of nature herself, the ultimate regenerator and recycler of all resources. CHAPTER Christiana Figueres and Tom Rivett-Carnac in The Future We Choose Fig. 1.1. Dudhsagar waterfall and the railway bridge, Goa, India 1. How do we categorise natural resources? The Big Questions @ What is the connection between the distribution of natural resources and different aspects of life? 3. What are the implications of unsustainable use / over exploitation of natural resources? 0881CHOT Fig. 1.2. A microhydel plant in Fig. 1.3. An offshore oil rig extracts Himachal Pradesh the power of flowing petroleum from below the seabed Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Chapter l.indd 2 water converted into electricity WHEN DOES NATURE BECOME A RESOURCE? One of the meanings of the word Nature is the totality of life and non-life forms that are part of our environment but have not been created by humans. When humans use these for their sustenance, or create new things from them for consumption, these elements of Nature become resources . For example, trees are part of the environment; they exist independently ofhumans. When we cut them and convert their wood into furniture, we see the trees as a resource. Often these entities are not easily accessible. For example, there may be petroleum in places deep under the ocean that we do not have the technology to access, or the extraction cost may be too high; or it may be culturally unacceptable like cutting trees in sacred groves. So, for an entity to be called a resource, it should be technologically accessible, and its exploitation should be economically feasible and culturally acceptable. (Usually, the word exploitation has a negative connotation; in the context we use it here, it means extraction, utilisation and consumption of Natural resources .) The Earth has treasures, many of which have formed over millions of years, and which humans have taken and learnt to use. These include the most obvious ones like water, air and soil, and also the not-so-obvious ones like coal, petroleum, precious stones, metal ores, timber, etc. 05-07-2025 16:47:36 ; 3 a on > ed s a Fig. 1.4. Gentle ploughing causes minimal Fig. 1.5. Honey from a beehive disturbance to the underground ecosystem and retains soil moisture. DON'T MISS OUT > In many indigenous traditions of the world, Nature is considered sacred. You have read about this. In such traditions, Nature is a nurturer and nourisher. . s 9 i 7 oe. = | * ay > Doyouknow of practices that reflect this? Te, ody Fig. 1.6. Tulasi puja for wellbeing THINK ABOUT IT Take a pause. Look at yourself and the things around you. What is the origin of each of them? At some