Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Arghyam: offering, generally of water, as a mark of respect or gratitude than the forest can grow trees, we will eventually deplete the forest. Scientists have shown that through irresponsible human actions, many of Nature s cycles have been disturbed. A combination of several factors interacting fossil fuel-driven industrialisation and the cutting down of forests for agriculture and other purposes are two of them has led to rising temperatures that we are experiencing; on account of this, the glaciers in some places in the Himalayas are melting at a rate faster than precipitation can replace them. This has implications on water security for the populations living in the plains dependent on the water tower . ) DON'T MISS OUT > Traditionally, communities had a system of regulating (or refraining from) fishing during the spawning season to enable the maintenance of the fish population. However, the commercialisation of fishing resulted in over-fishing. In the case of a type of fish called tuna, for example, the rapid and extensive decline in their population led to some agreements on control of fishing. Nevertheless, this important type of fish that keeps the ocean ecosystem in balance by consuming smaller fish, shrimps, etc., is on a decline. > Do you know of other traditional practices that help the ecosystem to stay in balance? We need industries to produce the goods we consume. The process also creates wastes that are frequently discharged into rivers and other water bodies. Often, these wastes cannot decay to become the food of some lifeform. Instead, it leads to a disturbance in Nature s cycle of restoration and regeneration, leading to a situation where the river becomes poisonous and cannot support life. without proper treatment LET'S EXPLORE Identify human actions in your surroundings that result in | Nature losing her ability to restore and regenerate. What types of interventions can be undertaken to restore Nature s cycle? ~ DON'T MISS OUT > Ecosystem functions and ecosystem services: Nature has some inherent ways of working. For example, trees naturally produce oxygen. When these natural processes benefit humans, we call them ecosystem services . We can think of it like this: a forest naturally filters water, prevents soil erosion, and provides habitat for animals these are ecosystem functions. When we benefit from clean water, protected farmland, and pollinated crops because of that forest, we are receiving ecosystem services from Nature. > Amature tree produces about 275 litres of oxygen per day (this varies a little depending on the type of tree). Ahuman being needs about 350 litres of oxygen every day (this can change based on the type of activity that an individual engages in, their height and weight, and so on). India and the World: Land and the People 1 - Natural Resources and Their Use Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 ld Take up a small research study to assess the types of renewable resources in your region;