wide variety of natural resources, from wood to marble, and coal to gold. Resources for energy Energy is a cornerstone of modern living electricity for our buildings, transportation, and all types of production processes. This energy can come from diverse natural sources: coal, water, petroleum, natural gas, sunlight, wind, etc. Chapter l.indd 5 resource as long as glaciers and ie Fig. 1.8. We can take timber from the forest, in limited quantities, for a long forests exist time if we allow it to regenerate. Renewable and non-renewable resources A second way of categorising natural resources could be based on whether they are renewable or not. A general principle of Nature is that it functions in a restorative and regenerative way. Restoration is the process of returning something to its original healthy state ifit has been degraded or damaged. Nature heals, renews and maintains herself over time. A cut on your skin will normally heal; a forest recovers after a wildfire. Regeneration goes beyond restoration. It is about Nature s ability to create new life and the conditions for thriving. We plant trees in areas that may have lost them on account of human interventions like clearing forests for housing. Planting the types of trees that were originally growing there restores the ecosystem the trees provide food and shelter for birds, squirrels and other creatures, enabling life to return. Nature works in cycles where there is no waste. Take a forest. Let s say a tree falls in the forest. It decomposes with the bacteria, fungi and insects feeding on it. The tree becomes part of the soil enriching it. New trees and plants grow from seeds ... eventually some will fall and the cycle starts again. These are examples of Nature s principle of restoration and regeneration in practice. Renewable resources Renewable resources exhibit these characteristics over time. Most of India has abundant sunshine. In the natural course, rivers are India and the World: Land and the People 1 - Natural Resources and Their Use 05-07-2025 16:47:40 fed regularly by rain and melting glaciers, forests renew themselves, soil replenishes itself through natural processes, and so on. Solar energy, wind energy, energy from flowing water, timber from forests are renewable resources as long as we are able to manage them in a sustainable manner. However, for them to remain renewable there is a condition the natural rhythm of restoration and regeneration must not Fig. 1.9. Offering arghyam to Surya, be disturbed. If we harvest timber faster the sun-god, in gratitude. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Arghyam: offering, generally of water, as a mark of respect or gratitude than the forest can grow trees, we will eventually deplete the forest. Scientists have shown that through irresponsible human actions, many of Nature s cycles have been disturbed. A combination of several factors interacting fossil fuel-driven industrialisation and the cutting down of forests for agriculture and other purposes are two of them has led to rising temperatures that we