soil moisture. DON'T MISS OUT > In many indigenous traditions of the world, Nature is considered sacred. You have read about this. In such traditions, Nature is a nurturer and nourisher. . s 9 i 7 oe. = | * ay > Doyouknow of practices that reflect this? Te, ody Fig. 1.6. Tulasi puja for wellbeing THINK ABOUT IT Take a pause. Look at yourself and the things around you. What is the origin of each of them? At some point they all lead to Nature; even the plastic button on your shirt. In short, we apply the term natural resources to materials and substances that occur in Nature and are valuable to humans. CATEGORIES OF NATURAL RESOURCES In Science, we learn the usefulness of categorisation and naming we use some shared characteristics (or criteria) when we categorise ideas or things; we name the categories so that we can refer to them with just one word or a short phrase. When these names and meanings are shared across groups of people, it helps India and the World: Land and the People 1 - Natural Resources and Their Use Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 us discuss a set of ideas or things without needing to describe them every time. We can communicate more effectively, too. In earlier classes, you learnt about living and non-living things. As soon as we use these words, you know what they mean. This is a simple example of categories. We do the same with natural resources. y THINK ABOUT IT What might be the different criteria we can use to categorise natural resources? One of the ways we could categorise natural resources is based on the uses we put them to essential for our life, source for materials and sources for energy. Resources essential for life Life could not exist on Earth without the air we breathe, the water we drink and the food we eat. We take these from the atmosphere, the rivers and ponds, and through the cultivation of soil or other living things. We cannot make the air we breathe, the water we drink, or the soil which gives us food. Resources for materials Human beings create physical objects out of Nature s gifts. We make them for our utility or to create things of beauty that enrich our lives and those of others a piece of wood can be transformed into a chair and also carved into a statuette. India s geographical diversity provides us with a wide variety of natural resources, from wood to marble, and coal to gold. Resources for energy Energy is a cornerstone of modern living electricity for our buildings, transportation, and all types of production processes. This energy can come from diverse natural sources: coal, water, petroleum, natural gas, sunlight, wind, etc. Chapter l.indd 5 resource as long as glaciers and ie Fig. 1.8. We can take timber from the forest, in limited quantities, for a long forests exist time if we