in different geographical areas? However, the challenge of balancing resource extraction with sustainability remains. Understanding and managing natural resources is a valuable starting point, but human knowledge, good governance, and strategic planning determine whether they become lasting benefits or temporary windfalls. India and the World: Land and the People 1 - Natural Resources and Their Use Biodiversity loss: The decline in the variety of life on Earth Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Chapter l.indd 12 RESPONSIBLE AND WISE USE OF NATURAL RESOURCES: STEWARDSHIP Sustaining life on Earth requires that we respect Nature and use natural resources in a way that enables the restoration and regeneration of renewable resources, and the responsible and judicious use of non-renewable ones. Scientists studying these aspects have warned that the irresponsible treatment of natural resources has led to pollution, biodiversity loss and climate change, which has been taking place at an increased pace in recent years. Restoration and regeneration of renewable resources Here are two examples of how we are pushing the use of natural resources beyond their capacity to regenerate. Many farmers in our country extract groundwater for irrigation purposes. In most states, the extraction rate is greater than the rate at which the water table is replenished. Over time, this deficit builds up, leading to higher cost of extraction of groundwater and eventually to its unavailability. It has been predicted that many of our growing cities will run out of groundwater soon. Initiatives to raise groundwater levels have been launched to remedy this. Traditional practices of water harvesting, rejuvenation of ponds and tanks, cutting down on wasteful consumption of water, processing and reusing water are some of the strategies attempted. Similarly, the improper use of chemical fertilisers and pesticides has led to soil degradation. Traditional farming practices considered soil to be part of Mother Earth. Practices like the use of cow dung and other natural fertilisers, mulching, multi-cropping, and so on, enabled injudicious use of chemical fertilisers learn from these practices and apply 05-07-2025 16:47:45 Chapter l.indd 13 them in our current situation to prevent further degradation. We need to replenish and rejuvenate our soil. Overexploitation of groundwater: a caselet from Punjab A crisis has unfolded in the fertile plains of Punjab where groundwater resources have been severely depleted. Punjab was home to the Green Revolution that fed a large proportion of our population, and contributed to India becoming self-sufficient in food. Today the same state faces issues of sustainability Nature has been exploited beyond regeneration, at least in the short term. However, this concern is not particular to Punjab; it affects many other states. In the 1960s, farmers shifted to high-yielding varieties of wheat and paddy. These required more water than the traditional seeds, and farmers began to extract groundwater to meet this need. In addition, the supply of free power led to the over-pumping of groundwater (a situation still prevalent in much of India today). Modern farming techniques also required the use of chemical pesticides and