little depending on the type of tree). Ahuman being needs about 350 litres of oxygen every day (this can change based on the type of activity that an individual engages in, their height and weight, and so on). India and the World: Land and the People 1 - Natural Resources and Their Use Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 ld Take up a small research study to assess the types of renewable resources in your region; you may discuss with your teacher the geographical area of your study and sources to access information that you may need. What has been the change in their status over time? Make a small report that identifies the reasons for the change and what may be done. Non-renewable resources Non-renewable resources are created over long periods. They cannot be replenished at the rate we use them. For example, fossil fuels (coal and petroleum), and minerals and metals like iron, copper and gold, are non-renewable resources. India has significant quantities of coal reserves. We mine coal to meet our growing need for energy, but it has been estimated that the coal reserves in India may last another 50 years; the demand for electricity has been increasing as the population expands and development work accelerates. Till more sustainable options become available widely, we need to use the coal we have judiciously. What are the non-renewable resources that you use daily, directly or indirectly? What are the possible renewable substitutes? What are some of the steps we can take to transition to renewables? DISTRIBUTION OF NATURAL RESOURCES AND ITS IMPLICATIONS Natural resources are not evenly distributed across our planet or even within countries. This uneven distribution shapes human settlements, trade patterns, international relations, and conflicts too. Many wars have been fought, and continue to be fought, to gain control over natural resources. 25 N 20 N 15 N 10 N 70 E 75 E 80 E 85 E 90 E A Basse A Mumbai Hig LEGEND @ Coal AOil Iron Ore Bauxite 70 E 75 E 80 E 85 E 90 E Fig. 1.11. Distribution of important minerals Observe the map in Fig.1.11. Notice the uneven distribution of important minerals. What types of resources are available in your region? How are they distributed? Industries located near natural resources create employment opportunities for the local people. Townships grow around them and expand economic opportunities for others, too. More modern facilities that improve the quality of life become accessible. However, these benefits are often accompanied by costs, in the short term as well as in the long term. We have examples from across the world of people living in resource-rich areas who have been displaced from their homes to facilitate such 95 E N oSL N 002 N oS2 N oOL India and the World: Land and the People 1 - Natural Resources and Their Use Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Fig. 1.12. Shared waters of the Brahmaputra river developments.