yields, and causes soil and water pollution too. The Central Pollution Control Board has created guidelines for cement factories to ensure that the pollution is minimised or eliminated. In addition, thereisa move towards creating alternative materials that reduce pollution. These include the use of traditional materials like stone and mud, new plant-based materials and recycled materials from waste plastic. \ Fig. 1.19. A community building in Auroville constructed by Auroville Earth Institute (which holds the UNESCO Chair for Earthen Architecture). This modern building is made of mud using special techniques. India and the World: Land and the People 1 - Natural Resources and Their Use 05-07-2025 16:47:52 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Chapter l.indd 16 Traditional materials and methods are being combined with modern technological advances to create new materials that are sustainable the process of production is less polluting, provides local employment, and is designed keeping in mind the climate of the place. Vrikshayurveda is an ancient Indian botanical science that focuses on the study and care of plants and trees. The term comes from Sanskrit, with vriksha meaning tree and ayurveda meaning the science of life or health. This traditional knowledge system dates back several millennia and was formalised in texts such as Surapala s Vrikshayurveda around the 10" century CE. It has elaborate recommendations on the specific plants to be grown on different soil types, and provides intricate methods for seed collection, preservation, and pre-planting treatments. Irrigation techniques are _ elaborately described, with recommendations varying according to plant species, growth stage, and seasonal conditions. It specifies pest management strategies through natural repellents and plants that should be grown together. This form of sustainable agriculture promotes practices like crop rotation and mixed cropping to maintain soil health. Vrikshayurveda also offers advice on proper methods of ploughing soil so as to retain soil moisture as well as facilitate the growth of living organisms in the soil like fungi, bacteria and earthworms. A caselet from Sikkim Pema s family farm in Sikkim faced declining yields and mounting debts from expensive chemical inputs. When the state government announced a policy to promote organic farming throughout the state, Pema s family decided to try. It was not an easy transition initially the yields dropped as the soil was Fig. 1.20. Organic farming in Sikkim recovering from years of chemical use. 05-07-2025 16:47:53 Chapter l.indd 17 The family switched to compost, prepared natural pest repellents using neem and garlic, and started growing multiple crops across the year. After about five years, Pema s farm was thriving. She was able to sell her cardamom, ginger, and traditional vegetables at premium prices. In 2016, Sikkim became a 100 per cent organic state with all of its farmland certified organic. The effects were transformational local biodiversity flourished, with beneficial insects and birds returning; tourism increased as visitors came to see the organic farming model, and farmers incomes grew by 20 per cent on average. Today, Sikkim serves as a global model,