goes to school. On her first day 1. (at/in/on) school, Jahnavi stood nervously 2. (in/ outside/above) the gate, clutching her bag close to her. The bell rang and she hurried 3. (outside/through/inside) the bustling classroom. classmates. The teacher greeted them warmly and started the lesson 5. (about/in/for) numbers. Jahnavi listened attentively, feeling excited 6. (at/about/for) the new adventure ahead. VII Read the highlighted words in the following sentence from the text. A kingfisher swept down, its wings an arrow of blue in the sunlight. Words like on, off, up, down can function both as preposition and as adverb. For example: She ran up the stairs. (preposition) * She rang me up. (adverb) ww Remember, a position will always be followed by an object (noun) whereas erb will tell you more about the action (verb). 1 Fill in the blanks with prepositions or adverbs. 1. The cat jumped the table. (preposition) 2. The children played until dark. (adverb) TWA 3. She quickly ran the park. (preposition) Poorvi | Unit lindd 12 I _ -_ . The helicopter was hovering . (adverb) . We were just walking , chatting. (adverb) . After thoroughly wiping his shoes, he stepped ___ . (adverb) . She drove slowly the sharp curve. (preposition) oN DMD WH BS . He placed the keys the mat before leaving. (preposition) D Let us listen Read the words given in the box below. You will listen to five people speak about school life. As you listen, circle the words that are used by the speakers. There are two words you do not need. (Transcript for the teacher on pg. 39 ) lawyer desks homemaker principal _ posters newspapers marriage advertisements careers books { 1 I I I I ( ! You will once again listen to the five speakers. As you listen, match each statement 1-7 to each speaker (i)-(v). There are two statements that you do not need. Statements Speaker No. 1. Promotes active participation for all in school activities 2. Comments on how school makes learning Mathematics joyful 3. Believes in the power of education that leads to freedom of choice 4. Shares that school also means companionship 5. Understands that boys and girls have different abilities 6. Persuades the parent to grant permission to attend school 7. Believes that learning skills is not gender-based JUUUUUU 06-Mar-25 2:47:16 PM LEARNING TOGETHER Let us speak I Read the sentence given below. Dear, dear! What s the matter? ... You shouldn t cry, you know. And you really shouldn t be scared, when you have been coming here to see me every day, well, almost every day. The River spoke to Jahnavi in a sleepy voice. Work in pairs and take turns to speak the same sentence in other voices. Some hints are given below. II Janhavi asks the River for advice and the River gives advice. Read the given situations and work in pairs to ask for and give advice. Take turns to change your roles. Use the prompts