too heavy. She tried pushing it, pulling it and even rolling it, but nothing seemed to work. Exhausted and saddened, she sat down and began to cry. As the ant sat there, feeling beaten, she noticed a small bird nearby. The bird was trying to build a nest. It picked up twigs and leaves, but every time it tried to place them, the wind would blow them away. However, the bird did not give up. It kept trying, over and over again, until finally, it managed to build a strong nest. 06-Mar-25 2:47:33 PM LEARNING To If that bird can keep trying and succeed, then I shouldn t give up either, she thought, feeling inspired. Determined once more, the ant gathered all her strength and decided to try again. She called her fellow ants for help. Together, they formed a chain and lifted the crumb with their combined strength. Slowly but surely, they carried the crumb back to the anthill. We did it! Thank you, everyone! We showed that with teamwork and never giving up, we can achieve anything! the ant shouted, excited and grateful. She and her friends celebrated their success. We too should learn this lesson from the ant s experience never give up, no matter how difficult the situation may seem. Hope you all liked the story. Thank you! 2. Now, listen to the story once again and as you listen, check whether your answers are correct. Rectify wherever needed. Let us listen (refer to page 36) ye) You will listen to a conversation between a mother and son. As you listen, select four true statements from 1-7 given below. Anuy : Ma, we have a new student in our class, Tara. She s quite talkative and pleasant. You know, the writing in her books doesn t look like ours. It s different. She told us that it s called Braille. Motuer: It s great to know that your school has facilities to address the needs of the visually impaired. Thanks to the Digital India Initiative, which is paving the way for inclusion of the visually impaired. Unit lindd 41 Anyy : Oh, Digital India! That s about being computer literate, isn t it? Motuer: Well, Digital India is about more than just internet access. It aims to include everyone, including people with disabilities, by providing digital infrastructure and services. For the visually impaired, it means access to assistive technologies like screen readers, voice-overenabled smartphones and apps that can make daily activities easier. Anuyy : Ohh... interesting. What is a screen reader, Ma? Motuer: I knew you d ask about it! Well, a screen reader is a software application that helps people who are visually impaired use computers and smartphones. It reads out the text displayed on the screen and provides audio feedback. Anyy__: That s amazing! So, Tara can use a computer just like we do? Motue_r: Yes, she can. Anuj _ : So, it makes a big difference in their daily lives. Motuer: It certainly