mighty strains of an orchestra, as if you would be stricken deaf tomorrow. Touch each object as if tomorrow your tactile sense would fail. Smell the perfume of flowers, taste with relish each morsel, as if tomorrow you could never smell and taste again. Make the most of every sense; glory in all the facets of pleasure and beauty, which the world reveals to you through the several means of contact, which Nature provides. But of all the senses, Iam sure that sight must be the most delightful. HELEN KELLER Let us discuss I Work in pairs. Identify the statements that are true from the ones given below. Share your answers with the teacher. 1. The author expresses a deep longing to experience the world through the sense of hearing. 2. The author would like exploring the city only to observe how people are suffering. 3. The author would spend the first day seeing the people whose kind-heartedness and friendship have enriched her life. 4, The author acknowledges that even in three days, she would not be able to see everything. 5. The author feels that everyone can find the greatest joy merely by the sense of touch. 6. The author advises those who can see to appreciate every moment as if they might lose their senses tomorrow. 7. On the third day, the author would like to observe people in their daily lives and understand their experiences. LEARNING TOGETHER strains: tunes tactile sense: sense of touch morsel: a small piece of food facets: aspects 06-Mar \ Poorvi II Complete the table given below with what Helen Keller wanted to do on the three days if she had sight. see the people, know rise with the dawn, her friends fromthe | 978 Wit eda feel of their faces, ... III The author says that you need eyes to be able to see the true self of a person. Therefore, she refers to the eye as window of the soul . How is the narrator able to understand the feelings of a person? Let us think and reflect I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow. 1. I feel the delicate symmetry of a leaf. I pass my hands lovingly about the smooth skin of a silver birch, or the rough, shaggy bark of a pine. In spring, I touch the branches of trees hopefully in search of a bud, the first sign of awakening Nature after her winter s sleep. Occasionally, I am very fortunate; I place my hand gently ona small tree and feel the happy quiver of a bird in full song. (i) What does the delicate symmetry of a leaf ? symbolise? (ii) List two phrases from the extract that describe the texture of objects in nature. (iii) Complete the sentence appropriately. The phrase awakening Nature after her winter s sleep refers to (iv) What is the tone of the writer in this extract? A. nostalgic B. proud C. admiring D. celebratory 2.