Tue Day THE RIVER SPOKE Let us do these activities before we read. I Close your eyes and quietly listen to the sounds around you for a minute. 1. Are they trying to tell you something? 2. Do you think the things around you also listen to you all day long? f Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher. II Jahnavi was a bright young girl who lived with her parents and three brothers in a coastal village in India. Her parents worked on the farm. She had a dream. 1. What could that dream be? 2. How could she make her dream come true? 3. What is your dream? What can you do to make your dream come true? i Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher. Poorvi splashed: fell in drops, making a sound slithered: moved by sliding from side to side murmuring: speaking ina low voice startled: surprised thicket: a 4 group of bushes and trees shrieked: made a high-pitched sound PA Qs I A big bright tear splashed down her nose. And another. A kingfisher swept down, its wings an arrow of blue in the sunlight. And a green lizard slithered down to the river s edge to bask in the sun. Dear, dear! said a sleepy, murmuring voice, What s the matter? Jahnavi was startled, because she was sure she had been quite alone. It couldn t have been the lizard. And the kingfisher was up in the thicket of bamboo eating the fish it had caught. It couldn t be the parrots, because parrots shrieked and this was such a sleepy voice. She looked around her. There wasn t a soul in sight. She was rather scared and wanted to run away. You shouldn t cry, you know, the voice went on. And you really shouldn t be scared, when you have been coming here to see me every day, well, almost every day. 06-Mar-25 2:47:08 PM She was puzzled. It was such a voice, like the river. It couldn t be the river! Well, tell me all about it, said the River, for it was the River. I ve got to hurry to reach the sea, you know. They won t let me go to school, said Jahnavi. Tasked my mother, Why can t I go to school like Ettan and Meena? And Mother had replied, You are too small, baby. Maybe later. But when she was five, little Ramu was born and Mother still said, Maybe next year. Jahnavi, mind your little brother while I go to the fields. Now, she was nearly ten and minding Little Appu, who was the smallest. They don t want me. They only... she stopped with a sob... Tam scared to go to school. And I m so old now, they ll never let me go. But I want to go. I want to learn to read like Ettan and Meena. Jahnavi called her brother Ettan . Ettan means Elder brother ,