the ground as ever. Up, up it ran, not a second to stay, To utter the least complaint; Till it fell still lower, and there it lay, A little dizzy and faint. Its head grew steady again it went, And travelled a half-yard higher; Twas a delicate thread it had to tread, And a road where its feet would tire. Again it fell and swung below, But again it quickly mounted; Till up and down, now fast, now slow, Nine brave attempts were counted. Sure, cried the King, that foolish thing Will strive no more to climb; When it toils so hard to reach and cling, And tumbles every time. But up the insect went once more, Ah me! tis an anxious minute; He s only a foot from his cobweb door, Oh say, will he lose or win it? Steadily, steadily, inch by inch, Higher and higher he got; And a bold little run at the very last pinch Put him into his native cot. Bravo, bravo! the King cried out, All honour to those who try; The spider up there, defied despair; He conquered, and why shouldn t I? And Bruce of Scotland braced his mind, And gossips tell the tale, That he tried once more as he tried before, And that time did not fail. Exiza Cook -Mar -25 2:47:24 PM Unit lindd 19 Let us discuss I Complete the summary of the poem by filling in the blanks with suitable words from the text given in the box below. Share your answers with the teacher. An example has been given. ' tried mounted despair attempts great ' conquered low strive The poem, written in a narrative style, tells the story of King Bruce of Scotland, who was feeling 1. ___ after failing multiple times to achieve something 2. for his people. In a moment of 3.0 , he observed a spider trying to reach its web high above. The spider 4. every time it fell after getting close to its goal. It made nine 5. _ and finally succeeded. The king said that the spider had 6. and so would he. Inspired by the spider s determination, King Bruce decided to 7. . When he 8. ___ this time, he ultimately succeeded. II Complete the following sentences suitably. 1. We can say that the poet uses the narrative style because _ 2. The central idea of the poem is III Pick three examples from the poem for each of the following: 1. lines that describe the spider s efforts 2. alliteration (the repetition of the same consonant sounds at the beginning of closely connected words) IV Why does the poet repeat the following words or phrases in the poem? tried and tried; steadily, steadily; up, up V Fill in the blanks by choosing the correct answer from within the brackets. 1. The rhyme scheme of the poem is . (AABB/ABBA/ABAB) 2. Bravo is an example of . (conjunction/interjection/ adjective) 3. The poet uses twas and tis