Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow. 1. He flung himself down in low despair, As grieved as man could be; And after a while he pondered there, Tl give it all up, said he. Now just at that moment a spider dropped, With its silken, filmy clue; (i) Select the phrase which shows the physical expression of the King s emotional state. (ii) Why does the poet use the word low before despair? (iii) Choose the correct option to complete the sentence. In the line, And after a while he pondered there , the word pondered means A. paused B. thought C. noticed OD. rested (iv) Choose the correct option from the words given in the brackets. The phrase silken filmy clue creates an image of something that is (long and light/very delicate and soft). 2. ..when it toils so hard to reach and cling, And tumbles every time. But up the insect went once more, Ah me! tis an anxious minute; He s only a foot from his cobweb door, Oh say, will he lose or win it? (i) Choose the correct option to complete the analogy. toil: hard:: A. roll: tumble B. tumble: circle C. compress: roll D. jump: tumble \ \ Unit l.indd 21 d-mahdd 24726 PM | \ Poorvi (ii) List any two characteristics of the spider highlighted in the line, But up the insect went once more . (iii) Choose the correct option to complete the sentence. The expression Ah me! in the extract indicates a sense of A. happiness B. stress C. relief D. loneliness (iv) Complete the sentence with an appropriate reason. Readers are able to relate to this extract because II Answer the following questions. 1. How does the first stanza help in setting the mood of the poem? 2. Describe how King Bruce s attitude changes from the beginning towards the end of the poem. 3. The poet describes every action of the spider in great detail. What does this tell us about his attitude towards the spider? 4. How does the spider inspire us to overcome despair and not give up? 5. The poem teaches us that failures are stepping stones to success. Explain. 6. The spider s journey tells us that anyone can bea source of inspiration in our lives. Elaborate. ute, ww > Let us learn I Write the opposites of the following words taken from the poem. 1. up x 2. fast x 3. glad x 4. win x 5. succeed x Unit l.indd 22 06-Mar-25 2:47:26 PM Unit l.indd 23 II Ill A Choose the correct meaning of the underlined words in the following sentences from the box given below. Frame sentences of your own for these words. 1. work very hard and/or for a long time 2. prepared themselves for something difficult 3. an attempt to do something new or difficult . to try very hard to achieve something == === =e ee ee (i) Please make every endeavour to