What you see panorama What you hear music esouwe mh) II Read the following sentences from the text and underline the verbs. I should divide the period into three parts. 4, * On the first day, I should want to see... The next day I should arise with the dawn... I should behold with awe... The words you have underlined are a combination of two verbs. In each of these sentences, should is the modal verb (suggestion), and the second verb (divide, want, arise, behold) is the main verb. _ Modal verbs are auxiliary verbs that express necessity, possibility, permission, or ability. They are used before the main verb to give additi ormation about the function of the main verb. COmmon modal verbs include can, could, may, might, shall, should, will, would, must, and ought to. III Identify the modal verbs in the following sentences. Choose the functions. they express from those given in the box below. see ee ee Be ew ee ee ee ee Be ee ee ee eB eB ee ee eB ee eB eB eB ee ee ee eK 1. You can learn a lot from this experience. 2. They might arrive late due to traffic. 06-Mar-25 2:47:32 PM 3. She must finish her homework before dinner. 4. They ought to apologise for their mistake. 5. He would like to have some lassi, please. LEARNING TOGETHER IV Read the situations in Column 1 and functions in Column 2. Fill in the blanks in the sentences in Column 4 with appropriate modal verbs from Column 3. After filling in the blanks, explain the function of each modal verb you used to your classmates and the teacher. Column 1 1. You want to leave work early. 2. You have an important deadline tomorrow. 3. Your friend is thinking whether to join Art class. 4. There are dark clouds in the sky. 5. Asking someone to pass the salt at the dinner table 6. Advising someone to apologise for a mistake 7. Deciding where to go for picnic Unit l.indd 35 Column 2 permission obligation advice possibility polite request | moral obligation suggestion Column 3 (i) | (ii) | | (iii) | can, | | could, may, | might, } must, ought | (iv) to, | shall, } should, (v) will, would (vi) (vii) We Column 4 I leave early today if I finish all my tasks? I finish this report | by tomorrow. You consider all the pros and cons before making a decision. It rain later today. you pass the salt, please? You apologise for the mistake you made. go to any park nearby for picnic. do-mtahse 2:47:32 PM | Poorvi & | Unit lindd 36 Let us listen You will listen to a conversation between a mother and son. As you listen, select four true statements from 1-7 given below. (Transcript for the teacher on pg. 41) ws Statements . Anuj finds the concept of Braille fascinating and wants to learn more about it. . Mother