Your perseverance helped you. Use the following sentence prompts as a guide for your narration. Use as per your topic. 1. Introduction: I remember a time when I felt like giving up. It was when... There was a moment in my life when I faced a big challenge. It happened when... 2. Describe the challenge: The challenge I faced was... I was struggling with... The problem seemed too big because... 3. Feeling disheartened: At first, I felt discouraged and thought about giving up because... I didn t think I could succeed because... I felt upset and wanted to leave because... 4. The source of motivation: But then, I saw/heard/read about... Someone/something inspired me to keep going. It was... I remembered the poem... do not quit... 5. Taking action: After feeling inspired, I decided to... I gathered my strength and... With a new sense of willpower, I... I asked for help from... 6. The result: In the end, I was able to... Thanks to standing firm and never giving up, I achieved... I felt proud because... It was worth it because... 7. Reflection: This experience taught me that... I learned that perseverance is the key to success... Now, I always remember to... The lesson I learnt from this is... Unit lindd 25 bao h \29 2:47:27 PM | Poorvi Let us write King Bruce was inspired by the spider that kept on trying till it was successful. Think about the steps you can take to overcome a difficult situation and write them down. Now, write a letter to your cousin on how you plan to overcome any difficult situation. Also, advise not to quit and persevere. Remember to use transition words like To begin with..., Next..., After that..., Then..., Finally... to share the steps of your plan. You may begin this way: 20, Rajendra Nagar Jeevanpur 23 August 20XX Dear Monika, Thank you for your letter asking me about... You may end this way: Yours affectionately, Deepa ' \ <4) ye - -yf Let us-explore . I Collect folk songs in your own language that connect us with nature and compile them as a class project. ) II Did you know that spiders are not insects? They belong to a group called the arachnids. Observe a spider and an ant from a distance and note down the differences between them. Share your observations with your classmates. Ask your Science teacher for more information to know about spiders better. III Let us learn how to weave a spider web. 1. Take three sticks (each about eight inches long) and a roll of old wool. 2. Tie the sticks together in the centre with the wool (Fig. 1). 3. Start weaving the web by putting a loop around every stick (Figs. 2 and 3). ae 06-Mar-25 2:47:28 PM \ 4. Complete the web and tie the thread in a knot on the stick where the *. _ web is complete (Fig. 4). Now, decorate it with words and phrases you learnt about the