Trains are noisy; I prefer ships, said the River. Jahnavi never knew the snake lived in the bamboo clump. What are ships? she asked. Big boats, said the River, so big that they can take hundreds of people, and they sail along the sea with lights that shine all night. Jahnavi held her breath. Will they come here? she asked. T m afraid not, said the River. Too large, you know. Chandu s catamaran is good enough for me. Chandu can take you to see a ship, someday. They'd never let me! wailed Jahnavi. Try going to school first, said the River. Remember it s up to you! Unit lindd 5 Jahnavi gathered courage. The next day she reached the school, panting and out of breath and stood by the door listening while the teacher read out the lesson. It was a story about a prince called Ashoka, who became a great king. Little Appu had fallen asleep on her shoulder. She crept nearer and nearer till she was in the back row, squatting with the others on the earthen floor. Little Appu made no noise and she listened. Where did you spring from, little girl? asked the teacher. And what is your name? You re new in my class. She s Gopi s sister, Gopi is in the next class, said one of the boys. It s Jahnavi, said another. So, you re Gopi s little sister? Nice lad, Gopi. If you really, really want to come to my school, Jahnavi, the teacher had said, we ll talk to your father about it. Don t you worry. We'll find a way. Jahnavi saw the teacher walking up the steps to their gate the next evening when she was lighting the lamp. She could see her father scratching his cheek the way he did when he was worried and the teacher was nodding and saying something she couldn t make out. And Mother said, Little Jahnavi, I shall miss you when you go to school. Girls should learn as much as they want. When I was your age, I wanted to go to school, but your grandmother said No , but now, I am glad the teacher came to talk to your father. LEARNING TOGETHER 06-Ma \ MWe 2:47:12 PM | Poorvi & | Unit lindd 6 And Jahnavi said, Mother, when I grow up, Ill be a teacher and I'll go from house to house in our village and ask all the little girls to come to my school. And Ill teach them all that I m going to learn. And she went down the path between the fields the next morning before school began, to meet the River. I did it! she told the River. I was scared, but I did it! And they re letting me go. m going to learn to write my name and do sums and find out why our little fishes in the rice fields turn into frogs. She heard the river s