spider s efforts 2. alliteration (the repetition of the same consonant sounds at the beginning of closely connected words) IV Why does the poet repeat the following words or phrases in the poem? tried and tried; steadily, steadily; up, up V Fill in the blanks by choosing the correct answer from within the brackets. 1. The rhyme scheme of the poem is . (AABB/ABBA/ABAB) 2. Bravo is an example of . (conjunction/interjection/ adjective) 3. The poet uses twas and tis for the sake of __ . (rhythm/ rhyme/contraction) LEARNING TOGETHER \ do-mahdd24725 PM | Poorvi VI The spider s climbing is compared to King Bruce s own struggles. Just as the spider repeatedly attempts to reach its web, Bruce is trying to achieve a great deed for his people. This poetic device is called metaphor. It strengthens the poem s message about perseverance keep trying till we succeed. Ametaphor isa figure of speech that involves an implied comparison between two unlike things without using like , as , or as...as . It suggests that one thing is another, highlighting similarities between them to add deeper meaning or understanding. 1. Read the following sentences and identify metaphors and similes. Write M for metaphor and for simile. (i) | Heranas fast as a cheetah. (ii) The world is a stage. (iii) The night was as dark as coal. (iv) Hesang like an angel. (v) Her voice was music to his ears. (vi) The classroom was a zoo. (vii) The baby slept like a log. (viii) Her smile was as bright as the sun. (JUUUVUUVUU (ix) The lake was a mirror, reflecting the sky. . Read the following sentences and transform the similes to metaphors and metaphors to similes. Two examples have been given. (i) Knowledge spreads like the branches of a mighty tree. Knowledge is a spreading branch of a mighty tree. (ii) His courage was a beacon, guiding us through the storm. His courage was as bright as a beacon guiding us through the storm. His courage was like a beacon guiding us through the storm. (iii) The book was a treasure chest, filled with endless adventures. (iv) Her laughter was a melody that brightened the darkest days. & | Unit lindd 20 06-Mar-25 2:47:25 PM N a LEARNING TOGETHER (v) The mountain stood as a guard, watching over the valley below. (vi) The night was like a velvet cloak, wrapping the world in mystery. (vii) Her thoughts were like butterflies in a summer meadow. Let us think and reflect I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow. 1. He flung himself down in low despair, As grieved as man could be; And after a while he pondered there, Tl give it all up, said he. Now just at that moment a spider dropped, With its silken, filmy clue; (i) Select the phrase which shows the physical expression of the King s emotional state. (ii) Why does the poet use the word low before despair? (iii) Choose