Jahnavi, mind your little brother while I go to the fields. Now, she was nearly ten and minding Little Appu, who was the smallest. They don t want me. They only... she stopped with a sob... Tam scared to go to school. And I m so old now, they ll never let me go. But I want to go. I want to learn to read like Ettan and Meena. Jahnavi called her brother Ettan . Ettan means Elder brother , but his real name was Gopi. I want to know why spiders are yellow in yellow flowers, why bamboo trees rustle, why the moon always comes from behind the hills, never the other way, why the baby fish in the field water become frogs, why... Stop! said the River. You make me breathless. So many whys! I can tell you where the moon goes, the River said conspiratorially. It goes down towards the sea. I ve seen; it always takes the same way over the mountains and down to the sea, like me! Let us discuss 1. What was Jahnavi s dream? Was it important to her? Why? 2. Do you think the river can help her in fulfilling her dream? How? | Unit lindd 3 LEARNING TOGETHER rustle: light sound made by leaves rubbing against each other conspiratorially: secretly Poorvi clump: a small group of trees growing together rattling: noise made by shaking things catamaran: a kind of boat wailed: (here) complained ina loud voice | Unit liindd 4 & I Even little Ramu goes to school, said Jahnavi, pity, the school isn t by the sea, said the River. Then I could take you along, you know. But, I suppose I couldn t really. You d get your feet wet. And that would never do! I m afraid there s only one thing you can do. Can I do something? asked Jahnavi. Well, it s up to you, said the River. Seems to me little girls can do as much as little boys they swim as fast as little boys. You just slip along one morning and sit there in the school and listen to what s going on, and maybe the teacher will let you stay. TI couldn t, gasped Jahnavi. I couldn t! They'd scare me! They d chase me out. The River laughed. You? Scared? the River said, when you re not afraid of the green lizard, or of the snake in the bamboo clump, Jahnavi startled) or the big trains rattling past that bridge. Trains are noisy; I prefer ships, said the River. Jahnavi never knew the snake lived in the bamboo clump. What are ships? she asked. Big boats, said the River, so big that they can take hundreds of people, and they sail along the sea with lights that shine all night. Jahnavi held her breath. Will they come here? she asked. T m afraid not, said the River. Too large, you know. Chandu s catamaran is good enough for me. Chandu