you pass the salt, please? You apologise for the mistake you made. go to any park nearby for picnic. do-mtahse 2:47:32 PM | Poorvi & | Unit lindd 36 Let us listen You will listen to a conversation between a mother and son. As you listen, select four true statements from 1-7 given below. (Transcript for the teacher on pg. 41) ws Statements . Anuj finds the concept of Braille fascinating and wants to learn more about it. . Mother is unsure of the school s efforts to include students with visual impairment. . Anuj initially thinks that Digital India is only about learning how to use computers. . Mother believes that screen readers are very effective for persons who are visually impaired. . Anuj already knew that persons who are visually impaired can use computers and smartphones. . Anuj wants to know about the effectiveness of assistive technologies for persons who are visually impaired. . Mother believes a right mindset is the best support for persons who are visually impaired. True or False Let us speak Work in pairs. Take turns to speak for a minute on any one of the senses you value the most. Use the given prompts to frame your response before you speak. e Ivalue my sense of sight/ sound/ touch/ smell / taste the most because... One of my favourite experiences is... This is so because... I appreciate being able to see/ hear/touch/ smell/ taste... God forbid, if I were to lose the sense of sight/ sound/ touch/ smell / taste, it would make me feel... I would not be able to... I thank God that I am able to see/ hear/ touch/ smell / taste. 06-Mar-25 2:47:32 PM LEARNING TOGETHER Remember to speak clearly and confidently e glance at your notes for reference rather than reading e make eye contact use gestures if you wish to * pronounce words clearly and avoid mumbling e speak at a steady, moderate pace Let us write A descriptive paragraph describes a person, place, object or event to create a memorable experience for the reader. Write a descriptive paragraph describing a place that you visited recently. Follow the guidelines given below to draft this paragraph. 1. In the opening line, begin with something interesting to capture the reader s attention. Introduce the place you visited. 2. In the supporting lines, describe the place using adjectives and specific details that appealed to your five senses sight, sound, smell, taste, and touch. You may include alliterations, similes, and personifications to hold the reader s attention. 3. In the concluding lines, summarise the description to provide a final impression. Mention what was the most important thing about that place which others should also experience. I Do you know how persons with visual challenges are able to read and write? They read through touch with the help of Braille, a code of raised dots that represents the letters of the alphabet. This tactile code was developed over / a period of