sticks (each about eight inches long) and a roll of old wool. 2. Tie the sticks together in the centre with the wool (Fig. 1). 3. Start weaving the web by putting a loop around every stick (Figs. 2 and 3). ae 06-Mar-25 2:47:28 PM \ 4. Complete the web and tie the thread in a knot on the stick where the *. _ web is complete (Fig. 4). Now, decorate it with words and phrases you learnt about the spider in the poem or anything else that you like. Fig. 2 Fig. 1 Fig. 4 . roe Fig. 3 Unit lindd 27 Poorvi THREE Days TO SEE Let us do these activities before we read. I Work in pairs. Recall a visit to a place that you liked. Discuss the details of that place and write about the following: 1. Name of the place 2. The person(s) you went with 3. The things that you could: see listen * smell * taste * touch and feel II How does this memory make you feel? III Do you think your visit/experience would be different if you could not see or hear? Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher. Did you know that our five senses are essential for us to experience and make sense of the world around us? Unit lindd 28 06-Mar-25 2:47:30 PM Unit lindd 29 < <7 Vi Cry C roe = Let us read I, who cannot see, find hundreds of things to interest me through mere touch. I feel the delicate symmetry of a leaf. I pass my hands lovingly about the smooth skin of a silver birch, or the rough, shaggy bark of a pine. In spring, I touch the branches of trees hopefully in search of a bud, the first sign of awakening Nature after her winter s sleep. Occasionally, I am very fortunate; I place my hand gently ona small tree and feel the happy quiver of a bird in full song. At times, my heart cries out with longing to see all these things. If I can get so much pleasure from mere touch, how much more beauty must be revealed by sight. And I have imagined what I should most like to see if I were given the use of my eyes, say, for just three days. I should divide the period into three parts. On the first day, I should want to see the people whose kindness and companionship have made my life worth living. I do not know what it is to see into the heart of a friend through that window of the soul , the eye. I can only see through my fingertips the outline of a face. I can detect laughter, sorrow and other obvious emotions. I know my friends from the feel of their faces. LEARNING TOGETHER symmetry: evenness birch: a slender tree with thin peeling bark shaggy: hairy quiver: shiver Poorvi behold: see panorama: scene glimpse: brief look pageant: display condensed: