morning and sit there in the school and listen to what s going on, and maybe the teacher will let you stay. T couldn t, gasped Jahnavi. I couldn t! They d scare me! They d chase me out. (i) Complete the sentence with an appropriate reason. According to the River, there was no difference between girls and boys because (ii) Identify whether the following statement is true or false. The River encourages Jahnavi to have faith in herself and fulfill her desire to go to school. \ Unit lindd 7 domabad 4 2:47:13 PM | g (iii) Choose the correct option to complete the sentence. When the River suggests that Jahnavi should slip along , it means that she should move A. quickly B. casually _ C. quietly D. confidently (iv) What does the repetition of the phrase J couldn t, tell us? II Answer the following questions. 1. Why does the writer describe different aspects of nature in great detail at the beginning of the story? Why do you think the writer does this? 2. How did the River know so much about Jahnavi? 3. Jahnavi says, And I m so old now, they ll never let me go. What can you infer about Jahnavi and the school from this line? 4. Why did the River laugh when Jahnavi said she would be scared at school? 5. Why should Jahnavi follow the River s advice? 6. How does the conversation between Jahnavi and the River make the story more appealing? 7. What is the main message that the writer intends to convey? * Let us learn I You have learnt that naming words are called nouns and only proper nouns begin with a capital letter. Why has the author used a capital letter for the River even when it is a common noun? (Clue: Has the River been given qualities of ahuman being?) II There are a few words related to sound in the text. Pick the words from the text and write them next to the correct definition. 1. made a high-pitched piercing sound DQ . to cause liquid to strike or fall on something . alowcontinuous background noise . cry with loud uncontrollable gasps . to make a soft dry sound, like paper or leaves moving n na F&F WwW WD . tooka short quick breath through the mouth due to surprise, pain or shock 7. shaking rapidly to make continuous short, sharp sounds yg \ 06-Mar-25 2:47:13 PM 8. making a lot of noise 9. made a long, high cry, usually because of pain or sadness Now, fill in the blanks with suitable sound words from exercise (II). The classroom grew (i) as the students noticed the teacher carrying the answer papers. As the teacher turned the pages with a (ii) , the children (iii) , wondering what comments awaited. Someone (iv) in frustration, and the (v) of the students steadily increased. Finally, when the teacher praised the students for their excellent performance, the students