And Ill teach them all that I m going to learn. And she went down the path between the fields the next morning before school began, to meet the River. I did it! she told the River. I was scared, but I did it! And they re letting me go. m going to learn to write my name and do sums and find out why our little fishes in the rice fields turn into frogs. She heard the river s sleepy chuckle, Come again, little girl, and I ll tell you all about e ships that sail the sea. KaMALA NaIR act ada pted fi rom The Day the River Spoke) Let us discuss Complete the table given below with Jahnavi s questions in Column 1 and the River s answers in Column 2. Check your answers with the teacher. ..why the moon always comes from behind the hills...? ... little girls can do as much as little boys. Big boats, so big that they can take hundreds of people, and they sail along the sea with lights that shine all night. 06-Mar-25 2:47:13 PM LEARNING TOGETHER O Let us think and reflect Ly 3 I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow. 1. You shouldn t cry, you know, the voice went on. And you really shouldn t be scared, when you have been coming here to see me every day, well, almost every day. She was puzzled. It was such a voice, like the river. It couldn t be the river! Well, tell me all about it, said the River, for it was the River. I ve got to hurry to reach the sea, you know. (i) Complete the sentence with the correct option from those given in the brackets. The tone of the River in the given extract is (assuring/sympathising) (ii) Select a phrase from the extract which shows that Jahnavi was a frequent visitor to the spot. (iii) Choose the correct option to complete the sentence. The use of an exclamation mark at the end of the line, It couldn t be the river! expresses A. excitement B. hesitation C. irritation D. disbelief (iv) Choose three qualities of the River highlighted in the extract from the words in the box given below. 2. Can I do something? asked Jahnavi. Well, it s up to you, said the River. Seems to me little girls can do as much as little boys they swim as fast as little boys. You just slip along one morning and sit there in the school and listen to what s going on, and maybe the teacher will let you stay. T couldn t, gasped Jahnavi. I couldn t! They d scare me! They d chase me out. (i) Complete the sentence with an appropriate reason. According to the River, there was no difference between girls and boys because (ii) Identify whether the following statement is true or false. The River encourages Jahnavi to have faith in herself and