Unit l.indd 22 06-Mar-25 2:47:26 PM Unit l.indd 23 II Ill A Choose the correct meaning of the underlined words in the following sentences from the box given below. Frame sentences of your own for these words. 1. work very hard and/or for a long time 2. prepared themselves for something difficult 3. an attempt to do something new or difficult . to try very hard to achieve something == === =e ee ee (i) Please make every endeavour to arrive on time. (ii) Ants toil tirelessly to save food for rainy season. (iii) We encourage all students to strive to do their best. (iv) The sailors braced themselves against the strong wind. The poem uses words that show distance. For example: a long way up, inch by inch, higher and higher, half-yard higher Classify the words or phrases in the box given below based on the distance (far or near) and write in the space provided. You may take the help of a dictionary. | proximity nowhere vicinity adjacent I ' remoteness Q yarn a stone s throw hair light year farther Poorvi IV Read the following line from the poem. Twas a delicate thread it had to tread, Now repeat the lines five to six times. Are you able to say it clearly? Create more tongue twisters of your own. 9 Let us listen I You will listen to a story about an ant. Read the questions given below and before you listen, guess the answers to these questions. (Transcript for the teacher on pg. 40) 1. What was the ant known for? (i) determination (ii) strength (iii) wisdom 2. Why was the ant unable to take the roti home? (i) It was stuck under a rock. (ii) It was too heavy to carry. (iii) It was pulled by other ants. 3. What was the bird doing? % (@i)_ playing with the ant (ii) searching for food (ili) picking up leaves 4. How did the bird make the ant feel? (Gi) proud (ii) inspired (iii) relaxed oe 5. How did the fellow ants help? (i) by advising the ant continuously (ii) by standing still near the ant (iii) by joining the ant in her efforts Ne. II_ Now, listen to the story once again and as you listen, check whether your answers are correct. | Unit lindd 24 06-Mar-25 2:47:27 PM LEARNING TOGETHER Let us speak Narrate a personal experience about a time when you were motivated by someone or something to carry on and never give up. Your perseverance helped you. Use the following sentence prompts as a guide for your narration. Use as per your topic. 1. Introduction: I remember a time when I felt like giving up. It was when... There was a moment in my life when I faced a big challenge. It happened when... 2. Describe the challenge: The challenge I faced was... I was struggling with... The problem seemed too big because... 3. Feeling disheartened: At first, I felt discouraged and thought