Yes, they should. I do my best to ensure that both my son and daughter get equal opportunities. I look forward to their successful careers and rewarding lives. I feel education gives freedom to make choices in life. Whether my daughter wants to work in an organisation or be a homemaker, it should be her choice and the same applies to my son. SPEAKER (ii): (Grandmother) I went to school but many girls at that time could not attend school because some elders in the village felt that girls should help in the house and take care of their little brothers and sisters. I am happy that the situation has changed today. SPEAKER (iii):(Teacher) The school prepares students for meaningful and useful participation in the world of work by learning hands-on abilities and skills, developing equal respect for head-hands-heart, valuing the dignity of labour, and understanding vocational choices for the future. SPEAKER (iv): (Student) I like to go to school. I feel that by coming to school and reading the books, I learn about things from all over the world. I also have friends with whom I can share my feelings. Unit lindd 39 SPEAKER (v): (Principal) Everyone should attend school. You must ve noticed that the girls are doing very well. However, as the Head of an institution, I know that all students can work hard. My message to students is that they should attend school regularly and take part in every school activity without bothering whether it is for girls or boys. The idea is to focus on learning. II You will once again listen to the five speakers. As you listen, match each statement 1-7 to each speaker (i)-(v). There are two statements that you do not need. Let us listen (refer to page 24) 1. You will listen to a story about an ant. Read the questions given below and before you listen, guess the answers to these questions. Hello everyone, I m sure you have enjoyed learning about King Bruce and the spider. Let me share another story with you. In a thick green forest, there lived a little ant. She was known for her determination and never-give-up attitude. One sunny day, the ant found a delicious piece of roti that was too big for her to carry alone. This crumb is huge, but I must get it back to the anthill. My family will be so happy! she thought to herself. She tried to lift the crumb with all her might, but it was too heavy. She tried pushing it, pulling it and even rolling it, but nothing seemed to work. Exhausted and saddened, she sat down and began to cry. As the ant sat there, feeling beaten, she noticed a small bird nearby. The bird was trying to build a nest. It picked up twigs and leaves, but every time it tried to place them, the wind would blow them away. However, the bird did not give up. It kept trying, over and