not know what it is to see into the heart of a friend through that window of the soul , the eye. I can only see through my fingertips the outline of a face. I can detect laughter, sorrow and other obvious emotions. I know my friends from the feel of their faces. LEARNING TOGETHER symmetry: evenness birch: a slender tree with thin peeling bark shaggy: hairy quiver: shiver Poorvi behold: see panorama: scene glimpse: brief look pageant: display condensed: brief carcasses: remains mastodons: a large animal similar to an elephant, but with fur stature: physique, build haunts: regular meeting places merely: just | i \ [ The next day I should arise with the dawn and see the thrilling miracle by which night is transformed into day. I should behold with awe the magnificent panorama of light with which the sun awakens the sleeping earth. This day I should devote to a hasty glimpse of the world, past and present. I should want to see the pageant of man s progress, and so I should go to the museums. There my eyes would see the condensed history of the earth animals and the races of men pictured in their native environment; gigantic carcasses of dinosaurs and mastodons that roamed the earth before man appeared, with his tiny stature and powerful brain, to conquer the animal kingdom. The following morning, I should again greet the dawn, anxious to discover new delights, new revelations of (OrY beauty. Today, this third day, I shall spend in the workaday world, amid the 4 haunts of men going about the business of life. The city becomes my destination. First, I stand at a busy corner, merely looking at people, trying by sight of them to understand something of their daily [ {> lives. I see smiles, and I am happy. \ j I see serious determination, and t I am proud. I see suffering, and I am compassionate. i rile: We ay Unit l.indd 31 At midnight, permanent night would close in on me again. Naturally in those three short days I should not have seen all I wanted to see. Only when darkness had again descended upon me should I realise how much I had left unseen. I who am blind can give one hint to those who can see: use your eyes as if tomorrow you would be stricken blind. And the same method can be applied to your other senses. Hear the music of voice, the song of a bird, the mighty strains of an orchestra, as if you would be stricken deaf tomorrow. Touch each object as if tomorrow your tactile sense would fail. Smell the perfume of flowers, taste with relish each morsel, as if tomorrow you could never smell and taste again. Make the most of every sense; glory in all the facets of pleasure and beauty, which the world reveals to you through the several means of contact, which Nature provides. But of all the senses, Iam