be scared, when you have been coming here to see me every day, well, almost every day. The River spoke to Jahnavi in a sleepy voice. Work in pairs and take turns to speak the same sentence in other voices. Some hints are given below. II Janhavi asks the River for advice and the River gives advice. Read the given situations and work in pairs to ask for and give advice. Take turns to change your roles. Use the prompts given below. 1. Situation (i) : You wish to play football at school but it has an all-boys team only. 2. Situation (ii) : You have been unable to score well in Mathematics due to nervousness during exams. 3. Situation (iii) : You really enjoy music classes but do not get enough time to practise for it. 4. Situation (iv) : You cannot see the blackboard clearly from the last bench. Asking for advice Giving advice . problem . I think you should... seed a you think I * Why don t you...? > anny ml * The best thing to do is... problem ET Do you think I should...? were you, I would / wouldn't... problem What would you do in my position? problem I'd appreciate your advice on this issue. Unit lindd 13 Poorvi OBSERVING NATURE Take some time to observe the world around you. Over the next few days, pay attention to the colours, shapes, patterns, and textures found in nature. Look closely at the plants, trees, flowers, birds, and even the sky. Make detailed notes of what you observe, focusing on textures, movements, and how light plays with these elements. Record your observations in detail and the features that draw your attention the most whether it s the soft ripple of water, the vibrant flutter of a butterfly or the colour of the birds or flowers. Now, write a descriptive paragraph based on what you ve observed. Highlight the colours, shapes, textures, and unique details that made an impression on you. Give a title to your paragraph. Every day, I see... I find it very interesting that... e J like... because... e | feel... as... I want to tell you that... My advice to all is... I Discuss why rivers in India are considered to be sacred and most of them are referred to as female. Some rivers are referred to as male, for example, the Brahmaputra and the Sone. II Whole Class Activity A\ ~. 1. India is a multilingual country, and many of us can speak two to _ s_ three languages easily. Make a list of the languages that everyone in , , the.class can speak and display it on a chart paper in the classroom. \ XN \ <2.'In which language do you enjoy reading and learning the most? 06-Mar-25 2:47:17 PM Unit lindd 15 / \ The Happiness of a Nation lies in the Dignity of 1. What are the things you can observe in the poster? 2. Why do you