place my hand gently ona small tree and feel the happy quiver of a bird in full song. (i) What does the delicate symmetry of a leaf ? symbolise? (ii) List two phrases from the extract that describe the texture of objects in nature. (iii) Complete the sentence appropriately. The phrase awakening Nature after her winter s sleep refers to (iv) What is the tone of the writer in this extract? A. nostalgic B. proud C. admiring D. celebratory 2. The next day I should arise with the dawn and see the thrilling miracle by which night is transformed into day. I should behold with awe the magnificent panorama of light with which the sun awakens the sleeping earth. This day I should devote to a hasty glimpse of the world, past and present. I should want to see the pageant of man s progress, and so I should go to the museums. & | Unit l.indd 32 06-Mar-25 2:47:31 PM N oy LEARNING TOGETHER (i) The word thrilling has been used with miracle . Which of the following words does not match with the word thrilling ? A. experience BB. tale C. knowledge D. adventure (ii) Why does the writer refer to the earth as sleeping earth ? (iii) Complete the sentence with an appropriate reason. The writer wishes to dedicate the day to a brief look at the present and past world because (iv) Why does the writer use should multiple times in the extract? II Answer the following questions. 1. The sense of touch makes up for the loss of sight and hearing. Explain this statement with reference to the text. 2. Why does the author believe that the sense of sight is the most wonderful? 3. How might the author s opinion on making the most of our senses guide us to be kinder towards people with special abilities? 4, What is the significance of imagining the loss of a sense, according to the author? 5. How does the author encourage people to approach their everyday sensory experiences? 6. What do the author s choices for the three days tell us about her values and priorities? ms \ Unit l.indd 33 s ) ate, ree , Let us learn I Sensory words are descriptive they describe how we experience the world: how we see, hear, smell, taste or feel something. Complete the following table with sensory words from the text in Column 2 for the five senses in Column 1. Add new words in Column 3. What you see panorama What you hear music esouwe mh) II Read the following sentences from the text and underline the verbs. I should divide the period into three parts. 4, * On the first day, I should want to see... The next day I should arise with the dawn... I should behold with awe... The words you have underlined are a combination of two verbs. In each of these sentences, should is the modal verb (suggestion), and the second