can speak two to _ s_ three languages easily. Make a list of the languages that everyone in , , the.class can speak and display it on a chart paper in the classroom. \ XN \ <2.'In which language do you enjoy reading and learning the most? 06-Mar-25 2:47:17 PM Unit lindd 15 / \ The Happiness of a Nation lies in the Dignity of 1. What are the things you can observe in the poster? 2. Why do you think the girls look happy? 3. Dignity means self-respect . What is the relation between dignity any and happiness ? J 4. How does a Nation prosper when its daughters are happy? IV The Government has launched many schemes for the education of the girl child. Some of them are Beti Bachao Beti Padhao , Balika Samridhi Yojana , Samagra Shiksha Scheme-Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalayas , etc. Find out more such schemes a > from the internet or from your teacher and spread awareness in your neighbourhood. Poorvi Try AGAIN Let us do these activities before we read. I Who inspires you to do your best? II Work in pairs, identify what you see in the pictures given below. What can we learn from them? Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher. 16 ay Unit lindd 16 06-Mar-25 2:47:21 PM LEARNING TOGETHER On < 1D, SB s= > Let usread King Bruce of Scotland flung himself down In a lonely mood to think; Tis true he was monarch, and wore a crown, But his heart was beginning to sink. For he had been trying to do a great deed, To make his people glad; He had tried and tried, but couldn t succeed And so he became quite sad. He flung himself down in low despair, As grieved as man could be; And after a while he pondered there, Tl give it all up, said he. Now just at that moment a spider dropped, With its silken, filmy clue; And the King, in the midst of his thinking, stopped To see what the spider would do. Twas a long way up to the ceiling dome, And it hung by a rope so fine; That how it would get to its cobweb home, King Bruce could not divine. L = Ze A Unit lindd 17 06-Mar' i 2:47:22 PM | Poorvi a | Unit lindd 18 It soon began to cling and crawl Straight up with strong endeavour; But down it came with a slippery sprawl, As near to the ground as ever. Up, up it ran, not a second to stay, To utter the least complaint; Till it fell still lower, and there it lay, A little dizzy and faint. Its head grew steady again it went, And travelled a half-yard higher; Twas a delicate thread it had to tread, And a road where its feet would tire. Again it fell and swung below, But again it quickly mounted; Till up and down, now fast, now slow, Nine