made a long, high cry, usually because of pain or sadness Now, fill in the blanks with suitable sound words from exercise (II). The classroom grew (i) as the students noticed the teacher carrying the answer papers. As the teacher turned the pages with a (ii) , the children (iii) , wondering what comments awaited. Someone (iv) in frustration, and the (v) of the students steadily increased. Finally, when the teacher praised the students for their excellent performance, the students (vi) with excitement. III The word catamaran is used in the text. The word originates from Tamil language kattu maram meaning tied wood . Find out the meanings of these words. From which Indian language these words were borrowed. An example has been given. 1. karma (Sanskrit) 2. sahib 3. chutney 4. guru 5. verandah 6. jungle 7. areca 8. palanquin IV Chandu, the fisherman, has a catamaran that the River preferred to a ship. Given below are some boats that are used in different parts of our country. 3. coracle 4. shikara (i) Which one would you like to travel in? (ii) Make a colourful drawing of a boat that you would like to travel in. Unit l.indd 9 Poorvi V Solve the crossword puzzle based on words related to water transport. Across 1. a large vessel used for transporting goods or passengers by sea 2. a small vessel for travelling on water, typically propelled by oars, sails, or an engine 3. a flat floating structure for travelling across water 4. aboat or ship driven by steam Down 5. a small, light, narrow boat, pointed at both ends and moved using a paddle 6. a boat with a powerful engine which can change direction easily and is used to pull large ships into and out of port 7. a boat with sails and sometimes an engine, used for either racing or travelling for pleasure, rhymes with cot VI Read the highlighted words in the following lines from the text. She goes down towards the sea. I ve seen her; she always takes the same way over the mountains and down to the sea, like me! Prepositions are words that indicate the relationship between nouns or pronouns and other elements in a sentence. They show direction, location, time or logical relationships between ideas. Unit l.indd 10 06-Mar-25 2:47:15 PM fi She found a seat 4. (among/between/from) two friendly Unit lindd 11 Now, fill in the blanks with suitable prepositions given within the brackets. Jahnavi takes the River s advice and goes to school. On her first day 1. (at/in/on) school, Jahnavi stood nervously 2. (in/ outside/above) the gate, clutching her bag close to her. The bell rang and she hurried 3. (outside/through/inside) the bustling classroom. classmates. The teacher greeted them warmly and started the lesson 5. (about/in/for) numbers. Jahnavi listened attentively, feeling excited 6. (at/about/for) the new adventure ahead. VII Read the highlighted words in the following sentence from the text. A kingfisher swept down, its wings an arrow of