gatherings in villages and in taverns in towns. Oral culture thus entered print and printed material was orally transmitted. The line that separated the oral and reading cultures became blurred. And the hearing public and reading public became intermingled. Reprint 2025-26 ) _ iS can SS 1S) ra = = a 3.2 Religious Debates and the Fear of Print Print created the possibility of wide circulation of ideas, and introduced a new world of debate and discussion. Even those who disagreed with established authorities could now print and circulate their ideas. Through the printed message, they could persuade people to think differently, and move them to action. This had significance in different spheres of life. Not everyone welcomed the printed book, and those who did also had fears about it. Many were apprehensive of the effects that the easier access to the printed word and the wider circulation of books, could have on people s minds. It was feared that if there was no control over what was printed and read then rebellious and irreligious thoughts might spread. If that happened the authority of valuable literature would be destroyed. Expressed by religious authorities and monarchs, as well as many writers and artists, this anxiety was the basis of widespread Fig. 9 - J.V. Schley, L Imprimerie, 1739. This is one of the many images produced in early modern Europe, celebrating the coming of print. You can see the printing press descending from heaven, carried by a goddess. criticism of the new printed literature that had begun to circulate. Let us consider the implication of this in one sphere of life in early modern Europe namely, religion. In 1517, the religious reformer Martin Luther wrote Ninety Five Theses criticising many of the practices On two sides of the goddess, blessing the machine, are Minerva (the goddess of wisdom) and Mercury (the messenger god, also symbolising reason). The women in the foreground are holding plaques with the portraits of six pioneer printers of different countries. In the middle ground on the left (figure encircled) is the portrait of Gutenberg. and rituals of the Roman Catholic Church. A printed copy of this was posted on a church door in Wittenberg. It challenged the Church to debate his ideas. Luther s writings were immediately reproduced in vast numbers and read widely. This lead to a division within the Church and to the beginning of the Protestant New words Reformation. Luther's translation of the New Testament sold 5,000 Protestant Reformation A sixteenth-century copies within a few weeks and a second edition appeared within | movement to reform the Catholic Church three months. Deeply grateful to print, Luther said, Printingis the | dominated by Rome. Martin Luther was one SS = = oO _ ) a = Vu g < fe) 1S) (J) = = S = oO oe Ss & ultimate gift of God and the greatest one. Several scholars, in fact, of the main Protestant reformers. Several think that print brought about a new