(J) = ~ ae) = oO oe ae) = /n the foreground on the right, compositors are at work, while on the left galleys are being prepared and ink is being applied on . the metal types; in the background, the printers are turning the text for printing screws of the press, and near them proofreaders are at work. Right in front is the final product the double-page printed sheets, stacked in neat piles, waiting to be bound. and the text composed Compositor The person who composes the Galley Metal frame in which types are laid Reprint 2025-26 ey The Print Revolution and Its Impact What was the print revolution? It was not just a development, a new way of producing books; it transformed the lives of people, changing their relationship to information and knowledge, and with institutions and authorities. It influenced popular perceptions and opened up new ways of looking at things. Let us explore some of these changes. 3.1 A New Reading Public =] With the printing press, a new reading public emerged. Printing reduced the cost of books. The time and labour required to produce each book came down, and multiple copies could be produced with greater ease. Books flooded the market, reaching out to an ever-growing readership. Access to books created a new culture of reading. Earlier, reading was restricted to the elites. Common people lived in a world of oral culture. They heard sacred texts read out, ballads recited, and folk tales narrated. Knowledge was transferred orally. People collectively heard a story, or saw a performance. As you will see in Chapter 8, they did not read a book individually and silently. Before the age of print, books were not only expensive but they could not be produced in sufficient numbers. Now books could teach out to wider sections of people. If earlier there was a hearing public, now a reading public came into being, But the transition was not so simple. Books could be read only by the literate, and the rates of literacy in most European countries were very low till the twentieth century. How, then, could publishers persuade the common people to welcome the printed book? To do this, they had to keep in mind the wider reach of the printed work: even those who did not read could certainly enjoy listening to books being read out. So printers began publishing popular ballads and folk tales, and such books would be profusely illustrated with pictures. These were then sung and recited at gatherings in villages and in taverns in towns. Oral culture thus entered print and printed material was orally transmitted. The line that separated the oral and reading cultures became blurred. And the hearing public and reading public became intermingled. Reprint 2025-26 ) _ iS can SS 1S) ra = = a 3.2 Religious Debates and the Fear of Print Print created the possibility of wide circulation of ideas, and introduced a new world of debate and discussion. Even those who