in many printed tracts and essays. Jyotiba Phule, the Maratha pioneer of low caste protest movements, wrote about the injustices of the caste system in his Gw/amgiri (1871). In the twentieth century, B.R. Ambedkar in Maharashtra and E.V. Ramaswamy Naicker in Madras, better known as Periyar, wrote powerfully on caste and their writings were read by people all over India. Local protest movements and sects also created a lot of popular journals and tracts ctiticising ancient scriptures and envisioninga new and just future. Workers in factories were too overworked and lacked the education to write much about their experiences. But Kashibaba, a Kanpur millworker, wrote and published Chhote Aur Bade Ka Sawal in 1938 to show the links between caste and class exploitation. The poems of another Kanpur millworker, who wrote under the name of Sudarshan Chakr between 1935 and 1955, were brought together and published ina collection called Sacchi Kavitayan. By the 1930s, Bangalore cotton milhworkers set up libraries to educate themselves, following the example of Bombay workers. These were sponsored by social reformers who tried to restrict excessive drinking among them, to bring literacy and, sometimes, to propagate the message of nationalism. Reprint 2025-26 Fig. 27 A European couple sitting on chairs, nineteenth-century woodcut. The picture suggests traditional family roles. The Sahib holds a liquor bottle in his hand while the Memsahib plays the violin. ~ Look at 49, 20 and 21 carefully. > Whai ent are the artists making on the ial nges taking place in society? it changes in society were taking place to voke this reaction? ) Do you agree with the artist s view? Fig. 22 Lakshminath Bezbaruah (1868-1938) He was a doyen of modern Assamese literature. Burhi Aair Sadhu (Grandma s Tales) is among his notable works. He penned the popular song of Assam, O Mor Apunar Desh (O my beloved land). Print and Censorship Before 1798, the colonial state under the East India Company was not too concerned with censorship. Strangely, its early measures to control printed matter were directed against Englishmen in India who were critical of Company misrule and hated the actions of particular Company officers. The Company was worried that such criticisms might be used by its critics in England to attack its trade monopoly in India. By the 1820s, the Calcutta Supreme Court passed certain regulations to control press freedom and the Company began encouraging publication of newspapers that would celebrate Britsh rule. In 1835, faced with urgent petitions by editors of English and vernacular newspapers, Governor-General Bentinck agreed to revise press laws. Thomas Macaulay, a liberal colonial official, formulated new rules that restored the earlier freedoms. After the revolt of 1857, the attitude to freedom of the press changed. Enraged Englishmen demanded a clamp down on the native press. As vernacular newspapers became assertively nationalist, the colonial government began debating measures of stringent control. In 1878, the Vernacular Press Act was passed, modelled on the Irish Press Laws. It provided the government with extensive rights to censor