the process, it raised Reprint 2025-26 Source B This is how Mercier describes the impact of the printed word, and the power of reading in one of his books: Anyone who had seen me reading would have compared me to a man dying of thirst who was gulping down some fresh, pure water ... Lighting my lamp with extraordinary caution, I threw myself hungrily into the reading. An easy eloquence, effortless and animated, carried me from one page to the next without my noticing it. A clock struck off the hours i silence of the shadows, and I heard nothin p began n to run out of oil and prod pale light, but still I read on. I could not even take out time to raise the wick fear of interrupting my pleasure. How t ideas rushed into my brain! How my i nce adopted them! Quoted ~ Darnton, The Forbidden Best-Revolutionary France, 1995. ~ Source ) _ iS can SS 1S) ra = = a questions about the existing social order. Cartoons and caricatures typically suggested that the monarchy remained absorbed only in sensual pleasures while the common people suffered immense hardships. This literature circulated underground and led to the growth of hostile sentiments against the monarchy. How do we look at these arguments? There can be no doubt that print helps the spread of ideas. But we must remember that people did not read just one kind of literature. If they read the ideas of Voltaire and Rousseau, they were also exposed to monarchical and Activity | Church propaganda. They were not influenced directly by everything Imagine that you are a cartoonist in France they read or saw. They accepted some ideas and rejected others. They interpreted things their own way. Print did not directly shape their minds, but it did open up the possibility of thinking differently. que "e us mel fin brusser mes fers =a Dareny: Gi ACD: 90 Ms nt =. n Ks yy ext abolic 4 > jours est ! ea Ee 7 per rrp a apts =) Py Gee , , c SIR teeny Oa nmi Fig. 11 The nobility and the common people before the French Revolution, a cartoon of the late eighteenth century. The cartoon shows how the ordinary people peasants, artisans and workers had a hard time while the nobility enjoyed life and oppressed them. Circulation of cartoons like this one had an impact on the thinking of people before the revolution. Why do some historians think that print culture created the basis for the French Revolution? ge) = = oO _ [e) [on = Vu oa] = 1S) (J) = ~ Ze) = oO oe ae) = Reprint 2025-26 sy The Nineteenth Century The nineteenth century saw vast leaps in mass literacy in Europe, bringing in large numbers of new readers among children, women and workers. RONTISPIECE FOR THE FENNY MAGKZIN 5.1 Children, Women and Workers == As primary education became compulsory from the late nineteenth century, children became