200 million copies. This shift from hand printing to mechanical printing led to the print revolution. Reprint 2025-26 Fig. 5 A Portrait of Johann Gutenberg, 1584. Ss go : Printing block === placed\over 4 ne i? Fig. 6 - Gutenberg Printing Press. Notice the long handle attached to the screw. This handle was used to turn the screw and press down the platen over the printing block that was placed on top of a sheet of damp paper. Gutenberg developed metal types for each of the 26 characters of the Roman alphabet and devised a way of moving them around so as to compose different words of the text. This came to be known as the moveable type printing machine, and it remained the basic print technology over the next 300 years. Books could now be produced much faster than was possible when each print block was prepared by carving a piece of wood by hand. The Gutenberg press could print 250 sheets on one side per hour. ) _ iS can SS 1S) ra = = a Fig. 7 - Pages of Gutenberg s Bible, the first printed book in Europe. Gutenberg printed about 180 copies, of which no more than 50 have survived. Look at these pages of Gutenberg s Bible carefully. They were not just products of new technology. The text was printed in the new Gutenberg press with metal type, but the borders were carefully designed, painted and illuminated by hand by artists. No two copies were the same. Every page of each copy was different. Even when two copies /ook similar, a careful comparison will reveal differences. Elites everywhere preferred this lack of uniformity: what they possessed then could be claimed as unique, for no one else owned a copy that was exactly the same. In the text you will notice the use of colour within the letters in various places. This had two functions: it added colour to the page, and highlighted all the holy words to emphasise their significance. But the colour on every page of the text was added by hand. Gutenberg printed the text in black, leaving spaces where the colour could be filled in later. \ JOANNEM KINCHIVM | | \ Sub Monocerofe veferi Fig. 8 A printer s workshop, sixteenth century. This picture depicts what a printer s shop looked like in the sixteenth century. All the activities are going on under one roof. New words oO S = o _ le) a = Vu Ww = [o} OU (J) = ~ ae) = oO oe ae) = /n the foreground on the right, compositors are at work, while on the left galleys are being prepared and ink is being applied on . the metal types; in the background, the printers are turning the text for printing screws of the press, and near them proofreaders are at work. Right in front is the final product the double-page printed sheets, stacked in neat piles, waiting to be bound. and the