people narrated their struggles to read against grim obstacles: the twentieth-century Russian revolutionary author Maxim Gorky s My Childhood and My University provide glimpses of such struggles. ) _ iS can SS 1S) ra = = a 5.2 Further Innovations _ _ _ ""9nDDR By the late eighteenth century, the press came to be made out of metal. Through the nineteenth century, there were a series of further innovations in printing technology. By the mid-nineteenth century, Richard M. Hoe of New York had perfected the power-driven cylindrical press. This was capable of printing 8,000 sheets per hour. This press was particularly useful for printing newspapers. In the late nineteenth century, the offset press was developed which could print up to six colours at a time. From the turn of the twentieth century, electrically operated presses accelerated printing operations. Aseries of other developments followed. Methods of feeding paper improved, the quality of plates became better, automatic paper reels and photoelectric controls of the colour register were introduced. The accumulation of several individual mechanical improvements transformed the appearance of printed texts. Printers and publishers continuously developed new strategies to sell their product. Nineteenth-century periodicals serialised important novels, which gave birth to a particular way of writing novels. In the 1920s in England, popular works were sold in Activity | cheap series, called the Shilling Series. The dust cover or the wr k at Fig. 13. What impact do such vertisements have on the public mind? book jacket is also a twentieth-century innovation. With the onset of the Great Depression in the 1930s, publishers feared a decline in book purchases. To sustain buying, they brought you think everyone reacts to printed material in the same way? out cheap paperback editions. ge) = oO _ [e) [on = Vu oa] = 1S) (J) = ~ Ze) = oO oe ae) = Fig. 13 Advertisements at a railway station in England, a lithograph by Alfred Concanen, 1874. Printed advertisements and notices were plastered on street walls, railway platforms and public buildings. Reprint 2025-26 India and the World of Print Letus see when printing began in India and how ideas and information were written before the age of print. 6.1 Manuscripts Before the Age of Print India had a very rich and old tradition of handwritten manuscripts in Sanskrit, Arabic, Persian, as well as in various vernacular languages. Manuscripts were copied on palm leaves or on handmade papert. Fig. 14 Pages from the Gita Govinda of Jayadeva, eighteenth century. This is a palm-leaf handwritten manuscript in accordion format. Pages were sometimes beautifully illustrated. They would be either pressed between wooden covers or sewn together to ensure preservation. Manuscripts continued to be produced till well after the introduction of print, down to the late nineteenth century. Manuscripts, however, were highly expensive and fragile. They had to be handled carefully, and they could not be read easily as the vu _ > S > U Ss = [a Fig. 15 Pages from the Diwan of Hafiz, 1824. Hafiz