few weeks and a second edition appeared within | movement to reform the Catholic Church three months. Deeply grateful to print, Luther said, Printingis the | dominated by Rome. Martin Luther was one SS = = oO _ ) a = Vu g < fe) 1S) (J) = = S = oO oe Ss & ultimate gift of God and the greatest one. Several scholars, in fact, of the main Protestant reformers. Several think that print brought about a new intellectual atmosphere and traditions of anti-Catholic Christianity helped spread the new ideas that led to the Reformation. developed out of the movement Reprint 2025-26 3.3 Print and Dissent == Print and popular religious literature stimulated many distinctive individual interpretations of faith even among little-educated working people. In the sixteenth century, Menocchio, a miller in Italy, began to read books that were available in his locality. He reinterpreted the message of the Bible and formulated a view of God and Creation that enraged the Roman Catholic Church. When the Roman Church began its inquisition to repress heretical ideas, Menocchio was hauled up twice and ultimately executed. The Roman Church, troubled by such effects of popular readings and questionings of faith, imposed severe controls over publishers and booksellers and began to maintain an Index of Prohibited Books from 1558. Fig. 10 The macabre dance. This sixteenth-century print shows how the fear of printing was dramatised in visual representations of the time. In this highly interesting woodcut the coming of print is associated with the end of the world. The interior of the printer s workshop here is the site of a dance of death. Skeletal figures control the printer and his workers, define and dictate what is to be done and what is to be produced. Write briefly why some people feared that the development of print could lead to the growth of dissenting ideas. Reprint 2025-26 angen ed the excesses of Catholicism but kept istance from Luther, expressed a deep anxiety ut printing. He wrote in Adages (1508): oO what corner of the world do they not fly, ese swarms of new books? It may be that one here and there contributes something worth knowing, but the very multitude of them is hurtful to scholarship, because it creates a glut, and even in good things satiety is most harmful ... [printers] fill the world with books, not just trifling things (such as I write, perhaps), but stupid, ignorant, slanderous, scandalous, raving, irreligious and seditious books, and the number of them is such that even the valuable publications lose their value. Source ) _ iS can SS 1S) ra = = a SS = = oO _ ) a = Vu g < fe) 1S) (J) = = S = oO oe Ss The Reading Mania Through the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries literacy rates went up in most parts of Europe. Churches of different denominations set up schools in villages, carrying literacy to peasants and artisans. By the end of the eighteenth