Nature of Matter:
Elements, Compounds,
and Mixtures

Probe and ponder

Which of the entities in the picture above consist of matter, and
which of them do not?

How can elements be combined to form a compound?

How could the discovery of a compound that absorbs carbon
dioxide from the air contribute to solving environmental
challenges?

Share your questions

Chapter 8.indd 116 6/28/2025 2:51:17 PM |

Chapter 8.indd 117

LC] CLLLOI CLO) OO C{chapte 8 Nature of Matter: Elements, Compounds, and woneures 117

Have you ever wondered what the world around you is made
of? Look around! The staircase you use, the air you breathe, the
water in your bottle, the food in your lunch box, the clothes and
shoes you wear, the book you read, the trees outside, the ball you
play with and even the stick you carry all of these are examples
of matter, which you have learnt in earlier grades.

You have also learnt that all these things are made up of tiny
particles. Most of the things around us are not made of just one
substance; rather they are made up of two or more substances
mixed together. Let us now understand how different substances
come together to form mixtures.

8.1 What Are Mixtures?

Have you ever wondered what makes
your poha (Fig. 8.1) so delicious or how
to make the perfect sprout salad? While
these dishes may seem very different, they
share something in common they are
both made by mixing several ingredients.
We observe the mixing of substances in
everyday life. Sugar dissolved in water
is also a mixture, and so are soups and
lemonade.

When two or more substances are
mixed, where each substance retains
its properties, it is called a mixture.
The individual substances that make up
a mixture are called its components.
The components of a mixture do not
react chemically with each other. In some
mixtures, the components like green
gram, chickpeas, onion, and tomato
in a sprout salad (Fig. 8.2), are easy to

Fig. 8.2: Sprout salad see. Such mixtures, where the different
components are generally visible with the naked eye or with a
magnifying device, are non-uniform in nature. Can you identify
a few more examples of non-uniform mixtures around you?

On the other hand, some mixtures have components that
cannot be seen separately even with the help of a microscope.
For example, sugar and water particles cannot be seen separately
in their mixture. Such types of mixtures, where the components
are evenly distributed and cannot be distinguished, are uniform
in nature (Fig. 8.3). Can you list a few uniform mixtures?

Fig. 8.1: Poha

Fig. 8.3: Uniform mixture
of sugar and water

6/28/2025 2:51:20 PM

A step further

Do you know that stainless steel is also a mixture?
Stainless steel contains iron, nickel, chromium,
and a small amount of carbon. They are mixed
so uniformly that the entire mixture appears
the same throughout and one cannot see the
individual substances. Such mixtures are known
as alloys. Brass, a mixture of copper and zinc,
and bronze, a mixture of copper and tin, are Fig. 8.4: Utensils made of

some other examples of alloys (Fig. 8.4). stainless steel, brass, and bronze

Our scientific heritage

Mishraloha was the name given to the mixture of two or more metals
that had properties distinct from its constituent metals. Ancient
Indian texts, such as the Charaka Samhita, Susruta Samhita, Rasaratna
Samucchaya, Rasa Jala Nidhi, etc., mention the use of alloys for
medicinal purposes. For example, Bronze, also known as Kamsya, is
an alloy made up of Copper (Tamra, 4 parts) and Tin (Vanga, 1 part),
was used to improve digestion and boost immunity.

8.1.1 Is air a mixture?

In Curiosity, Grade 6, you learnt about air and its composition in
the chapter Nature s Treasures . Is air a mixture? What kind of
mixture is it?

You have learnt that air is a uniform mixture of mainly
nitrogen, oxygen, argon, carbon dioxide, and water vapour. Out of
these, oxygen is required by most of the living beings to stay alive.
It also helps in combustion. Nitrogen, which constitutes about 78%
of the air, does not take part in combustion. We also learnt that air
has water vapour in it. When warm air touches a cool surface, the
water vapour turns into liquid water, forming tiny droplets. Recall
the experiment where you tested the presence of carbon dioxide
in the air that we exhale. Let us confirm the presence of carbon
dioxide in the air.

| Activity 8.1: Let us experiment

e Take a glass tumbler and fill it half with water.

e Add a small amount of calcium oxide
(quick lime) slowly to it.

e What do you observe?

e Calcium oxide reacts vigorously with

water to form calcium hydroxide and releases heat.

Safety first

Ay

 

)

Perform this step carefully.
uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 | TTT] CF) OLLI OJ O CLL OL) Oo

Chapter 8.indd 118 6/28/2025 2:51:32 PM

O CLIT) CLO) oO C{chapte 8 Nature of Matter: Elements, Compounds, and woneures 119

e Stir continuously to make a solution of calcium
hydroxide. This solution is called lime water.
e Filter it and observe its colour.
e Leave this colourless solution in a petri dish for a few
hours (Fig. 8.5a). (a)
e Keep stirring the solution at regular intervals.
e What do you observe (Fig. 8.5b)?
e Does it turn milky?
Can you explain why the solution has turned milky?
You know that lime water turns milky when carbon
dioxide reacts with calcium hydroxide to form calcium
carbonate (insoluble tiny white particles) and water (b)
(Fig. 8.5). Since lime water turns milky when exposed to Fig. 8.5: Lime water turns milky
air, this activity demonstrates the presence of carbon jn tne presence of carbon dioxide
dioxide in the air.
Calcium hydroxide + Carbon dioxide Calcium carbonate + Water

Apart from gases, have you ever observed anything
else present in the air? Have you ever noticed tiny shining
particles moving in a beam of sunlight entering a dark room
through a small opening? What are these particles?

| Activity 8.2: Let us explore

e Take a black sheet of paper. Ensure that it is free from
any visible dust particles.

e Place the black sheet of paper undisturbed near an open
window (Fig. 8.6a), or in the garden, for a few hours.

e What do you observe?

You may notice tiny particles settled on its surface. You
may use a magnifying glass to examine the particles more
closely (Fig. 8.6b). 3

This shows that dust particles are suspended in the air.
They are not an integral part of the air and are considered Fig. 8.6: Black sheet of paper
pollutants. The nature and the number of dust particles in (@) with no dust particles;
the air may vary from time to time and from place to place. (b) with dust particles

A step further

The major pollutants present in the air are particulate matter
(dust, soot) and gases like carbon monoxide, ozone, nitrogen
dioxide, and sulfur dioxide. The air quality index (AQD isa
tool used to describe the air quality.

| po | ni

Chapter 8.indd 119 6/28/2025 2:51:37 PM

8.1.2 Types of mixtures

You know that the term mixture in common usage refers to the
mixing of two or more components. The components of a mixture
may themselves be mixtures, as in poha and sprout salad, or
pure substances like sugar or common salt dissolved in water.
However, in science, all the components of a mixture must be
pure substances only.

Mixtures could be of several types depending on the physical
state of their components. Some mixtures with their examples are
shown in Table 8.1. Complete the third column 

Table 8.1: Different types of mixtures

non-uniform

Gas and gas Uniform

2. Gas and liquid Aerated water (sodawater) eaeeseeeseceneeeeeees
Oxygen dissolved in water ha eecetnteeeeeeeeees

Solid and gas Carbon particles in air hneeeesteeeeeeeeeee

4. Liquid and Acetic acid in water (vinegar) haaeeeeeeeeeeetteeee
liquid Oilandwater an eeeeteeeeeeneeeee

5. Solidandliquid Sandand water 2 ha eeeeesteeeeeeeteee
Seawater aaa ateeeeeeeeeeeeee

6. Solid and solid Baking powder (bakingsodaand en. eeeeeeeeeeeeeeees
tartaric acid)
Alloys i ateetteeeeeenees

You learnt in earlier grades about the separation of mixtures. It
is done to separate the components of a mixture. The examples
discussed were from everyday life, where separation is done
to obtain the component of interest and other components are
 discarded. However, in science, the purpose of separating a
mixture is to obtain pure substances.

8.2 What Are Pure Substances?

Have you ever noticed the word pure written on the packs of
some consumables, such as milk, ghee, and spices (Fig. 8.7)? The
word pure has slightly different meanings in common usage
and in science.

In common usage, pure means unadulterated products.
Adulteration is an illegal process of adding substances which
are cheaper, or of a poor quality, to a product. This is usually

Fig. 8.7: Some done to increase the quantity or reduce the manufacturing cost.
consumable items However, it deteriorates the quality of the product. It can also
make the product hazardous to health.
uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 | TTT] CF) OLLI OJ O CLL OL) Oo

Chapter 8.indd 120

6/28/2025 2:51:38 PM

O CLIT) CLO) oO C{chapte 8 Nature of Matter: Elements, Compounds, and woneures 121

In science, however, a pure substance is the one that has no
other substance present in it. For a scientist, even these products
that look pure can be considered impure if they are made of
more than one substance.

A pure substance is a kind of matter that cannot be separated
into other kinds of matter by any physical process. When a
scientist says that something is pure, it means that the substance
consists of the same type of particles.

A step further

According to science, how would you classify milk, packed
fruit juice, baking soda, sugar, and soil as mixtures or pure
substances?

8.3 What Are the Types of Pure Substances?

Recall the different states of water that you studied in Curiosity,
Grade 6. What happened when water was cooled or heated?
We observed that on cooling water gets converted into ice, and
on boiling it gets converted into vapour. We can get back water
up on heating ice or cooling water vapour. It shows that during
these processes, the particles of water remain the same. Now, let
us perform another activity in which we pass electricity through
water and observe its effect.

Activity 8.3: Let us experiment
(Demonstration activity)

Safety first

This activity must be performed under the
supervision of the teacher. Be careful while
handling sulfuric acid. Do not use lithium-ion ()/
battery.

Test tubes

Water

Test tube
stand

Test tubes filled with wat
e Collect two small test tubes, a beaker or a glass (a) Test tubes filled with water

tumbler, and a 9 V battery.

e Fill 2/3rd of the beaker with water and add a few drops of
dilute sulfuric acid to it.

e Fill both the small test tubes completely with water taken
from the beaker (Fig. 8.8a).

e Place a 9 V battery inside the beaker (Fig. 8.8b).

e Without spilling the water, carefully place the water-filled (b) 9 V battery placed inside
test tubes on each of the terminals of the battery (Fig. 8.8c). */ Beaker containing water

Chapter 8.indd 121 6/28/2025 2:51:40 PM

Water filled
test tube
placed on the
terminal of the

battery

Water filled
test tube . .
placingon @ Wait for a few minutes.

the terminal e Do youobserve the formation of any gas bubbles
battery at both the terminals inside the test tubes?
e Let it continue for 10-15 minutes.
e Observe the volume of gas collected in each test
tube (Fig. 8.8d).

e Is the volume of the gas collected the same in
(c) Water filled test tubes placing over both the test tubes?
the terminals of the battery

e Remove these test tubes one-by-one carefully.
e Test these gases one-by-one by bringing a
Oxygen gas burning candle close to the mouth of the test

Hydrogen gas

tubes.
< - Test tube e What happens in each case?
Gas bubbles e Which gas is present in each test tube?
Water containing
a few drops of
sulfuric acid
9 V battery Can these _ collected
(d) Gases collected in the test tubes gases be water vapour?

Fig. 8.8: Passing electricity through water

These gases are not water vapour otherwise
they would have condensed back to form
water. Let us try to identify these gases.

Safety first

f Ls Perform gas testing with care. Maintain a
NO" Ke safe distance from the set-up.

To test the gases present in the two test tubes, bring a burning
candle near the mouth of each test tube. A pop sound can be heard
from one, indicating the presence of hydrogen gas (Fig. 8.9a). In the
other test tube, the flame of the burning candle will glow brighter,
confirming the presence of oxygen gas (Fig. 8.9b).

Flame glows
Pop sound Ruy brighter ~

+ Candle

Test tube >
Test tube
stand

Water Water

(a) (b)
Fig. 8.9: Testing the nature of gas (a) hydrogen; (b) oxygen
uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 | TTT] CF) OLLI OJ O CLL OL) Oo

Chapter 8.indd 122 6/28/2025 2:51:42 PM

O CLIT) CLO) oO C{chapte 8 Nature of Matter: Elements, Compounds, and woneures 123

From Activity 8.3, we can infer that water is composed of two
different constituents hydrogen and oxygen.
Water > Hydrogen + Oxygen

Ever heard of ...

When electric current is passed through water, it breaks down into
hydrogen and oxygen. Is this a chemical change or a physical change?
Recall Curiosity, Grade 7, chapter Changes Around Us: Physical and
Chemical .

8.3.1 Elements

The two substances hydrogen and oxygen formed in Activity 8.3,
are pure substances and are termed as elements. Each element
is made up of identical particles called atoms. These particles
are different from the particles of any other element. Elements
are substances that cannot be further broken down into simpler
substances. They are the building blocks of all matter. Some other
examples of elements are gold, silver, sulfur, carbon, etc.

A step further

The atoms of most of the elements cannot exist
independently. Two or more such atoms combine and
form a stable particle of that element called a molecule.
For example, two atoms of hydrogen combine to form
one molecule of hydrogen. Similarly, two atoms of oxygen
combine to form one molecule of oxygen (Fig. 8.10).

eM Fig. 8.10: Depiction of
 molecules of
(a) hydrogen;
(b) oxygen

Elements can be classified into metals and non-metals.
You have already studied that gold, silver, magnesium, iron, and
aluminium are metals, whereas carbon, sulfur, hydrogen, and
oxygen are non-metals. Isn't it interesting to know that some
elements like silicon and boron have intermediate properties
between those of metals and non-metals? They are called
metalloids, about which you will learn in higher grades.

A step further

 The number of elements known at present is 118, and most of them exist
in a solid state.

@ Eleven elements exist in a gaseous state at room temperature, all of
which are non-metals like oxygen, helium, nitrogen, etc.

@ Only two elements are liquid at room temperature mercury, which is a
metal and bromine, which is a non-metal.

 Although gallium and caesium are solid elements, they become liquid at

a temperature around 30 C (303 K) and turn into liquid.

Chapter 8.indd 123 6/28/2025 2:51:49 PM

A step further

More than 45 different elements, like aluminium, copper, silicon,
cobalt, lithium, gold, silver, etc., are used in manufacturing a mobile
phone, including its screen, battery, and other components.

Oxygen 8.3.2 Compounds

Why cannot we separate hydrogen and oxygen present
in water by physical means?

In water, the particles of hydrogen and oxygen are
so tightly attached to each other that it is generally
impossible to separate them apart using physical
methods. That is why water is a compound. Compounds
are formed when different elements combine in fixed
ratios to form something entirely new.
The properties of compounds are different
from those of elements forming that
compound. The constituent elements of
a compound cannot be separated by any
physical method. From Activity 8.3, we
find that molecules of water are made of two different elements:
hydrogen and oxygen (Fig. 8.11), combined chemically in a fixed
ratio. The ratio of the number of atoms of hydrogen to oxygen in
water has been found to be 2:1.

Are common salt and sugar elements or compounds? Let us
find out.

Sodium, a soft metal, and chlorine, a hazardous gas, combine
to form a harmless yet taste-enhancing substance that is essential
for our lives. This substance is known as sodium chloride, which
is made up of particles of sodium and chlorine in a 1:1 ratio. We
learnt that dissolved sodium chloride (common salt) may be
separated from water by the physical process of evaporation.

Is it possible to separate sodium chloride into its elements by
physical processes?

Let us now explore if we can separate the elements in sugar!

| Activity 8.4: Let us experiment

e Putateaspoon ofsugar ina boiling tube.

Hydrogen

Fig. 8.11: Depiction of
molecules of water

Oh! This is really
fascinating hydrogen is
a fuel, oxygen supports
combustion, whereas
water extinguishes fire.

e Heat it gently as shown in Fig. 8.12a.
This activity must be performed
in the presence of a teacher.

> \\

{

Ws e What do you observe?
uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 | TTT] CF) OLLI OJ O CLL OL) Oo

Chapter 8.indd 124

6/28/2025 2:51:50 PM

O CLIT) CLO) oO C{chapte 8 Nature of Matter: Elements, Compounds, and woneures 125

As you heat the sugar, it turns brown
(Fig. 8.12b). Later, it begins to char, i.e., it
turns blackish (Fig. 8.12c).

You will find small droplets of water
inside the boiling tube near its open end.
Where did this water come from? Was
it in the dry sugar, or did it come by the
condensation of water vapour in the air?

Since we are heating the tube, the
water must have come from the dry sugar
and not from the air. Can you predict
what is left behind? Charcoal (carbon) is
left behind in the boiling tube. You can
scoop it out in a watch glass (Fig. 8.12c)
and explore if it burns like coal.

Sugar decomposes on heating and
gives carbon and water. As you know,
water consists of hydrogen and oxygen.
Hence, sugar cannot be an element.
It may be stated that sugar is a chemical
compound consisting of the elements
carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen.

Let us explore more about

compounds.

(Demonstration activity)

Safety first

area. Do not inhale the gases.

Activity 8.5: Let us experiment

This activity may be demonstrated under the supervision of the
teacher. It may be performed in a fume hood or a well-ventilated

_ 2 holder
tube
Spirit
lamp

(a) Heating of sugar

Water ry Test tube holder
droplets 
Boiling _ 
tube Sugar after
heating
Spirit
lamp

(b) Colour of the sugar changes on heating

Watch glass

Charcoal
(carbon)

(c) Charcoal placed on a watch glass
Fig. 8.12: Heating sugar in a boiling tube

ou

e Take 5.6 grams of iron filings (Fig. 8.13a) and 3.2 grams of
sulfur powder (Fig. 8.13b) on a watch glass. Observe them

carefully.

(a)

(b)
Fig. 8.13: (a) Iron filings; (b) Sulfur powder

6/28/2025 2:51:54 PM

e Mix them thoroughly ina watch glass. Label this mixture
as Sample A (Fig. 8.14).

e Observe it carefully.

e Isthis a uniform or a non-uniform mixture? Can you still

Fig. 8.14: A mixture ofiron observe both iron and sulfur as separate substances?
filings and sulfur powder

e Take half of Sample A in a
china dish and gently heat it
(Fig. 8.15a) with continuous
stirring until a black mass is
formed.

e Let the content of the china
dish cool.

e Place this black mass in a
mortar and grind it with the
help of a pestle.

e Now, put it on another
watch glass and label it as
Sample B (Fig. 8.15b).

e Now, you have two samples Sample A and Sample B
(Fig. 8.16a and 8.16b). Compare both the Samples A and B
step by step and record your observations in Table 8.2.

Sample B

(b)
Fig. 8.15: (a) Heating Sample A; (b) Black mass

(a)
Fig. 8.16: (a) Sample A; (b) Sample B

Step 1 Appearance

e Compare the appearance of Sample A and Sample B like
colour and texture.

(a) Sample A

M
 gre Step 2 Magnet test

e Take a magnet and move it over the Samples A (Fig. 8.17a)
and B (Fig. 8.17b), one by one.

e What do you observe?

" Step 3 Gas test

(b) Sample B e Take a small amount of @EVGSAITE:

Fig. 8.17: Responses of Sample A in a test tube and
Samples A and B toa add a few drops of dilute | Be careful while handling 
hydrochloric acid. A

magnet hydrochloric acid (Fig. 8.18a).
uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 | TTT] CF) OLLI OJ O CLL OL) Oo

Chapter 8.indd 126 6/28/2025 2:51:59 PM

O CLIT) CLO) oO C{chapte 8 Nature of Matter: Elements, Compounds, and woneures 127

Test tube
Test tube
stand

(a) Sample A (b) Sample B
Fig. 8.18: Samples A and B in dilute hydrochloric acid

< Test tube

Test tube
stand

Fig. 8.19: Correct way

e What do you observe? to waft the fumes of
an evolved gas

e Gently smell the evolved gas by wafting it towards your nose

(Fig. 8.19).
Safety first

e Test the evolved gas by bringing a
burning splinter or a lighted candle near
the mouth of the test tube (Fig. 8.20a).

(a) Sample A (b) Sample B
Fig. 8.20: Testing gases

e What do you observe?

e Repeat the above steps with Sample B as well (Fig. 8.18b and
8.20b).

Table 8.2: Comparison of Samples A and B

Observations
Experiment
| Sample A Sample B

Appearance
1. (i) Colour
(ii) Texture

2. Magnet test

Gas test
3. (i) Odour
(ii) Burning

Chapter 8.indd 127 6/28/2025 2:52:01 PM
Chapter 8.indd 128

Sample B

Some discussion points

Do the Samples, A and B look the same?

Which sample exhibits magnetic properties?

Can we separate the components of Samples A and B?

On adding dilute hydrochloric acid, do gases evolve in both

Samples A and B?

In both the cases, do the gases smell the same or different?

e Also, categorise the substances used in this activity into
mixtures, compounds, and elements.

Sample A: We can say that Sample A is a mixture of the two
elements iron and sulfur. Its components retain their properties,
and their black and yellow coloured particles can be seen.
On bringing magnet near Sample A, the iron filings get attracted
towards the magnet. Hence, iron and sulfur can be separated.
You might have observed that in Sample A, iron in the mixture
reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid to form iron chloride and
hydrogen gas. The gas is colourless, has no smell, and burns with
a pop sound.
The reaction can be represented as 

Iron + Dilute Hydrochloric acid ~ Iron chloride + Hydrogen gas

Sulfur on the other hand, is left as a yellow solid at the bottom

of the test tube. This shows that sulfur does not react with
hydrochloric acid.
Sample B: The black mass obtained in Sample B is iron sulfide.
We observe that the texture andthe colour are the same throughout.
It is formed by heating the two elements, iron and sulfur. It is not
attracted by a magnet. The new substance has completely different
properties, and iron and sulfur can no longer be separated. Hence,
we can say that a compound has been formed. Can you explain
now why the magnet has no effect on Sample B?

Also, Sample B, iron sulfide, reacts with dilute hydrochloric
acid, to form iron chloride and hydrogen sulfide gas. The gas is
colourless and has a rotten egg-like odour.

The reaction can be represented as 

Iron sulfide + Dilute Hydrochloric acid ~ Iron chloride + Hydrogen sulfide

8.4 How Do We Use Elements, Compounds,

and Mixtures?

Elements, compounds, and mixtures are all around us. The
air we breathe is a mixture of gases like oxygen, nitrogen, and
carbon dioxide. Water, which is essential for life, is a compound

uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 | TTT] CF) OLLI OJ O CLL OL) Oo

6/28/2025 2:52:01 PM

O CLIT) CLO) oO C{chapte 8 Nature of Matter: Elements, Compounds, and woneures 129

made of elements, hydrogen and oxygen. Elements like iron and
aluminium are used to construct bridges, buildings, and vehicles.

Understanding these concepts is not just about recognising
what surrounds us; it is also the key to innovation. For instance,
chemists study how elements combine to create compounds,
enabling them to invent life-saving medicines and vaccines to fight
diseases. This knowledge also helps in the creation of fertilisers
thereby enhancing crop production that feeds the ever-increasing
human population globally.

Engineers and material scientists rely on their understanding of
compounds and mixtures to design materials with unique properties.
For example, they have developed alloys like stainless steel, which is
stronger and more durable than pure iron. Wood, steel, and concrete,
which are used as building materials, are all mixtures.

You learnt that various metals are obtained from minerals.
Let us learn about these minerals.

A step further

An example of a wonder material
developed by material scientists is graphene
aerogel. This is made from carbon and is
said to be the lightest material on earth. It is
so light that even grass can hold it (Fig. 8.21).
It is highly porous and therefore, has a high
absorbing capacity. For this reason, it can
potentially be used as an environmental cleaner, for example, to
clean up oil spills in both seas and on land. It is useful in fabricating
energy-saving devices and special coatings for buildings.

8.5 What Are Minerals?

Most rocks are a mixture of minerals, which can be
viewed with the eyes, or by using a magnifying glass or
a microscope. Some of the minerals are called native
minerals, which are pure elements and not compounds.
These can be metals, such as gold, silver, copper, etc., or
non-metals like sulfur, carbon, etc.

Most of the minerals are compounds made up of more
than one element. Some common examples of minerals
include quartz, calcite, mica, pyroxene, and olivine
(Fig. 8.22). Many things that we use in our everyday life are
made up of minerals or elements extracted from minerals.
For example, cement is made from calcite, quartz, alumina,
and iron oxide, which are minerals or are obtained from Olivine
minerals. Talcum powder is made from the mineral talc. Fig. 8.22: Some minerals

Fig. 8.21

Chapter 8.indd 129 6/28/2025 2:52:05 PM

Our scientific heritage

Use of elements, compounds, and
mixtures in Indian Art

The Dhokra art is an old craft from Bihar and
Odisha that uses different metals to create
beautiful figures inspired by nature (Fig. 8.23).
The process begins with shaping a design in
beeswax. This wax model is covered with clay
to make a mould. After the clay hardens, the
wax is melted out, leaving a hollow space. This
space is then filled with molten brass or bronze
which makes Dhokra art strong and gives it a
shiny golden colour. The figures often show
animals, people, and nature, reflecting tribal
creativity and tradition. Fig. 8.23: Dhokra art

Elements and compounds are the building blocks of
matter everything that has mass and takes up space. They make
the materials we see and use every day. However, not everything
around us is matter. Light, heat, electricity, and even thoughts
and emotions are important parts of our world, but they are not
made of matter. Understanding what matter is and what it is
not helps us better understand the world around us.

Snapshots

 A mixture consists two or more substances mixed together. These
substances retain their individual properties and do not react chemically
with each other.

 The individual substances that make up a mixture are called its
components.

 A pure substance consists the same type of particles. All the constituent
particles of that substance behave identically.

 Pure substance can be either an element or a compound.

 Elements are the simplest substances that cannot be broken down further
into simpler substances. They are the building blocks of all matter.

@ Substances which are composed of two or more elements combined
chemically in a fixed ratio and have different properties from their
constituent elements are called compounds.

 Minerals are natural, solid substances found on the Earth. They have a
fixed chemical composition. Most often they are compounds but rarely,
they can also be pure elements.
uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 | TTT] CF) OLLI OJ O CLL OL) Oo

Chapter 8.indd 130 6/28/2025 2:52:15 PM

Chapter 8.indd 131

O CLIT) CLO) oO C{chapte 8 Nature of Matter: Elements, Compounds, and woneures 131

Keep the curiosity alive

1. Consider the following reaction where two substances,

A and B, combine to form a product C:
A+B- >C

Assume that A and B cannot be broken down into simpler

substances by chemical reactions. Based on this information,
which of the following statements is correct?

(i) A, B, and C are all compounds and only C has a fixed
composition.

(ii) Cis a compound, and A and B have a fixed composition.
(iii) A and B are compounds, and C has a fixed composition.
(iv) A and B are elements, C is a compound, and has a fixed

composition.

2. Assertion: Air is a mixture.

Reason: A mixture is formed when two or more substances

are mixed, without undergoing any chemical change.

(i) Both Assertion and Reason are true and Reason is the
correct explanation for Assertion.

(ii) Both Assertion and Reason are true, but Reason is not

the correct explanation for Assertion.
(iii) Assertion is true, but Reason is false.
(iv) Assertion is false, but Reason is true.

3. Water, a compound, has different properties compared to
those of the elements oxygen and hydrogen from which it is
formed. Justify this statement.

4. In which of the following cases are all the examples correctly
matched? Give reasons in support of your answers.

(i) Elements water, nitrogen, iron, air.

(ii) Uniform mixtures minerals, seawater, bronze, air.
(iii) Pure substances carbon dioxide, iron, oxygen, sugar.
(iv) Non-uniform mixtures air, sand, brass, muddy water.

5. Iron reacts with moist air to form iron oxide, and magnesium
burns in oxygen to form magnesium oxide. Classify all the
substances involved in the above reactions as elements,
compounds or mixtures, with justification.

Prepare some questions based on your
learnings so far ...

6/28/2025 2:52:21 PM

6. Classify the following as elements, compounds, or mixtures

in Table 8.3.

Carbon dioxide, sand, seawater, magnesium oxide, muddy
water, aluminium, gold, oxygen, rust, iron sulfide, glucose,
air, water, fruit juice, nitrogen, sodium chloride, sulfur,
hydrogen, baking soda.

Identify pure substances amongst these and list them below.

Pure substances

8.
Gas (A) ?
Dilute
hydrochloric acid 9
Tron filings

Fig. 8.24 10.

What new substance is formed when a
mixture of iron filings and sulfur powder
is heated, and how is it different from the
original mixture? Also, write the word
equation for the reaction.

Is it possible for a substance to be classified
as both an element and a compound?
Explain why or why not.

. How would our daily lives be changed if

water were not a compound but a mixture
of hydrogen and oxygen?

Analyse Fig. 8.24. Identify Gas A. Also, write
the word equation of the chemical reaction.

11. Write the names of any two compounds made only from
non-metals, and also mention two uses of each of them.

12. How can gold be classified as both a mineral and a metal?

Reflect on the questions framed by your

i. Shouldn't it
, ange friends and try to answer ...

Chapter 8.indd 132

6/28/2025 2:52:28 PM

O CLIT) CLO) oO C{chapte 8 Nature of Matter: Elements, Compounds, and woneures 133

Discover, design, and debate

e Design and create comic strips from real-life examples to
differentiate between elements, compounds, and mixtures
with diagrams and illustrate their properties and uses.

e Search for discoveries of some elements (such as phosphorus,
sodium), compounds (such as penicillin) and mixtures
(such as brass, bronze, stainless steel). Present your findings
in the class.

e Let us search: Read labels on items like detergents or snacks,
and try to list the mixtures and compounds they contain.

e Work in groups: Each group will pretend to be in the role of
either an element, a compound, or a mixture. Debate which
category among them is the most important.

Chapter 8.indd 133 6/28/2025 2:52:37 PM