Exploring Forces

0877CHOS

Probe and ponder

e Why does it feel harder to pedal a bicycle when going uphill
than on flat ground?

e Why is it easier to slip on a wet surface?

e Why do we feel light or like we are floating just after our
swing reaches its highest point and begins to come down?

e Share your questions

Chapter 5.indd 62 6/28/2025 3:08:44 PM |

Chapter 5.indd 63

\HOOOO NOON \H0006 revi) HH0000 SM) Chapter 5 Exploring Forces )

It was a windy day. Sonali and Ragini were excited to go
cycling. Their summer vacation had just begun, and they wanted
to explore the beautiful landscapes around their village. After
pumping air into their bicycle tyres, they set off. As they rode
through the village, the wind rushed past them. Oh no! The
wind is pushing me hard! said Ragini. Smiling, Sonali replied,
 We are riding against the wind. We must push our pedals harder
to move faster. 

Their ride took them up a long path to a hilltop. Some parts
of the road were rough where they found it hard to pedal, while
other parts were smoother. When they reached the top and were
enjoying the view, they heard thunder and saw flashes of lightning
at a distance. Even though it looked beautiful, they decided to
head back immediately. On the way back, while passing a herd of
sheep, they pressed their bicycle bells and turned the handles to
change direction.

As they were coming down the slope of the hill, they realised
that their bicycles were moving down at a great speed even
though they were not pedalling! Sonali yelled, It s thrilling! It
seems something is pulling us downhill, what could it be? 

5.1 What Is a Force?

Let us try to experience the push and the pull.

| Activity 5.1: Let us explore

e Take a large cardboard box.

e Try moving the box in as many different ways as you can
think of.

(b)
Fig. 5.1: Moving a box in different ways (a) Pushing; (b) Pulling;
(c) Lifting (pulling up), and carrying
Did you move the box in any other way than shown in Fig. 5.1?
In all the ways that you might have used to move the box, you
had to apply a push or pull to the box. Generally, the push or pull
applied on an object is called force in science.

6/28/2025 3:08:45 PM

5.2 What Can a Force Do to the Bodies on

Which It Is Applied?

We experience push or pull in our daily lives all the time, often
without even realising it. Let us recall some of these experiences
and analyse them.

| Activity 5.2: Let us analyse

e Think of situations where a force (push or pull) is applied
and list them in Table 5.1.

e Analyse each situation and write the effect of the force
in Table 5.1. Some situations and their effects are already
listed for you.

Table 5.1: Different actions and their effects

Your friend holding Pull Stopping or decreasing
your moving bicycle the speed of the bicycle
from behind to stop

it

2. Hitting a moving ball Push Changing the direction
with a bat of a moving ball

3. Pressing an inflated Push Change in shape of
balloon the balloon

What do you conclude from these examples? Does a force
cause a moving object to stop? Can it change speed, or direction
of motion, or change the shape of an object?

Fig. 5.2: Applying force on objects

uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade # BSS60 R "BSSOON a POOED
Chapter 5.indd 64 6/28/2025 3:08:48 PM

\HOOOO NOON \H0006 revi) HH0000 SM) Chapter 5 Exploring Forces ) 6

In everyday life, we come across many situations where a force
is applied, for example, opening a drawer, stretching a rubber
band, a fielder stopping a ball, kicking a football, applying brakes
on a moving bicycle, rolling a chapati, or turning the steering
handle of an autorickshaw. What effect can the application of
force have on objects?

The force applied on an object may
e make an object move from rest.

e change the speed of an object if it is moving.
e change the direction of motion of an object.
e bring about a change in the shape of an object.
e cause some or all of these effects.

Does this mean __ that
whenever there is a change
in speed or direction, or
change in shape, a force is
acting on the object?

Yes, none of these take
place without the action
of force.

A step further

Suppose an object is at rest. Does it mean that no force is acting
on this object? It means that the forces acting on the object are
balancing one another. You will learn about balanced forces in
higher grades.

5.3 Are Forces an Interaction Between Two

or More Objects?

When you push a table, your hand is one object applying force
on another object the table. Here, we say that your hand and
the table are two objects interacting with each other.

Think of all the actions listed in Table 5.1. How many objects
are involved in each of the actions? Do you notice that forces
result only when two objects are interacting in some way or
the other? From these examples, we can infer that at least two
objects must interact for a force to come into play.

A force is a push or pull on an object resulting from the
object s interaction with another object. The SI unit of force is
newton (written with a small n ) and its symbol is N.

Chapter 5.indd 65 6/28/2025 3:08:52 PM

A step further

When you pushed the table with your hand, did you feel a force
on your hand too? The moment you stopped pushing, the force on
your hand disappeared. Whenever two objects interact, each object
experiences a force from the other. As soon as the interaction
ceases, the two objects no longer experience the force.

5.4 What Are the Different Types of Forces?

5.4.1 Contact forces

In many situations, we find that to apply a force on an object,
physical contact is necessary between our body and the object.
This contact can be direct, such as using our hands or other body
parts, or indirect, such as using a stick or rope. Forces of this
type which act only when there is physical contact between the
objects are called contact forces.

Muscular force

An example of contact force is muscular force. When we perform
any physical activity, such as walking, running, lifting, pushing,
jumping, or stretching, the force is caused by the action of muscles
in our body. The force resulting due to the action of muscles is
known as muscular force. Muscular force occurs when muscles
contract and elongate while doing any activity.

Animals, birds, fish, and insects use muscular forces for
movement and survival.

Fig. 5.3: Use of muscular force by living beings

uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade # BSS60 R "BSSOON a POOED
Chapter 5.indd 66 6/28/2025 3:08:58 PM

\HOOOO NOON \H0006 revi) HH0000 SM) Chapter 5 Exploring Forces ) 6

Humans used the muscular force of some animals to carry
out many tasks for a long time.

Fig. 5.4: Use of muscular force of animals to assist with human tasks

Ever heard of ...

Muscular force plays an important role in many functions inside
our body too. This force helps us chew food and push it through
the alimentary canal during the process of digestion. The expansion
and contraction of our heart muscles allows the blood to circulate
in our body a process essential for survival.

Friction

A ball rolling on a flat ground stops on its own
after some time. If we stop pedalling our bicycle | contact force?
on a flat road, it slows down and comes to a stop.

If the road is rough, it stops sooner than on a smoother road.
You must have come across many such experiences. What causes
the change in the speed of objects in such situations? We have
learnt earlier that a force is essential to change the speed of an
object. However, in all these situations no force appears to be
acting on the objects, yet their speed gradually decreases and
they come to a stop after some time. Is it possible that some force
is indeed acting on them? Which force is that?

| Activity 5.3: Let us investigate

e Take an object with a flat base (such as an empty lunch box/
geometry box/ a notebook) and place it on a table or floor.

e Gently push it and observe. Does it stop after travelling some
distance? Is there a force acting on it which brings it to rest?

e Now repeat by pushing the object in the opposite direction.
Does it stop again after travelling some distance?

Chapter 5.indd 67 6/28/2025 3:09:05 PM

On pushing, the object stops after sliding a certain
distance. This must be due to a force acting between the
surfaces of the sliding object and the table or floor which
are in contact. This force must be acting on the object ina
direction opposite to its direction of motion. This force is
what brings the object to a stop.

The force that comes into play when an object moves
or tries to move over another surface is called the force
Fig. 5.5: Friction acts between of friction or simply friction. Friction always acts in a
two surfaces and opposes the girection opposite to the direction in which the object is

motion of the object. : . Lee
moving or trying to move. The force of friction is a contact
force since it arises due to two surfaces in contact.

Friction arises due to the irregularities in the two surfaces in
contact. Even surfaces which appear smooth, havea large number
of minute irregularities (Fig. 5.6). When placed in contact, the
irregularities of two surfaces lock into each other and oppose
any effort to move one surface over the other.

Does this mean that
the force of friction
will be greater if the
surfaces are rough?

Fig. 5.6: Friction between two surfaces due to irregularities

Activity 5.4: Let us explore

e Try Activity 5.3 again, but this time place the same object on
different surfaces, such as glass, cloth, wood, ceramic tile,
and sand.

e Does the object stop after travelling the same distance as in
Activity 5.3?

e Does the object stop at the same distance on all surfaces?

For different surfaces, the object stops after moving different
distances so we can say that the force of friction depends upon
the nature of the surfaces in contact. Friction is greater on rough
surfaces.

A step further

Does the force or friction act only if the objects are moving on solid
surfaces? What about objects moving through liquids and gases? Air,
water, and other liquids also exert force of friction on the objects
moving through them. Hence the objects, such as aeroplanes, ships,
boats, or high-speed trains are designed with specific shapes to
reduce the force of friction due to the air or water around them.

uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade # BSS60 R "BSSOON a POOED

Chapter 5.indd 68 6/28/2025 3:09:06 PM
Chapter 5.indd 69

\HOOOO NOON \H0006 revi) HH0000 SM) Chapter 5 Exploring Forces ) 6

Is it essential for an object
applying force on another object
to always be in contact with it?

5.4.2 Non-contact forces

There are forces whose effect can be experienced even if the
objects are not in contact. These forces are called non-contact
forces. Let us learn about non-contact forces.

Magnetic force

Do you remember learning about magnets in the chapter
 Exploring Magnets in Curiosity, Grade 6? We learnt that a
magnet attracts objects made of magnetic materials. When two
magnets are brought close to each other, like poles (North North,
South-South) repel each other while unlike poles (North-South)
attract each other. In an earlier chapter of this book, we also learnt
about electromagnets which behave like magnets. Attraction
and repulsion between objects are also a form of push and pull,
that is, a force. Can you recall that a magnet could exert force on
another magnet or a magnetic material without being in contact
with it?

| Activity 5.5: Let us test

e Take two ring magnets and a wooden stick.

e While holding the stick in a vertical position over a wooden
table, insert one ring magnet onto the stick (Fig. 5.7).

e Now insert the second ring magnet above it such that the like
poles of the two magnets face each other. Does the second
magnet stay floating above the first magnet?

e Try pushing the second magnet down gently. Do you feel a
force on it?

e Now, reverse the poles of both the magnets. Does the second
magnet still remain floating?

We find that a magnet can exert force on another magnet
without being in contact with it.

The force exerted by a magnet on another magnet or a
magnetic material is called magnetic force. Since a magnet can
exert a force from a distance without being in contact it is called
a non-contact force.

Are there more such forces which act from a distance?

Fig. 5.7: Force between
two ring magnets

6/28/2025 3:09:10 PM

Electrostatic force

| Activity 5.6: Let us experiment

e Take a plastic scale or a plastic straw, a piece of
polythene, and small pieces of paper.

e Rub plastic scale/straw vigorously with polythene.

e Do not touch the rubbed part with your hand or
any metal object.

e Now, bring it close to the small pieces of paper placed
on a table, taking care not to touch the paper pieces
(Fig. 5.8). Do you notice something surprising?

=

Fig. 5.8: Charged plastic scale
attracting small paper pieces

The paper pieces get pulled towards the plastic scale/straw
and stick to it when it is brought close to paper pieces. Why does
this happen?

When two objects of certain materials are rubbed together,
electrical charges build up on their surfaces. These charges are
called static charges as they do not move by themselves. The
object that acquires static charges is said to be a charged object.
A charged object attracts, that is, exerts a force on uncharged
objects made of certain materials, such as small pieces of paper.
This force comes into play even when the bodies are not in contact.

Let us do another activity with objects made of different
materials.

| Activity 5.7: Let us experiment

e Take two balloons, a length of thread, and a woollen
cloth.

e Inflate two balloons and hang them in such a way that

@ they do not touch each other as shown in Fig. 5.9a.
e Rub both balloons with the woollen cloth and release
(a) them. Be careful not to touch the rubbed balloons

with your fingers. What do you observe?

We observe that the balloons move away from each

other as if they are repelling each other (Fig. 5.9b).
e Now bring the woollen cloth used for rubbing
(b) the balloons close to one of the rubbed balloons.
Fig. 5.9: (a) Two uncharged What happens?
balloons; (b) Two charged They move towards each other as if they are attracting

balloons repelling each other gach other. What do we infer from these observations?

uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade # BSS60 R "BSSOON a POOED

Chapter 5.indd 70 6/28/2025 3:09:16 PM
Chapter 5.indd 71

\HOOOO NOON \H0006 revi) HH0000 SM) Chapter 5 Exploring Forces )

We found that the two similarly charged /poes it mean that

there are two kinds of
electrical charges?

balloons repel each other whereas a charged
balloon and the woollen cloth (with which the
balloon was rubbed) attract each other. Does
this indicate that the charge on the balloon is of a different kind
from the charge on the woollen cloth?

Since the balloons were charged in the same way, we can say
that they have acquired similar charges. As the similarly charged
balloons repelled each other, we can infer that similar (like)
charges repel each other. Both the rubbing object and the rubbed
object get charged but they acquire opposite kind of charges.
Their attraction shows that opposite kind (unlike) of charges
attract each other. The two kinds of static charges are said to be
 positive and negative .

The force exerted by a charged body on another charged
body or an uncharged body is called electrostatic force. It is a
non-contact force.

A step further

When the charges move, they constitute an electric current in an
electrical circuit. It is the same current which makes a lamp glow
or generates a heating effect or a magnetic effect.

Gravitational force

| Activity 5.8: Let us observe

e Take a ball and throw it vertically upwards. Does it come
down?

e Now throw it again, but this time harder. Does it still fall
back down to the ground?

Think about different situations around you where any object
thrown up in any direction, finally falls or comes back to the
ground or floor.

Fig. 5.10: Some objects falling towards the Earth

6/28/2025 3:09:21 PM

Why do all the
objects fall towards
the Earth?

Is there any force
which acts on them?
What exerts this force?

Since all the objects fall towards the Earth, it means the Earth
attracts (pulls) them. The force with which the Earth attracts objects
towards itself is called the gravitational force. The gravitational
force exerted by the Earth is also called force of gravity or

simply gravity.

Since the gravitational force
| | \ acts without contact with the object
@\

it attracts, it is a non-contact force.
Gravitational force is always an
attractive force, unlike magnetic
force or electrostatic force, which
can either be attractive or repulsive.

You might have noticed that
when an object is dropped from a
height, it takes a straight vertical
path downwards before touching
the ground (Fig. 5.11a). When
an object is thrown vertically
upwards, the object moves up
straight, slows down, _ stops
momentarily at the top, and then
Fig. 5.11: (a) Dropping an object from a height; takes a straight vertical path

(b) Throwing an object vertically upwards downwards (Fig. 5.11b).

While going up, the speed
of the object goes on decreasing till the object comes to a stop,
its direction of motion changes and while coming down the

speed goes on increasing. We say that the object
undergoes a vertical motion when it moves in
a vertical direction under the influence of the
gravitational force.

Does the Earth
pull every object
with equal force?

5.5 Weight and Its Measurement

The force with which the Earth pulls an object towards itself is
called the weight of the object. The weight measures how strongly
an object is pulled by the Earth. Since the weight is a force, it is
measured in the same unit as that of force. Therefore, SI unit of
weight is also newton (N).
uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade # BSS60 R "BSSOON a POOED

Chapter 5.indd 72 6/28/2025 3:09:25 PM

\HOOOO NOON \H0006 revi) HH0000 SM) Chapter 5 Exploring Forces ) 7

Let us now try to find out if the Earth pulls every object with
equal force.

Activity 5.9: Let us explore

MTT
iy ith Wht

e Take a spring and a few objects of different masses,
such as a pencil box, a tiffin box, and a small stone.

e Hang one end of the spring froma nail. Fromthe other (a
end, hang an object and observe the spring. Does the
spring stretch?

e Now hang the other objects, one by one and notice the
stretch in the spring each time. Is the stretch caused by *
each object the same?

When an object is hung from a spring, the spring J\
stretches due to the force applied on the object by the Earth. EP
We find that the stretch caused in the spring is different , ise
for different objects. This indicates that the Earth pulls ) COS
different objects with different forces, that is, the weight
of different objects is different. Can we use the spring to
measure the weight of an object?

Fig. 5.12: (a) A hanging spring;
(b) Two different objects hung
from the spring

A step further

A spring balance is a simple device used to measure weight (force).
It consists of a spring fixed at one end, with a hook attached at
the other end. When we hang an object from the hook, the spring
stretches, and the amount of stretching gives the weight of the object.
There is a scale on the balance which is marked to show the weight
(force) in newton. Usually, there is also another scale to show the
corresponding values of mass in gram (g). These values have been
marked with the assumption that the spring balance is used on the
Earth, with the Earth s gravitational force attracting the object.

Let us learn to measure the weight using a spring balance. But
first, let us familiarise ourselves with a spring balance the way
we did with thermometer earlier (in the chapter Temperature
and Its Measurement in Curiosity, Grade 6).

| Activity 5.10: Let us observe

e Lookat the spring balance shown in Fig. 5.13 carefully. What
is the maximum weight it can measure?

The maximum weight it can measure is 10 N. Thus, this scale
has a range of Oto 10 N.

Chapter 5.indd 73 6/28/2025 3:09:29 PM

; Let us now try to find the smallest value of weight that
ous} can be measured by the spring balance.

S | Activity 5.11: Let us calculate

e Look atthe spring balance shown in Fig. 5.13 and note
down the following:

o How much is the weight difference indicated
between the two bigger marks?

The weight difference indicated between 0 and 01 N

or between 01 N and 02 N is1N.

o Howmany divisions (shown by smaller marks) are
there between these two bigger marks?

Fig. 5.13: A spring There are 5 divisions between these marks.

@ a and c ese up o Howmuchweight does one small division indicate?
Oy ws scate

epee

yuu
s
To

_

1N
One small division can read 3 = 0.2 N.

So, the smallest value that the spring balance can read is 0.2 N.

Now using this method, calculate the smallest value of weight
that can be measured with the spring balance given to you. Your
schoollaboratory may have spring balances for which the range and
the value of the smallest division may be different. It is, therefore,
always necessary to look carefully at the spring balance (or any
other instrument) you are about to use.

Let us now learn how to measure weight using a spring balance.

| Activity 5.12: Let us measure

e Take a spring balance and a few objects. Keep in mind that
the objects should not be heavier than the maximum value of
weight the spring balance can measure, otherwise it may get

; damaged.

e Suspend the objects one by one from the hook (Fig. 5.14). Read

iv

the scale for weight carefully and record your observations
in the Table 5.2.

Mover y TTT 1 i

qin

Table 5.2: Measuring weight using a spring
balance

Weight (N)

Pencil Box
2. Partially filled water bottle

Fig. 5.14: Object suspended

from a spring balance
uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade # BSS60 R "BSSOON a POOED

6/28/2025 3:09:39 PM

Chapter 5.indd 74

\HOOOO NOON \H0006 revi) HH0000 SM) Chapter 5 Exploring Forces ) 7

You can repeat Activities 5.10 to 5.12 for the mass scale shown
on the left side on the spring balance (Fig. 5.13) to measure the
mass of an object.

A step further

The mass of an object can be measured indirectly by measuring its
weight (using a spring balance) or by comparing its weight with the
weight of an object of a known mass (using a beam balance). Since
the weight of an object remains almost the same everywhere on the
Earth, so for all practical purposes it is acceptable to weigh an object
to find its mass.

As we have learnt earlier (in the chapter Materials
Around Us in Curiosity, Grade 6), mass is the amount
of matter in an object and is measured in grams (g)
or kilograms (kg). Its value remains the same at every
place. Weight, on the other hand, is the gravitational force
with which the Earth (or another planet) pulls an object. Since
gravitational force can vary very slightly from place to place on
the Earth (and can be very different on different planets), weight
can change, but mass does not.

A step further

The gravitational force of different planets on an object is different.
Thus, the weight of an object is different on different planets, as shown
in the following table, even though its mass remains the same.

[ Planet _| earth | Moon} Mars [venus [Jupiter |

Whatis the difference
between weight and
mass?

Mass of

the object 1kg 1kg 1kg 1kg 1kg

Weight of
10 N 1.6N 3.8 N 9N

A step further

In everyday life, particularly for the goods we commonly use, we
are more interested in the amount of matter in an object (its mass),
rather than the force applied by the Earth upon it (its weight).
However, though while the units of mass are used, instead of the
term mass, the term weight is typically used. For example, it is said
that the weight of the wheat bag is 10 kg. But in scientific use, this
is not correct and it is important to use the correct terms with their
correct units, even if every day language is more casual.

Chapter 5.indd 75 6/28/2025 3:09:45 PM

5.6 Floating and Sinking

While taking out water from

If we place some objects on water, some of .
them float, while others fall to the bottom. | @ bucket filled with water
The gravitational force of the Earth is | Using a mug, do you notice
acting on all objects, then why don t all| that the mug feels lighter
objects fall to the bottom? when it is inside water? Let

us try to understand this.

| Activity 5.13: Let us investigate

e Take an empty plastic bottle (with its lid closed tightly) anda
bucket full of water.

e Push the bottle in the water (Fig. 5.15). Do you feel an upward
push? Release the bottle. Does it bounce up?

You would have felt an upward push and the bottle bounces
back to the surface of the water. This indicates that water applies
a force on the bottle in the upward direction. In fact, all liquids
apply a similar force. The force applied by a liquid on an object
in the upward direction is known as upthrust or buoyant force.

When an object is placed in a liquid, the gravitational force due
Fig. 5.15: Plastic bottle to the Earth acts on it downwards. But a buoyant force is applied

in water on it by the liquid in the upward direction. If the gravitational
force is more than the buoyant force, the object sinks, but if the
two forces are equal, the object floats. One of the factors on which
the buoyant force depends upon, is the density of the liquid. You
will learn about density in a later chapter of this book.
gas inside. This creates a light, porous rock filled
with air pockets which is less dense than water and floats on it.

Archimedes, a famous Greek scientist, discovered that when an
Te Textbook of Science for Grade # BSS60 R "BSSOON a POOED

object is fully or partially immersed in a liquid, it experiences an
Chapter 5.indd 76 6/28/2025 3:09:52 PM

upward force which is equal to the weight of the liquid it displaces.
This is known as Archimedes Principle. If the weight of a liquid
displaced by an object is smaller than the weight of the object, the
object will sink in the liquid. If the weight of the liquid displaced is
equal to the weight of the object, the object will float in the liquid.

Ever heard of ...

There are some rocks which can float on water. z
One such rock is Pumice, which is formed during a 
volcanic eruptions. When lava with lots of gas and &

water vapour cools quickly, it traps tiny bubbles of

A force is push or pull on an object resulting from the object s interaction

with another object.

 The SI unit of force is newton and its symbol is N. P)

Forces can act with or without contact.

Muscular force and frictional force are some of the examples of contact

forces.

Magnetic force, gravitational force, and electrostatic force are
non-contact forces.

 Force can change an object s speed, direction of its motion, or both. Force
can change the shape of an object.

@ The force which comes into play when an object moves or tries to move
over another surface, is called force of friction or simply friction. It acts
in a direction opposite to the direction in which the object is moving or
trying to move.

@ The force exerted by a magnet on another magnet or a magnetic material
is called magnetic force.

@ The force exerted by a charged body on another charged body or
uncharged body is called an electrostatic force.

@ The force with which the Earth attracts objects towards itself, is called
the gravitational force. It is always an attractive force.

@ The force with which the Earth pulls an object towards itself is called the
weight of the object. The SI unit of weight is newton (N).

 The mass of an object remains unchanged whereas its weight may vary
from place to place.

@ When an object is placed in a liquid, the force applied by a liquid on an

object in the upward direction is known as upthrust or buoyant force.

Keep the curiosity alive

1. Match items in Column A with the items in Column B.

Column A (Type of force) Column B (Example)

(i) Muscular force (a) A cricket ball stopping on its own just
before touching the boundary line
(ii) Magnetic force (b) A child lifting a school bag
Gii) Frictional force (c) A fruit falling from a tree
(iv) Gravitational force (d) Balloon rubbed on woollen cloth

attracting hair strands
(v) Electrostatic force (e) Acompass needle pointing North

Prepare some questions based on your
learnings so far ...

Chapter 5.indd 77 6/28/2025 3:10:00 PM

Chapter 5.indd 78

. State whether the following statements are True or False.

(i) A force is always required to change the speed of motion
of an object.
(ii) Due to friction, the speed of the ball rolling on a flat
ground increases.
(iii) There is no force between two charged objects placed at
a small distance apart.

. Two balloons rubbed with a woollen cloth are brought near

each other. What would happen and why?

. When you drop a coin in a glass of water, it sinks, but when

you place a bigger wooden block in water, it floats. Explain.

. Ifaballis thrown upwards, it slows down, stops momentarily,

and then falls back to the ground. Name the forces acting on
the ball and specify their directions.
(i) During its upward motion
(ii) During its downward motion
(iii) At its topmost position

. A ball is released from the point P and moves along an

inclined plane and then along a horizontal surface as
shown in the Fig. 5.16. It comes to stop at the point A on the
horizontal surface. Think of a way so that when the ball is
released from the same point P, it stops (i) before the point A
(ii) after crossing the point A.

 

Fig. 5.16

. Why do we sometimes slip on smooth surfaces like ice or

polished floors? Explain.

. Is any force being applied to an object in a non-uniform

motion?

. The weight of an object on the Moon becomes one-sixth of its

weight on the Earth. What causes this change? Does the mass
of the object also become one-sixth of its mass on the Earth?

Shouldn't it Reflect on the questions framed by your
friends and try to answer ...

Cee

6/28/2025 3:10:06 PM

Chapter 5.indd 79

\HOOOO NOON \H0006 revi) HH0000 SM) Chapter 5 Exploring Forces )

10.

Discover, design, and debate

Three objects 1, 2, and 3 of the same size and shape but made
of different materials are placed in the water. 1
They dip to different depths as shown in Fig. 5.17. 
If the weights of the three objects 1, 2, and 3 are
Wy W and w,, respectively, then

(i) W,=W, =Ww,

(ii) w,> Ww, > Ww,
(iii) Ww, > W,>W,
(iv) w,> Ww, >w,

Collect objects made of different materials, such as plastic,
wool, silk, rubber, polythene sheet, paper, and metals.
Rub one material with another and check if it attracts small
pieces of paper or not, that is, whether it gets charged or not.
Record your observations in a systematic manner and write
a research paper.

Imagine a scenario where the gravity disappears. Develop a
story. Create a cartoon strip to present your story.

Organise a discussion in your class on the topic: Friction a
necessity or a problem? Make a note of the discussion and
state where friction is a necessity and when it is a problem.

Make your own spring balance with the help of your teacher
and calibrate it using standard weights. Now measure the
weights of different objects and calculate the ratio of the
weight and mass of different objects. Do you observe a
pattern?

An electroscope is a device which can determine whether
an object is electrically charged. You can make your own
electroscope (Fig. 5.18) in your class with the help of your
teacher, test the device. Explore in what other ways you may

use this electroscope.
Copper wire

Straw
Lid

Jar
Aluminium foil

Fig. 5.18

Fig. 5.17

6/28/2025 3:10:16 PM