the whole of India, which at the time included what is today Bangladesh, Pakistan, as well as parts of Afghanistan. Reprint 2025-26 35 N 30 N 25 N 20 N 15 N 10 N 5 N 5 India, That Is Bharat 03-02-2025 04:57:10 | A few centuries later, Bharata became the name generally used for the Indian Subcontinent. For instance, in an ancient text called the Vishnu Purana, we read: This name, Bharata remains in use even today. In north India, it is generally written as Bharat , while in south India, it is often Bharatam . Y THINK ABOUT IT Have you identified the snowy mountains ? Do you think this brief description of Bharata is correct? It is interesting to note that different parts of the country adopted a similar definition for India. For instance, a poem of ancient Tamil literature, from about 2,000 years ago, praises a king whose name is known from [Cape] Kumari in the south, from the great mountain in the north, from the oceans on the east and on the west... You can now recognise the great mountain in the north , and it should | nothe difficult to identify Cape Kumari . It looks like ancient Indians knew their geography well! Exploring Society: India and Beyond Tapestry of the Past Reprint 2025-26 chapter5.indd 80 & 03-02-2025 04:57:11 | o<9 DON'T MISS OUT chapter5.indd 81 The Indian Constitution, which was first written in English, uses the phrase India, that is Bharat right at the beginning. Similarly, the Hindi version of the Constitution mentions the same as Bharat arthath India . LET'S EXPLORE In this reproduction of the first page of the original Constitution of India in Fig. 5.5 (page 82), can you make out the phrase India, that is Bharat ? How Foreigners Named India The first foreigners to mention India were the Persians, the ancient inhabitants of Iran. In the 6" century BCE, a Persian emperor launched a military campaign and gained control of the region of the Indus River, which, as we saw, was earlier called Sindhw . So, it is no surprise that in their earliest records and stone inscriptions, the Persians referred to India as Hind , Hidw or Hindu , which are adaptations in their language of Sindhw . (Note that in ancient Persian, Hindw is a purely geographical term; it does not refer here to the Hindu religion.) Based on these Persian sources, the ancient Greeks named the region Indoi or Indike . They dropped the initial letter h of Hindw because this letter did not exist in their Greek language. 5 India, That Is Bharat Sindhu => Hindhu => Indoi/Indike The ancient Chinese also interacted with India. In several texts, they refer to India as Yintw or Yindu . This word also originally comes from Sindhu , in the following manner: Sindhu ==> Hindhu => Indu => Yindu Reprint 2025-26 Constitution: A document that spells out the basic principles and laws of a nation. The Indian