compounds called detergents as cleansing agents. Detergents are generally sodium salts of sulphonic acids or ammonium salts with chlorides or bromides ions, etc. Both have long hydrocarbon chain. The charged ends of these compounds do not form insoluble precipitates with the calcium and magnesium ions in hard water. Thus, they remain effective in hard water. Detergents are usually used to make shampoos and products for cleaning clothes. Q U ES TION S Would you be able to check if water is hard by using a detergent? People use a variety of methods to wash clothes. Usually after adding the soap, they beat the clothes on a stone, or beat it with a paddle, scrub with a brush or the mixture is agitated in a washing machine. Why is agitation necessary to get clean clothes? 76 Science Reprint 2025-26 What you have learnt Carbon is a versatile element that forms the basis for all living organisms and many of the things we use. This large variety of compounds is formed by carbon because of its tetravalency and the property of catenation that it exhibits. Covalent bonds are formed by the sharing of electrons between two atoms so that both can achieve a completely filled outermost shell. Carbon forms covalent bonds with itself and other elements such as hydrogen, oxygen, sulphur, nitrogen and chlorine. Carbon also forms compounds containing double and triple bonds between carbon atoms. These carbon chains may be in the form of straight chains, branched chains or rings. The ability of carbon to form chains gives rise to a homologous series of compounds in which the same functional group is attached to carbon chains of different lengths. The functional groups such as alcohols, aldehydes, ketones and carboxylic acids bestow characteristic properties to the carbon compounds that contain them. Carbon and its compounds are some of our major sources of fuels. Ethanol and ethanoic acid are carbon compounds of importance in our daily lives. The action of soaps and detergents is based on the presence of both hydrophobic and hydrophilic groups in the molecule and this helps to emulsify the oily dirt and hence its removal. Ethane, with the molecular formula C,H, has (a) 6covalent bonds. (b) 7 covalent bonds. (c) S8covalent bonds. (d) 9covalent bonds. Butanone is a four-carbon compound with the functional group (a) carboxylic acid. (b) aldehyde. (c) ketone. (d) alcohol. . While cooking, if the bottom of the vessel is getting blackened on the outside, it means that (a) the food is not cooked completely. (b) the fuel is not burning completely. the fuel is wet. the fuel is burning completely. Carbon and its Compounds 77 Reprint 2025-26 Explain the nature of the covalent bond using the bond formation in CH,Cl. Draw the electron dot structures for (a) ethanoic acid. (b) HS. (c) propanone. (d) F,. What is an homologous series? Explain with an example. How can ethanol and ethanoic acid be differentiated on the basis of their physical and chemical properties? Why does micelle formation