of water, the hydrophobic tail of soap will not be soluble in water and the soap will align along the surface of water with the ionic end in water and the hydrocarbon tail protruding out of water. Inside water, Hydrophilic end Hydrophobic end O YYYYYN. Soap molecule Hydrophilic end Nat s 1) 6 1) bi fra Moric end | S these molecules have a unique orientation that keeps the hydrocarbon portion out of the water. Thus, clusters of molecules in which the hydrophobic tails are in the interior of the cluster and the ionic ends are on the surface of the cluster. This formation is called a micelle. Soap in the form of a micelle is able to clean, since the oily dirt will be collected in the centre of the micelle. The micelles stay in solution as a colloid and will not come together to precipitate because of ion-ion repulsion. Thus, the dirt suspended in the micelles is also easily rinsed away. The soap micelles are large enough to scatter light. Hence a soap solution appears cloudy. More to Know! Figure 4.13 Effect of soap in cleaning Carbon and its Compounds 75 Reprint 2025-26 = Take about 10 mL of distilled water (or rain water) and 10 mL of hard water (from a tubewell or hand-pump) in separate test tubes. = Add a couple of drops of soap solution to both. Shake the test tubes vigorously for an equal period of time and observe the amount of foam formed. In which test tube do you get more foam? In which test tube do you observe a white curdy precipitate? Note for the teacher: If hard water is not available in your locality, prepare some hard water by dissolving hydrogencarbonates/ sulphates/chlorides of calcium or magnesium in water. = Take two test tubes with about 10 mL of hard water in each. = Add five drops of soap solution to one and five drops of detergent solution to the other. = Shake both test tubes for the same period. = Do both test tubes have the same amount of foam? = In which test tube is a curdy solid formed? Have you ever observed while bathing that foam is formed with difficulty and an insoluble substance (scum) remains after washing with water? This is caused by the reaction of soap with the calcium and magnesium salts, which cause the hardness of water. Hence you need to use a larger amount of soap. This problem is overcome by using another class of compounds called detergents as cleansing agents. Detergents are generally sodium salts of sulphonic acids or ammonium salts with chlorides or bromides ions, etc. Both have long hydrocarbon chain. The charged ends of these compounds do not form insoluble precipitates with the calcium and magnesium ions in hard water. Thus, they remain effective in hard water. Detergents are usually used to make shampoos and products for cleaning clothes. Q U ES TION S Would you be able to check if water