4.2.3 Will you be my Friend? Carbon seems to be a very friendly element. So far we have been looking at compounds containing carbon and hydrogen only. But carbon also forms Carbon and its Compounds Reprint 2025-26 Table 4.3 Some functional groups in carbon compounds Hetero atom Cl/Br Oxygen Halo- (Chloro/bromo) Cl, Br alkane (substitutes for hydrogen atom) 4. Carboxylic acid | bonds with other elements such as halogens, oxygen, nitrogen and sulphur. In a hydrocarbon chain, one or more hydrogens can be replaced by these elements, such that the valency of carbon remains satisfied. In such compounds, the element replacing hydrogen is referred to as a heteroatom. These heteroatoms are also present in some groups as given in Table 4.3. These heteroatoms and the group containing Class of Formula of these confer specific compounds functional group properties to the compound, regardless of the length and nature of the carbon chain and hence are_- called functional groups. Some 1. Alcohol OH important functional groups are given in the YH Table 4.3. Free valency or 2. Aldehyde men valencies of the group O are shown by the single line. The functional group ~C is attached to the carbon 3. Ketone ll chain through this valency by replacing one hydrogen atom or C-OH atoms. 4.2.4 Homologous Series You have seen that carbon atoms can be linked together to form chains of varying lengths. These chains can be branched also. In addition, hydrogen atom or other atoms on these carbon chains can be replaced by any of the functional groups that we saw above. The presence of a functional group such as alcohol decides the properties of the carbon compound, regardless of the length of the carbon chain. For example, the chemical properties of CH,OH, C,H,OH, C,H,OH and C,H,OH are all very similar. Hence, such a series of compounds in which the same functional group substitutes for hydrogen in a carbon chain is called a homologous series. Let us look at the homologous series that we saw earlier in Table 4.2. If we look at the formulae of successive compounds, say CH, and C,H, these differ by a -CH,- unit C,H, and C,H, these differ by a -CH,- unit What is the difference between the next pair propane and butane (C,H,,)? Can you find out the difference in molecular masses between these pairs (the atomic mass of carbon is 12 u and the atomic mass of hydrogen is 1 u)? Similarly, take the homologous series for alkenes. The first member of the series is ethene which we have already come across in Section 4.2.1. What is the formula for ethene? The succeeding members have the formula C,H,, C,H, and C,H,,. Do these also differ by a -CH, 3 " 6 Science Reprint 2025-26 unit? Do you see any relation between the number of carbon and hydrogen atoms in these compounds? The general formula for alkenes can be written as C_H,, where n = 2, 3, 4. Can you similarly generate the general formula