fyb o CHAPTERG : Carbon and its a Compounds n the last Chapter, we came to know many compounds of importance to us. In this Chapter we will study about some more interesting compounds and their properties. Also, we shall be learning about carbon, an element which is of immense significance to us in both its elemental form and in the combined form. Activity 4.1 Things made | Things made | Others of metal of glass/clay = Make a list of ten things you have used or consumed since the morning. = Compile this list with the lists made by your classmates and then sort the items into the adjacent Table. = If there are items which are made up of more than one material, put them into both the relevant columns of the table. Look at the items that come in the last column of the above table filled by you your teacher will be able to tell you that most of them are made up of compounds of carbon. Can you think of a method to test this? What would be the product if a compound containing carbon is burnt? Do you know of any test to confirm this? Food, clothes, medicines, books, or many of the things that you listed are all based on this versatile element carbon. In addition, all living structures are carbon based. The amount of carbon present in the earth s crust and in the atmosphere is quite meagre. The earth s crust has only 0.02% carbon in the form of minerals (like carbonates, hydrogencarbonates, coal and petroleum) and the atmosphere has 0.03% of carbon dioxide. In spite of this small amount of carbon available in nature, the importance of carbon seems to be immense. In this Chapter, we will know about the properties of carbon which make carbon so important to us. 4.1 BONDING IN CARBON - THE COVALENT BOND In the previous Chapter, we have studied the properties of ionic compounds. We saw that ionic compounds have high melting and boiling points and conduct electricity in solution or in the molten state. We also Reprint 2025-26 saw how the nature of bonding in ionic compounds explains these properties. Let us now study the properties of some carbon compounds. Most carbon compounds are poor conductors of electricity as we have seen in Chapter 2. From the data given in Table 4.1 on the boiling and Table 4.1 Melting points and boiling points of some melting points of the carbon compounds, compounds of carbon we find that these compounds have low ; = . as . Compound Melting Boiling melting and boiling points as compared : = Lo. point (K) | point (K) to ionic compounds (Chapter 3). We can conclude that the forces of attraction Acetic acid (CH,COOH) 290 391 between the molecules are not very strong. Since these compounds are largely non-conductors of electricity, we | Ethanol (CH,CH,OH) 156 351 can conclude that the bonding in these compounds does not give