the remains of trees, ferns, and other plants that lived millions of years ago. These were crushed into the earth, perhaps by earthquakes or volcanic eruptions. They were pressed down by layers of earth and rock. They slowly decayed into coal. Oil and gas are the remains of millions of tiny plants and animals that lived in the sea. When they died, their bodies sank to the sea bed and were covered by silt. Bacteria attacked the dead remains, turning them into oil and gas under the high pressures they were being subjected to. Meanwhile, the silt was slowly compressed into rock. The oil and gas seeped into the porous parts of the rock, and got trapped like water in a sponge. Can you guess why coal and petroleum are called fossil fuels? 4.3.2 Oxidation Activity 4.5 You have learnt about oxidation reactions in Take about 3 mL of ethanol in a test tube and warm it the first Chapter. Carbon gently in a water bath. compounds can be easily Add a 5% solution of alkaline potassium permanganate oxidised on combustion. In drop by drop to this solution. addition to this complete Does the colour of potassium permanganate persist when oxidation, we have reactions it is added initially? in which alcohols are Why does the colour of potassium permanganate not disappear when excess is added? converted to carboxylic acids Science Reprint 2025-26 Alkaline KMnO, + Heat CH, - CH,OH Or acidified K,Cr,O, + Heat CH,COOH We see that some substances are capable of adding oxygen to others. These substances are known as oxidising agents. Alkaline potassium permanganate or acidified potassium dichromate are oxidising alcohols to acids, that is, adding oxygen to the starting material. Hence they are known as oxidising agents. 4.3.3 Addition Reaction Unsaturated hydrocarbons add hydrogen in the presence of catalysts such as palladium or nickel to give saturated hydrocarbons. Catalysts are substances that cause a reaction to occur or proceed at a different rate without the reaction itself being affected. This reaction is commonly used in the hydrogenation of vegetable oils using a nickel catalyst. Vegetable oils generally have long unsaturated carbon chains while animal fats have saturated carbon chains. R R Nickel catal anh Ni talyst \C=c% ickel catalyst, 2 4_G_R R \R H, | | RR You must have seen advertisements stating that some vegetable oils are healthy . Animal fats generally contain saturated fatty acids which are said to be harmful for health. Oils containing unsaturated fatty acids should be chosen for cooking. 4.3.4 Substitution Reaction Saturated hydrocarbons are fairly unreactive and are inert in the presence of most reagents. However, in the presence of sunlight, chlorine is added to hydrocarbons in a very fast reaction. Chlorine can replace the hydrogen atoms one by one. It is called a substitution reaction because one type of atom or a group of atoms takes the place of another. A number of products are usually formed with the higher homologues of alkanes. CH, + Cl, CH,Cl +