the two carbon atoms in order to satisfy their valencies? Such compounds of carbon having double or triple bonds between the carbon atoms are known as unsaturated carbon compounds and they are more reactive than the saturated carbon compounds. Figure 4.7 Structure of ethene 4.2.2 Chains, Branches and Rings In the earlier section, we mentioned the carbon compounds methane, ethane and propane, containing respectively 1, 2 and 3 carbon atoms. Such chains of carbon atoms can contain many more carbon atoms. The names and structures of six of these are given in Table 4.2. Table 4.2 Formulae and structures of saturated compounds of carbon and hydrogen No. of C atoms H 1 Methane CH, a a | H a 2 Ethane C,H, HOC C -H H H iG 3 Propane C,H, EG 0 oO -H H H H ae 4 Butane C,H,, H-C-C-C-C-H H H H H eee 5 Pentane C.H,, H iC o 2 C H 6 Hexane C.H H-C-C 64 Science Reprint 2025-26 But, let us take another look at butane. If we make the carbon skeleton with four carbon atoms, we see that two different possible skeletons are JE C C C C C- NO Figure 4.8 (a) Two possible carbon-skeletons Filling the remaining valencies with hydrogen gives us H |-H aon Loy Heo eH anal HHHH H H ;~H Figure 4.8 (b) Complete molecules for two structures with formula C,H,, We see that both these structures have the same formula C,H,,. Such compounds with identical molecular formula but different structures are called structural isomers. In addition to straight and branched carbon chains, some compounds have carbon atoms arranged in the form ofa ring. For example, cyclohexane has the formula C,H,, and the following structure H H HH \/ \7 _ AY Te Cc. yH ro \c rN men \ / H C C H C C Y\ y~\ H H H H (a) (b) Figure 4.9 Structure of cyclohexane (a) carbon skeleton (b) complete molecule Can you draw the electron dot structure for cyclohexane? Straight chain, branched chain and cyclic carbon compounds, all may be saturated or unsaturated. For example, benzene, C,H,, has the following structure Cc Cc B C,H aN enzene C C H i H Figure 4.10 Structure of benzene All these carbon compounds which contain only carbon and hydrogen are called hydrocarbons. Among these, the saturated hydrocarbons are called alkanes. The unsaturated hydrocarbons which contain one or more double bonds are called alkenes. Those containing one or more triple bonds are called alkynes. 4.2.3 Will you be my Friend? Carbon seems to be a very friendly element. So far we have been looking at compounds containing carbon and hydrogen only. But carbon also forms Carbon and its Compounds Reprint 2025-26 Table 4.3 Some functional groups in carbon compounds Hetero atom Cl/Br Oxygen Halo- (Chloro/bromo) Cl, Br alkane (substitutes for hydrogen atom) 4. Carboxylic acid | bonds with other elements such as halogens, oxygen, nitrogen and sulphur. In a hydrocarbon chain, one or more