which depend on the elements other than carbon present in the molecule. Again the bonds that carbon forms with most other elements are very strong making these compounds exceptionally stable. One reason for the formation of strong bonds by carbon is its small size. This enables the nucleus to hold on to the shared pairs of electrons strongly. The bonds formed by elements having bigger atoms are much weaker. Science Reprint 2025-26 OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO ROR ORTORTORORTORS() More to Know! 4.2.1 Saturated and Unsaturated Carbon Compounds We have already seen the structure of methane. Another compound formed between carbon and hydrogen is ethane with a formula of C,H,. In order to arrive at the structure of simple carbon compounds, the first step is to link the carbon atoms together with a single bond (Fig. 4.6a) and then use the hydrogen atoms to satisfy the remaining valencies of carbon (Fig. 4.6b). For example, the structure of ethane is arrived in the following steps C C Step 1 Figure 4.6 (a) Carbon atoms linked together with a single bond Three valencies of each carbon atom remain unsatisfied, so each is bonded to three hydrogen atoms giving: Figure 4.6 HH (c) Electron dot structure of | ethane H-C 0H Step 2 H H Figure 4.6 (b) Each carbon atom bonded to three hydrogen atoms The electron dot structure of ethane is shown in Fig. 4.6(c). Can you draw the structure of propane, which has the molecular C C Step 1 formula C,H, in a similar manner? You will see that the valencies of all the atoms are satisfied by single bonds between them. Such carbon compounds are called saturated compounds. These compounds are normally not very reactive. However, another compound of carbon and hydrogen has the formula Z ~ ne C,H, and is called ethene. How can this molecule be depicted? We follow HH H Step 2 the same step-wise approach as above. H H Carbon-carbon atoms linked together with a single bond (Step 1). We see that one valency per carbon atom remains unsatisfied cH a (Step 2). This can be satisfied only if there is a double bond between the / \ Step 3 two carbons (Step 3). H H Carbon and its Compounds 63 Reprint 2025-26 The electron dot structure for ethene is given in Fig. 4.7. Yet another compound of hydrogen and carbon has the formula C,H, and is called ethyne. Can you draw the electron dot structure for ethyne? How many bonds are necessary between the two carbon atoms in order to satisfy their valencies? Such compounds of carbon having double or triple bonds between the carbon atoms are known as unsaturated carbon compounds and they are more reactive than the saturated carbon compounds. Figure 4.7 Structure of ethene 4.2.2 Chains, Branches and Rings In the earlier section, we mentioned the carbon compounds methane, ethane and propane, containing respectively 1, 2 and 3 carbon atoms. Such chains of carbon atoms can contain many more carbon