Substitution Reaction Saturated hydrocarbons are fairly unreactive and are inert in the presence of most reagents. However, in the presence of sunlight, chlorine is added to hydrocarbons in a very fast reaction. Chlorine can replace the hydrogen atoms one by one. It is called a substitution reaction because one type of atom or a group of atoms takes the place of another. A number of products are usually formed with the higher homologues of alkanes. CH, + Cl, CH,Cl + HCl (in the presence of sunlight) Q U ES TION S Why is the conversion of ethanol to ethanoic acid an oxidation reaction? A mixture of oxygen and ethyne is burnt for welding. Can you tell why a mixture of ethyne and air is not used? 4.4 SOME IMPORTANT CARBON COMPOUNDS ETHANOL AND ETHANOIC ACID Many carbon compounds are invaluable to us. But here we shall study the properties of two commercially important compounds - ethanol and ethanoic acid. Carbon and its Compounds 71 Reprint 2025-26 4.4.1 Properties of Ethanol Ethanol is a liquid at room temperature (refer to Table 4.1 for the melting and boiling points of ethanol). Ethanol is commonly called alcohol and is the active ingredient of all alcoholic drinks. In addition, because itis a good solvent, it is also used in medicines such as tincture iodine, cough syrups, and many tonics. Ethanol is also soluble in water in all proportions. Consumption of small quantities of dilute ethanol causes drunkenness. Even though this practice is condemned, it is a socially widespread practice. However, intake of even a small quantity of pure ethanol (called absolute alcohol) can be lethal. Also, long-term consumption of alcohol leads to many health problems. Reactions of Ethanol (i) Reaction with sodium Teacher s demonstration (Sodium ethoxide) = Drop a small piece of sodium, about the size of a couple of grains of rice, into ethanol Alcohols react with sodium leading to the evolution of hydrogen. With ethanol, the other (absolute alcohol). product is sodium ethoxide. Can you recall which = What do you observe? other substances produce hydrogen on reacting with = How will you test the gas evolved? metals? (ii) Reaction to give unsaturated hydrocarbon: Heating ethanol at 443 K with excess concentrated sulphuric acid results in the dehydration of ethanol to give ethene CH, CH;OH "y-55- > CH, = CH, + H,O The concentrated sulphuric acid can be regarded as a dehydrating agent which removes water from ethanol. Oo OQQOOoqOoOoO OOO ODODDOD ODO ODO O O O O OO O O O O O Do You Know? 72 Science Reprint 2025-26 @ @ @ @ i D) i D) @ dD) ) More to Know! 4.4.2 Properties of Ethanoic Acid Ethanoic acid is commonly called acetic acid and belongs to a group of acids called carboxylic acids. 5-8% solution of acetic acid in water is called vinegar and is used widely as a preservative in pickles. The melting point of pure ethanoic acid is 290 K and hence it often freezes