O O O Do You Know? 72 Science Reprint 2025-26 @ @ @ @ i D) i D) @ dD) ) More to Know! 4.4.2 Properties of Ethanoic Acid Ethanoic acid is commonly called acetic acid and belongs to a group of acids called carboxylic acids. 5-8% solution of acetic acid in water is called vinegar and is used widely as a preservative in pickles. The melting point of pure ethanoic acid is 290 K and hence it often freezes during winter = Compare the pH of dilute acetic acid and dilute hydrochloric acid using both litmus paper and universal indicator. in cold climates. This gave rise to its name glacial = Are both acids indicated by the acetic acid. ; litmus test? The group of organic compounds called = Does the universal indicator show carboxylic acids are obviously characterised by them as equally strong acids? their acidic nature. However, unlike mineral acids like HCl, which are completely ionised, carboxylic acids are weak acids. containing = Take 1 mL ethanol (absolute alcohol) i on and 1 mL glacial acetic acid along with a few drops of concentrated sulphuric acid in a test tube. = Warm ina water-bath for at least five Water minutes as shown in Fig. 4.11. = Pour into a beaker containing 20-50 mL of water and smell the resulting mixture. Beaker Wire gauze Tripod stand Burner Reactions of ethanoic acid: (i) Esterification reaction: Esters are most commonly formed by reaction of an acid and an alcohol. Ethanoic acid reacts with absolute ethanol in the presence of an acid catalyst to give an ester Figure 4.11 Acid CH, - C ~O-CH, -CH, +H,0 Formation of ester fe) CH, - COOH +CH, - CH,OH (Ethanoie acid) (Ethanol) (Ester) Generally, esters are sweet-smelling substances. These are used in making perfumes and as flavouring agents. On treating with sodium hydroxide, which is an alkali, the ester is converted back to alcohol and sodium salt of carboxylic acid. This reaction is known as saponification because it is used in the preparation of soap. Soaps are sodium or potassium salts of long chain carboxylic acid. Carbon and its Compounds 73 Reprint 2025-26 NaOH CH,COOC,H, > C, H,OH+CH,COONa (ii) Reaction with a base: Like mineral acids, ethanoic acid reacts with a base such as sodium hydroxide to give a salt (sodium ethanoate or commonly called sodium acetate) and water: NaOH + CH,COOH - CH,COONa + H,O How does ethanoic acid react with carbonates and hydrogencarbonates? Let us perform an activity to find out. Set up the apparatus as shown in Chapter 2, Activity 2.5. Take a spatula full of sodium carbonate in a test tube and add 2 mL of dilute ethanoic acid. What do you observe? Pass the gas produced through freshly prepared lime-water. What do you observe? Can the gas produced by the reaction between ethanoic acid and sodium carbonate be identified by this test? Repeat this Activity with sodium hydrogencarbonate instead of sodium carbonate. (iii) Reaction with carbonates and hydrogencarbonates: Ethanoic