up the apparatus as shown in Chapter 2, Activity 2.5. Take a spatula full of sodium carbonate in a test tube and add 2 mL of dilute ethanoic acid. What do you observe? Pass the gas produced through freshly prepared lime-water. What do you observe? Can the gas produced by the reaction between ethanoic acid and sodium carbonate be identified by this test? Repeat this Activity with sodium hydrogencarbonate instead of sodium carbonate. (iii) Reaction with carbonates and hydrogencarbonates: Ethanoic acid reacts with carbonates and hydrogencarbonates to give rise to a salt, carbon dioxide and water. The salt produced is commonly called sodium acetate. 2CH,COOH + Na,CO, > 2CH,COONa +.H,0 + CO, CH,COOH + NaHCO, CH,COONa #H,0 + CO, How would you distinguish experimentally between an alcohol and a carboxylic acid? What are oxidising agents? vat 4.5 SOAPS AND DETERGENTS = Take about 10 mL of water each in two test tubes. = Add a drop of oil (cooking oil) to both the test tubes and label them as A and B. Oil = To test tube B, add a few drops of soap solution. droplet = Now shake both the test tubes vigourously for the same period of time. = Can you see the oil and water layers separately Nat in both the test tubes immediately after you stop shaking them? Nat = Leave the test tubes undisturbed for some time Figure 4.12 and observe. Does the oil layer separate out? Formation of micelles In which test tube does this happen first? Science Reprint 2025-26 This activity demonstrates the effect of soap in cleaning. Most dirt is oily in nature and as you know, oil does not dissolve in water. The molecules of soap are sodium or potassium salts of long-chain carboxylic acids. The ionic-end of soap interacts with water while the carbon chain interacts with oil. The soap molecules, thus form structures called micelles (see Fig. 4.12) where one end of the molecules is towards the oil droplet while the ionic-end faces outside. This forms an emulsion in water. The soap micelle thus helps in pulling out the dirt in water and we can wash our clothes clean (Fig. 4.13). Can you draw the structure of the micelle that would be formed if you dissolve soap in a hydrocarbon? Micelles Soaps are molecules in which the two ends have differing properties, one is hydrophilic, that is, it interacts with water, while the other end is hydrophobic, that is, it interacts with hydrocarbons. When soap is at the surface of water, the hydrophobic tail of soap will not be soluble in water and the soap will align along the surface of water with the ionic end in water and the hydrocarbon tail protruding out of water. Inside water, Hydrophilic end Hydrophobic end O YYYYYN. Soap molecule Hydrophilic end Nat s 1) 6 1) bi fra Moric end | S these molecules have a unique orientation that keeps the hydrocarbon portion out of the water. Thus, clusters of molecules in