misfortune malicious embezzlement architect neighbours accustomed temporary behaviour documents Look up the following phrases in a dictionary to find out their meaning, and then use each in a sentence of your own. (i) You may take it that (ii) He seems to be coming round (iii) My foot s gone to sleep Reprint 2025-26 = = ie) = s a P First Flight BS on Il. Reported Speech A sentence in reported speech consists of two parts: a reporting clause, which contains the reporting verb, and the reported clause. Look at the following sentences. (a) I went to visit my grandma last week, said Mamta. (b) Mamta said that she had gone to visit her grandma the previous week. In sentence (a), we have Mamta s exact words. This is an example of direct speech. In sentence (b), someone is reporting what Mamta said. This is called indirect speech or reported speech. A sentence in reported speech is made up of two parts a reporting clause and a reported clause. In sentence (b), Mamta said is the reporting clause containing the reporting verb said. The other clause that she had gone to visit her grandma last week is the reported clause. Notice that in sentence (b) we put the reporting clause first. This is done to show that we are not speaking directly, but reporting someone else s words. The tense of the verb also changes; past tense (went) becomes past perfect (had gone). Here are some pairs of sentences in direct and reported speech. Read them carefully, and do the task that follows: 1. (i) Lomov : Honoured Stepan Stepanovitch, do you think I may count on her consent? (Direct Speech) (ii) Lomov asked Stepan Stepanovitch respectfully if he thought he might count on her consent. (Reported Speech) 2. (i) Lomov : Im getting a noise in my ears from excitement. (Direct Speech) (ii) Lomov said that he was getting a noise in his ears from excitement. (Reported Speech) 3. (i) Natatya : Why haven t you been here for such a long time? (Direct Speech) (ii) Natalya Stepanovna asked why he hadn t been there for such a long time. (Reported Speech) 4. (i) CHusuxov : What s the matter? (Direct Speech) (ii) Chubukov asked him what the matter was. (Reported Speech) 5. (i) Natatya : My mowers will be there this very day! (Direct Speech) ) (ii) Natalya Stepanovna declared that her mowers would be there that very day. (Reported Speech) You must have noticed that when we report someone s exact words, we have to make some changes in the sentence structure. In the following sentences fill in the blanks to list the changes that have occurred in the above pairs of sentences. One has been done for you. Reprint 2025-26 Ill. 1. To report a question, we use the reporting verb __asked_ __ (as in Sentence Set 1). 2. To report a statement, we use the reporting verb 3. The adverb of place here changes