to five dessiatins, and are worth perhaps 300 roubles, but I can t stand unfairness. Say what you will, I can t stand unfairness. Hear me out, I implore you! The peasants of your father s grandfather, as I have already had the honour of explaining to you, used to bake bricks for my aunt s grandmother. Now my aunt s grandmother, wishing to make them a pleasant... I can t make head or tail of all this about aunts and grandfathers and grandmothers. The Meadows are ours, that s all. Mine. Ours! You can go on proving it for two days on end, you can go and put on fifteen dress jackets, but I tell you they're ours, ours, ours! I don t want anything of yours and I don t want to give anything of mine. So there! Natalya Stepanovna, I don t want the Meadows, but I am acting on principle. If you like, I'll make you a present of them. I can make you a present of them myself, because they re mine! Your behaviour, Ivan Vassilevitch, is strange, to say the least! Up to this we have always thought of you as a good neighbour, a friend; last year we lent you our threshing-machine, although on that account we had to put off our own threshing till November, but you behave to us as if we were gypsies. Giving me my own land, indeed! No, really, that s not at all neighbourly! In my opinion, it s even impudent, if you want to know. : Then you make out that I m a landgrabber? Madam, never in my life have I grabbed anybody else s land and I shan t allow anybody to accuse me of having done so. [Quickly steps to the carafe and drinks more water] Oxen Meadows are mine! It s not true, they re ours! Mine! Reprint 2025-26 NATALYA Lomov NATALYA Lomov NATALYA Lomov NATALYA LomMov NATALYA LomMov NATALYA LomMov CHUBUKOV : NATALYA CHUBUKOV : ea It s not true! [ll prove it! Ill send my mowers out to the Meadows this very day! : What? My mowers will be there this very day! I'll give it to them in the neck! : You dare! [Clutches at his heart] Oxen Meadows are mine! You understand? Mine! Please don t shout! You can shout yourself hoarse in your own house but here I must ask you to restrain yourself! If it wasn t, madam, for this awful, excruciating palpitation, if my whole inside wasn t upset, I d talk to you in a different way! [Yells] Oxen Meadows are mine! Ours! Mine! Ours! Mine! [Enter Chubukov| What s the matter? What are you shouting for? Papa, please tell this gentlkeman who owns Oxen Meadows, we or he? [to Lomov| Darling, the Meadows are ours! Reprint 2025-26 = = ie) = ao) a P First Flight ~ S oO LomMov CHUBUKOV : LomMov CHUBUKOV : LomMov CHUBUKOV : LomMov CHUBUKOV : LomMov CHUBUKOV