three ill effects that result from anger? Note them down. Suggest ways to avoid losing your temper in such situations. Are there any benefits from anger? In pairs, prepare a script based on the given excerpt from The Home and the World by Rabindranath Tagore. You may write five exchanges between the characters with other directions such as movements on stage and way of speaking, etc. Reprint 2025-26 [Psedorg "aL First Flight BS oo One afternoon, when I happened to be specially busy, word came to my office room that Bimala had sent for me. I was startled. Who did you say had sent for me? I asked the messenger. The Rani Mother . The Bara Rani? No, sir, the Chota Rani Mother. The Chota Rani It seemed a century since I had been sent for by her. I kept them all waiting there, and went off into the inner apartments. When I stepped into our room I had another shock of surprise to find Bimala there with a distinct suggestion of being dressed up. The room, which from persistent neglect, had latterly acquired an air of having grown absent-minded, had regained something of its old order this afternoon. I stood there silently, looking enquiringly at Bimala. She flushed a little and the fingers of her right hand toyed for a time with the bangles on her left arm. Then she abruptly broke the silence. Look here! Is it right that ours should be the only market in all Bengal which allows foreign goods? What, then, would be the right thing to do? I asked. Order them to be cleared out! But the goods are not mine. Is not the market yours? It is much more theirs who use it for trade. Let them trade in Indian goods, then. Nothing would please me better. But suppose they do not? Nonsense! How dare they be so insolent? Are you not... I am very busy this afternoon and cannot stop to argue it out. But I must refuse to tyrannise. It would not be tyranny for selfish gain, but for the sake of the country. To tyrannise for the country is to tyrannise over the country. But that I am afraid you will never understand. With this I came away. In groups, discuss the qualities one should look for in a marriage partner. You might consider the following points. e Personal qualities Appearance or looks Attitudes and beliefs Sense of humour e Value system Compassion and kindness Tolerance, ambition Attitude to money and wealth e Education and professional background Are there parts of the play that remind you of film scenes from romantic comedies? Discuss this in groups, and recount to the rest of the class episodes similar to those in the play. Reprint 2025-26 In This Lesson Wuat WE Have Done Given you a play by the famous Russian writer, Anton Chekhov. Wuat You Can Do Dictate the biogrophical information given below. Students should then guess the name of the playwright.