125 roubles for him. It was too much, Ivan Vassilevitch. I think it was very cheap. He s a first-rate dog. Papa gave 85 roubles for his Squeezer, and Squeezer is heaps better than Guess! Squeezer better than Guess? What an idea! [/Jaughs] Squeezer better than Guess! Of course he s better! Of course, Squeezer is young, he may develop a bit, but on points and pedigree he s better than anything that even Volchanetsky has got. Excuse me, Natalya Stepanovna, but you forget that he is overshot, and an overshot always means the dog is a bad hunter! Overshot, is he? The first time I hear it! I assure you that his lower jaw is shorter than the upper. Have you measured? : Yes. He s all right at following, of course, but if you want to get hold of anything... In the first place, our Squeezer is a thoroughbred animal, the son of Harness and Chisels while there s no getting at the pedigree of your dog at all. He s old and as ugly as a worn-out cab-horse. He is old, but I wouldn t take five Squeezers for him. Why, how can you? Guess is a dog; as for Squeezer, well, it s too funny to argue. Anybody you like has a dog as good as Squeezer... you may find them under every bush almost. Twenty-five roubles would be a handsome price to pay for him. : There s some demon of contradition in you today, Ivan Vassilevitch. First you pretend that the Meadows are yours; now, that Guess is better than Squeezer. I don t like people who don t say what they mean, because you know perfectly well that Squeezer is a hundred times better than your silly Guess. Why do you want to say he isn t? Reprint 2025-26 | [Psedorg "aL First Flight SB IS) Lomov NATALYA Lomov NATALYA Lomov NATALYA LomMov NATALYA LomMov NATALYA LomMov NATALYA LomMov NATALYA CHUBUKOV : NATALYA LomMov CHUBUKOV : LomMov CHUBUKOV : LomMov CHUBUKOV : I see, Natalya Stepanovna, that you consider me either blind or a fool. You must realise that Squeezer is overshot! It s not true. He is! It s not true! : Why shout madam? : Why talk rot? It s awful! It s time your Guess was shot, and you compare him with Squeezer! Excuse me, I cannot continue this discussion, my heart is palpitating. I've noticed that those hunters argue most who know least. Madam, please be silent. My heart is going to pieces. [shouts] Shut up! I shan t shut up until you acknowledge that Squeezer is a hundred times better than your Guess! : A hundred times worse! Be hanged to your Squeezer! His head... eyes... shoulder... : There s no need to hang your silly Guess; he s half-dead already! [weeps] Shut up! My heart s bursting! I shan t shut up. [Enter Chubukov.] What s the matter now? Papa, tell us truly, which is the better