What? To whom? She s willing! Well? Kiss and be damned to you! [wails] He s alive... Yes, yes, I'm willing. Kiss each other! Eh? Kiss whom? [They kiss] Very nice, too. Excuse me, what s it all about? Oh, now I understand ... my heart... stars... 'm happy. Natalya Stepanovna... [Kisses her hand] My foot s gone to sleep. I... 'm happy too... What a weight off my shoulders, ouf! But, still you will admit now that Guess is worse than Squeezer. Better! : Worse! CHUBUKOV : Well, that s a way to start your family bliss! Have some champagne! He s better! : Worse! Worse! Worse! [trying to shout her down| Champagne! Champagne! CURTAIN Reprint 2025-26 Thinking about the Play 1. What does Chubukov at first suspect that Lomov has come for? Is he sincere when he later says And I ve always loved you, my angel, as if you were my own son ? Find reasons for your answer from the play. 2. Chubukov says of Natalya: ... as if she won t consent! She s in love; egad, she s like a lovesick cat... Would you agree? Find reasons for your answer. 3. (i) Find all the words and expressions in the play that the characters (ii ) use to speak about each other, and the accusations and insults they hurl at each other. (For example, Lomov in the end calls Chubukov an intriguer; but earlier, Chubukov has himself called Lomov a malicious, doublefaced intriguer. Again, Lomov begins by describing Natalya as an excellent housekeeper, not bad-looking, well-educated. ) Then think of five adjectives or adjectival expressions of your own to describe each character in the play. (iii) Can you now imagine what these characters will quarrel about next? Thinking about I. 1. This play has been translated into English from the Russian original. Are there any expressions or ways of speaking that strike you as more Russian than English? For example, would an adult man be addressed by an older man as my darling or my treasure in an English play? Read through the play carefully;and find expressions that you think are not used in contemporary English, and contrast these with idiomatic modern English expressions that also occur in the play. Look up the following words in a dictionary and find out how to pronounce them. Pay attention to how many syllables there are in each word, and find out which syllable is stressed, or said more forcefully. palpitations interfere implore thoroughbred pedigree principle evidence misfortune malicious embezzlement architect neighbours accustomed temporary behaviour documents Look up the following phrases in a dictionary to find out their meaning, and then use each in a sentence of your own. (i) You may take it that (ii) He seems to be coming round (iii) My foot s gone to sleep Reprint 2025-26 = = ie) = s a P First Flight BS on Il. Reported Speech A sentence in reported speech consists of two parts: a reporting clause,