he is asked to pay a fee. Usually it is his friends who steal the bride. Then there are the bride s friends they steal the bride s shoe. The groom must pay money for the shoe too. The guests enjoy watching these tussles, and continue partying. 2. Doyou think Indian and Russian weddings have any customs in common? With the help ofa partner, fill in the table below. Wedding Ceremonies in Russia and India Customs similar to Customs different from Indian ones Indian ones The Proposal (originally titled A Marriage Proposal ) is a oneact play, a farce, by the Russian short story writer and dramatist Anton Chekhov. It was written in 1888-89. The play is about the tendency of wealthy families to seek ties with other wealthy families, to increase their estates by encouraging marriages that make good economic sense. Ivan Lomov, a long time wealthy neighbour of Stepan Chubukov, also wealthy, comes to seek the hand of Chubukov s twenty-five-year-old daughter, Natalya. All three are quarrelsome people, and they quarrel over petty issues. The proposal is in danger of being forgotten amidst all this quarrelling. But economic good sense ensures that the proposal is made, after all although the quarrelling perhaps continues! Reprint 2025-26 = = ie) = s a P First Flight ~ iS) OS Characters STEPAN STEPANOVITCH CHUBUKOV : a landowner NATALYA STEPANOVNA : his daughter, twenty-five years old Ivan VASSILEvITCH Lomov : aneighbour of Chubukov, a large and hearty, but very suspicious, landowner A drawing-room in Chubukov s house. Lomov enters, wearing a dress-jacket and white gloves. Chubukov rises to meet him. CHUBUKOV : LomMov CHUBUKOV : LomMov CHUBUKOV : Lomov CHUBUKOV : LomMov CHUBUKOV : LomMov My dear fellow, whom do I see! Ivan Vassilevitch! I am extremely glad! [Squeezes his hand] Now this is a surprise, my darling... How are you? : Thank you. And how may you be getting on? We just get along somehow, my angel, thanks to your prayers, and so on. Sit down, please do... Now, you know, you shouldn't forget all about your neighbours, my darling. My dear fellow, why are you so formal in your get-up! Evening dress, gloves, and so on. Can you be going anywhere, my treasure? No. I ve come only to see you, honoured Stepan Stepanovitch. Then why are you in evening dress, my precious? As if you're paying a New Year s Eve visit! : Well, you see, it s like this. [Takes his arm] I've come to you, honoured Stepan Stepanovitch, to trouble you with a request. Not once or twice have I already had the privilege of applying to you for help, and you have always, so to speak... I must ask your pardon, I am getting excited. I shall drink some water, honoured Stepan Stepanovitch. [Drinks.] [aside] He s come to borrow money. Shan t give him any! [aloud] What is it, my beauty? : You see, Honoured Stepanitch... I beg pardon Stepan Honouritch... I mean, I m