Stepanovitch, to trouble you with a request. Not once or twice have I already had the privilege of applying to you for help, and you have always, so to speak... I must ask your pardon, I am getting excited. I shall drink some water, honoured Stepan Stepanovitch. [Drinks.] [aside] He s come to borrow money. Shan t give him any! [aloud] What is it, my beauty? : You see, Honoured Stepanitch... I beg pardon Stepan Honouritch... I mean, I m awfully excited, as you will please notice... In short, you alone can help me, though I don t deserve it, of course... and haven t any right to count on your assistance... Oh, don t go round and round it, darling! Spit it out! Well? One moment... this very minute. The fact is I've come to ask the hand of your daughter, Natalya Stepanovna, in marriage. Reprint 2025-26 CHUBUKOV : LomMov CHUBUKOV : LomMov CHUBUKOV : Lomov [joyfully] By Jove! Ivan Vassilevitch! Say it again I didn t hear it all! : I have the honour to ask... [interrupting] My dear fellow... I'm so glad, and so on... Yes, indeed, and all that sort of thing. [Embraces and kisses Lomov\ I ve been hoping for it for a long time. It s been my continual desire. [Sheds a tear] And I ve always loved you, my angel, as if you were my own son. May God give you both His help and His love and so on, and so much hope... What am I behaving in this idiotic way for? I m off my balance with joy, absolutely off my balance! Oh, with all my soul... I'll go and call Natasha, and all that. [greatly moved] Honoured Stepan Stepanovitch, do you think I may count on her consent? Why, of course, my darling, and... as if she won t consent! She s in love; egad, she s like a lovesick cat, and so on. Shan t be long! [Exit.] : It s cold... m trembling all over, just as if d got an examination before me. The great thing is, I must have my mind made up. If I give myself time to think, to hesitate, to talk a lot, to look for an ideal, or for real love, then Ill never get married. Brr... It s cold! Natalya Reprint 2025-26 = = ie) = ao) a P First Flight ~ i) aS NATLYA LomMov NATALYA LomMov NATALYA LomMov NATALYA Lomov Stepanovna is an excellent housekeeper, not bad-looking, well-educated. What more do I want? But I m getting a noise in my ears from excitement. [Drinks] And it s impossible for me not to marry. In the first place, I m already 35 a critical age, so to speak. In the second place, I ought to lead a quiet and regular life. I suffer from palpitations, I m excitable and always getting awfully upset; at this very moment my lips are trembling, and there s a twitch in my right