and wealth e Education and professional background Are there parts of the play that remind you of film scenes from romantic comedies? Discuss this in groups, and recount to the rest of the class episodes similar to those in the play. Reprint 2025-26 In This Lesson Wuat WE Have Done Given you a play by the famous Russian writer, Anton Chekhov. Wuat You Can Do Dictate the biogrophical information given below. Students should then guess the name of the playwright. (1564 1616). He was born at Stratford-on-Avon in April 1564. His father was an important public figure in Stratford. People believe that he received a decent grammar-school education in literature, logic, and Latin (mathematics and natural science did not form part of the curriculum). When he was eighteen, he married Anne Hathaway, who was eight years his senior. He seems to have prospered in the London theatre world. He probably began his career as an actor in London, and he earned enough as author to acquire landed property. When he was forty-seven, he retired to a large house in Stratford. He died in 1616, leaving behind a body of work that still stands as a pinnacle in world literature. Homophones Can you find the words below that are spelt similarly, and sometimes even pronounced similarly, but have very different meanings? Check their pronunciation and meaning in a dictionary. [Psedorg "aL They were too close to the door to close it. Since there is no time like the present, she thought it was time to present the present. Reprint 2025-26 CONSTITUTION OF INDIA Part III (Articles 12 35) (Subject to certain conditions, some exceptions and reasonable restrictions) guarantees these Fundamental Rights Right to Equality co before law and equal protection of laws; oo irrespective of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth; co of opportunity in public employment; co by abolition of untouchability and titles. Right to Freedom oo of expression, assembly, association, movement, residence and profession; co of certain protections in respect of conviction for offences; co of protection of life and personal liberty; co of free and compulsory education for children between the age of six and fourteen years; co of protection against arrest and detention in certain cases. Right against Exploitation oo for prohibition of traffic in human beings and forced labour; co for prohibition of employment of children in hazardous jobs. Right to Freedom of Religion co freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion; co freedom to manage religious affairs; co freedom as to payment of taxes for promotion of any particular religion; co freedom as to attendance at religious instruction or religious worship in educational institutions wholly maintained by the State. Cultural and Educational Rights oo for protection of interests of minorities to conserve their language, script and culture; oo for minorities to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice. Right to Constitutional Remedies co by issuance of directions or orders or writs by the Supreme Court and High Courts