NATALYA LomMov NATALYA had the privilege of knowing your family. My late aunt and her husband, from whom, as you know, I inherited my land, always had the greatest respect for your father and your late mother. The Lomovs and the Chubukovs have always had the most friendly, and I might almost say the most affectionate, regard for each other. And, as you know, my land is a near neighbour of yours. You will remember that my Oxen Meadows touch your birchwoods. Excuse my interrupting you. You say, my Oxen Meadows . But are they yours? : Yes, mine. : What are you talking about? Oxen Meadows are ours, not yours! No, mine, honoured Natalya Stepanovna. : Well, I never knew that before. How do you make that out? How? I m speaking of those Oxen Meadows which are wedged in between your birchwoods and the Burnt Marsh. : Yes, yes... they re ours. No, you re mistaken, honoured Natalya Stepanovna, they re mine. : Just think, Ivan Vassilevitch! How long have they been yours? How long? As long as I can remember. Really, you won't get me to believe that! But you can see from the documents, honoured Natalya Stepanovna. Oxen Meadows, it s true, were once the subject of dispute, but now everybody knows that they are mine. There s nothing to argue about. You see my aunt s grandmother gave the free use of these Meadows in perpetuity to the peasants of your father s grandfather, in return for which they were to make bricks for her. The peasants belonging to your father s grandfather had the free use of the Meadows for forty years, and had got into the habit of regarding them as their own, when it happened that... No, it isn t at all like that! Both grandfather and greatgrandfather reckoned that their land extended to Burnt Marsh which means that Oxen Meadows were ours. I don t see what there is to argue about. It s simply silly! Reprint 2025-26 = = ie) = ao) a P First Flight ~ SO los LomMov NATALYA LomMov NATALYA LomMov NATALYA LomMov NATALYA LomMov NATALYA LomMov I'll show you the documents, Natalya Stepanovna! No, you're simply joking, or making fun of me. What a surprise! We ve had the land for nearly three hundred years, and then we re suddenly told that it isn t ours! Ivan Vassilevitch, I can hardly believe my own ears. These Meadows aren t worth much to me. They only come to five dessiatins, and are worth perhaps 300 roubles, but I can t stand unfairness. Say what you will, I can t stand unfairness. Hear me out, I implore you! The peasants of your father s grandfather, as I have already had the honour of explaining to you, used to bake bricks for my aunt s grandmother. Now my aunt s grandmother, wishing to make them a pleasant... I can t make head or tail of all this about aunts