inside wasn t upset, I d talk to you in a different way! [Yells] Oxen Meadows are mine! Ours! Mine! Ours! Mine! [Enter Chubukov| What s the matter? What are you shouting for? Papa, please tell this gentlkeman who owns Oxen Meadows, we or he? [to Lomov| Darling, the Meadows are ours! Reprint 2025-26 = = ie) = ao) a P First Flight ~ S oO LomMov CHUBUKOV : LomMov CHUBUKOV : LomMov CHUBUKOV : LomMov CHUBUKOV : LomMov CHUBUKOV : NATALYA CHUBUKOV : NATALYA LomMov CHUBUKOV : But, please, Stepan Stepanovitch, how can they be yours? Do be a reasonable man! My aunt s grandmother gave the Meadows for the temporary and free use of your grandfather s peasants. The peasants used the land for forty years and got accustomed to it as if it was their own, when it happened that... Excuse me, my precious. You forget just this, that the peasants didn t pay your grandmother and all that, because the Meadows were in dispute, and so on. And now everybody knows that they re ours. It means that you haven't seen the plan. I'll prove to you that they re mine! You won't prove it, my darling I shall Dear one, why yell like that? You won t prove anything just by yelling. I don t want anything of yours, and don t intend to give up what I have. Why should I? And you know, my beloved, that if you propose to go on arguing about it, 'd much sooner give up the Meadows to the peasants than to you. There! I don t understand! How have you the right to give away somebody else s property? You may take it that I know whether I have the right or not. Because, young man, I m not used to being spoken to in that tone of voice, and so on. I, young man, am twice your age, and ask you to speak to me without agitating yourself, and all that. No, you just think I m a fool and want to have me on! You call my land yours, and then you want me to talk to you calmly and politely! Good neighbours don t behave like that, Stepan Stepanovitch! You're not a neighbour, you're a grabber! What s that? What did you say? Papa, send the mowers out to the Meadows at once! What did you say, sir? Oxen Meadows are ours, and I shan t give them up, shan t give them up, shan t give them up! : We'll see! I'll have the matter taken to court, and then Ill show you! To court? You can take it to court, and all that! You can! I know you; you're just on the look-out for a chance to go Reprint 2025-26 LomMov CHUBUKOV : : All, all, all! NATALYA CHUBUKOV : LomMov CHUBUKOV : : And there haven t been many backbiters to equal your NATALYA CHUBUKOV : NATALYA CHUBUKOV : LomMov CHUBUKOV