more do I want? But I m getting a noise in my ears from excitement. [Drinks] And it s impossible for me not to marry. In the first place, I m already 35 a critical age, so to speak. In the second place, I ought to lead a quiet and regular life. I suffer from palpitations, I m excitable and always getting awfully upset; at this very moment my lips are trembling, and there s a twitch in my right eyebrow. But the very worst of all is the way I sleep. I no sooner get into bed and begin to go off, when suddenly something in my left side gives a pull, and I can feel it in my shoulder and head... I jump up like a lunatic, walk about a bit and lie down again, but as soon as I begin to get off to sleep there s another pull! And this may happen twenty times... [Natalya Stepanovna comes in.] : Well, there! It s you, and papa said, Go; there s a merchant come for his goods. How do you do, Ivan Vassilevitch? : How do you do, honoured Natalya Stepanovna? : You must excuse my apron and neglige. We're shelling peas for drying. Why haven t you been here for such a long time? Sit down... [They seat themselves.] Won't you have some lunch? : No, thank you, I ve had some already. : Then smoke. Here are the matches. The weather is splendid now, but yesterday it was so wet that the workmen didn t do anything all day. How much hay have you stacked? Just think, I felt greedy and had a whole field cut, and now I m not at all pleased about it because I m afraid my hay may rot. I ought to have waited a bit. But what's this? Why, you re in evening dress! Well, I never! Are you going to a ball or what? Though I must say you look better... Tell me, why are you got up like that? [excited] You see, honoured Natalya Stepanovna... the fact is, 've made up my mind to ask you to hear me out... Of course you'll be surprised and perhaps even angry, but a... [aside] It s awfully cold! : What s the matter? [pause] Well? : I shall try to be brief. You must know, honoured Natalya Stepanovna, that I have long, since my childhood, in fact, Reprint 2025-26 NATALYA LomMov NATALYA LomMov NATALYA LomMov NATALYA LomMov NATALYA LomMov NATALYA LomMov NATALYA had the privilege of knowing your family. My late aunt and her husband, from whom, as you know, I inherited my land, always had the greatest respect for your father and your late mother. The Lomovs and the Chubukovs have always had the most friendly, and I might almost say the most affectionate, regard for each other. And, as you know, my land is a near neighbour of yours. You will remember that my Oxen Meadows touch