total population of an area at the beginning of a given time period. : Plant communities occuring in distinct groups in areas having similar climatic conditions. : The number of live births for every 1000 persons in a year. : In meteorology; it denotes an area of relatively low atmospheric pressure, which is found mainly in temperate regions. In geology, it refers to a hollow sunken area of the earth s surface. : The number of deaths per 1000 persons in year. : The average number of persons per unit area, such as a square kilometre. : The ratio of people of dependent age (below 15 and above 60 years) to people of economically active ages (15-59 years). : A system which comprises the physical environment and the organisms living therein. : Surroundings or the conditions under which a person or thing exists and develops his or its character. It covers both physical and cultural elements. : Alinear break in rocks of the earth s crust along which there has been displacement in a horizontal, vertical or oblique direction. : The animal life of a given area. : The total vegetation or plant cover of a region. : Abend in the rock strata resulting from compression of an area of the earth s crust. : Anarrow, shallow, elongated basin with a sinking bottom in which a considerable thickness of sediments was deposited by the rivers coming from Angara and Gondwanaland. : Amass of snow and ice that moves slowly under the influence of gravity along a confined course away from its place of accumulation. : The growth rate of population indicates the rate at which the population is growing. In estimating the growth rate the increase in population is compared with the base population. It can be measured annually or over a decade. : It refers to the contiguous stretch of landmass from Jammu and Kashmir to Kanniyakumari and from Gujarat to Arunachal Pradesh. : The local time along the Standard Meridian of India (82 30'E). : Adrainage system in which the waters of the rivers do not reach the oceans but fall into an inland sea or lake. Reprint 2025-26 Igneous rocks Lagoon Lake Lithospheric plates Life expectancy Local time Metamorphic rocks Migration Million plus cities Monsoon Mountain National park Plain Plateau Plate tectonics Relief Subsidence Sedimentary rocks Sex-ratio Subcontinent Tectonic Young mountains : Rocks formed as a result of solidification of magma either below the earth s surface or above it. : Asalt-water lake separated from the sea by the sandbars and spits. : A body of water that lies in a hollow in the earth s surface and is entirely surrounded by land. : Large segments of the earth s crust composed of continental and oceanic lithospheric parts, floating above the asthenosphere. : The average number of years one is expected to live. : The time of a place determined by the midday sun is called the local time. : Deformation and alteration of pre-existing igneous and