by the sandbars and spits. : A body of water that lies in a hollow in the earth s surface and is entirely surrounded by land. : Large segments of the earth s crust composed of continental and oceanic lithospheric parts, floating above the asthenosphere. : The average number of years one is expected to live. : The time of a place determined by the midday sun is called the local time. : Deformation and alteration of pre-existing igneous and sedimentary rocks as a result of changes in physical and chemical conditions due to intense heat or pressure. : Movement of people from one place to another. Internal migration means movement of people within a country and external migration means movement of people between countries. When people come to a country from another country, it is called immigration and when they leave that country, it is called emigration. : Cities with a population of more than one million or 10 lakh. : Acomplete reversal of winds over a large area leading to a change of seasons. : An upward projected features of the earth s surface that rises to high altitude and usually possesses steep slopes. : Areserved area for preserving its natural vegetation, wildlife and the natural environment. : An extensive area of flat or gently undulating land. : An extensive elevated area of relatively flat land. : The scientific concept that explains the movements of the crustal plates. : The differences in elevation or the physical outline of the land surface or ocean floor. : In meteorology, it is the downward movement of the air. In geology, it refers to the sinking of a portion of the earth s surface. : Rocks composed of sediments and generally having a layered structure. : Sex-ratio is defined as the number of females per thousand males. : Abig landmass, which stands out as a distinct geographical unit from the rest of the continent. : Forces originating within the earth and responsible for bringing widespread changes in the landform features. : The fold mountains formed during the most recent major phase of folding in the earth s crust. CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I Reprint 2025-26