plays a very significant role in changing the composition and distribution of population. Activity On a map, trace the migration of each of your grandparents and parents since their birth. Try and analyse the reasons for each move. In India, most migrations have been from rural to urban areas because of the push factor in rural areas. These are adverse conditions of poverty and unemployment in the rural areas and the pull of the city in terms of increased employment opportunities and better living conditions. Migration is an important determinant of population change. It changes not only the population size but also the population composition of urban and rural populations in terms of age and sex composition. In India, the rural-urban migration has resulted in a steady increase in the percentage of population in cities and towns. The urban population has increased from 17.29 per cent of the total POPULATION population in 1951 to 31.80 per cent in 2011. There has been a significant increase in the number of million plus cities from 35 to 53 in just one decade, i.e., 2001 to 2011. In 2023 there were 59 million plus cities in India. Adolescent Population The most significant feature of the Indian population is the size of its adolescent population. It constitutes one-fifth of the total population of India. Adolescents are, generally, grouped in the age group of 10 to 19 years. They are the most important resource for the future. Nutrition requirements of adolescents are higher than those of a normal child or adult. Poor nutrition can lead to deficiency and stunted growth. But in India, the diet available to adolescents is inadequate in all nutrients. A large number of adolescent girls suffer from anaemia. Their problems have so far not received adequate attention in the process of development. The adolescent girls have to be sensitised to the problems they confront. Awareness among them can be improved through the spread of literacy and education. National Population Policy Recognising that the planning of families would improve individual health and welfare, the Government of India initiated a comprehensive Family Planning Programme in 1952. The Family Welfare Programme has sought to promote responsible and planned parenthood on a voluntary basis. The National Population Policy (NPP) 2000 is a culmination of years of planned efforts. The NPP 2000 provides a policy framework for imparting free and compulsory school education up to 14 years of age, reducing infant mortality rate to below 30 per 1000 live births, achieving universal immunisation of children against all vaccine preventable diseases, promoting delayed marriage for girls, and making family welfare a people-centred programme. Reprint 2025-26 EXERCISE 1. oa kw + Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below. (i) Migrations change the number, distribution and composition of the population in (a) the area of departure (c) both the area of departure and arrival (b) the area of arrival (d) none of the above (ii) A large proportion of children in a population is a result