0968CH06 POPULATION an you imagine a world without human CVeeines Who would have utilised the resources and created social and cultural environment? The people are important to develop the economy and the society. The people make and use resources and are themselves resources with varying quality. Coalis but a piece of rock, until people were able to invent technology to obtain it and make it resource . Natural events, like a flood or a Tsunami, becomes a disaster only when they affect a crowded village or a town. Hence, population is the pivotal element in social studies. It is the point of reference from which all other elements are observed and from which they derive significance and meaning. Resources , calamities and disasters are all meaningful only in relation to human beings. Their numbers, distribution, growth and characteristics or qualities provide the basic background for understanding and appreciating all aspects of the environment. Human beings are producers and consumers of earth s resources. Therefore, it is important to know how many people are there in a country, where do they live, how and why their numbers are increasing and what are their characteristics. The census of India provides us with information regarding the population of our country. PoPuULATION SIZE AND DISTRIBUTION India s Population Size and Distribution by Numbers India s population as on March 2011 stood at 1,210.6 million, which account for more the 17 per cent of the world s population. These 1.21 billion people are unevenly distributed over our country s vast area of 3.28 million square km, which accounts for 2.4 per cent of the world s area (Figure 6.1). The 2011 Census data reveal that Uttar Pradesh with a population size of 199 million is the most populous state of India. Uttar Pradesh accounts for about 16 per cent of the country s population. On the other hand, the Himalayan state of Sikkim has a population of just about 0.6 million and Lakshadweep has only 64,429 people. Almost half of India s population lives in just five states. These are Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Bihar, West Bengal and Andhra Pradesh. Rajasthan, the biggest state in terms of area, has only 5.5 per cent of the total population of India (Figure 6.2) Find out e What could be the reason of uneven distribution of population in India? Census A census is an official enumeration of population done periodically. In India, the first census was held in the year 1872. The first complete census, however, was taken in the year 1881. Since then, censuses have been held regularly every tenth year. The Indian Census is the most comprehensive source of demographic, social and economic data. Have you ever seen a census report? Check in your library if it has one. Reprint 2025-26 POPULATION India s Population Distribution by Density Population density provides a better picture of the uneven distribution. Population density is calculated as the number of persons per unit area. India is one of the most densely