all vaccine preventable diseases, promoting delayed marriage for girls, and making family welfare a people-centred programme. Reprint 2025-26 EXERCISE 1. oa kw + Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below. (i) Migrations change the number, distribution and composition of the population in (a) the area of departure (c) both the area of departure and arrival (b) the area of arrival (d) none of the above (ii) A large proportion of children in a population is a result of (a) high birth rates (c) high death rates (b) high life expectancies (d) more married couples (iii) The magnitude of population growth refers to (a) the total population of an area (b) the number of persons added each year (c) the rate at which the population increases (d) the number of females per thousand males (iv) According to the Census, a literate person is one who (a) can read and write his/her name (b) can read and write any language (c) is 7 years old and can read and write any language with understanding (d) knows the 3 R s (reading, writing, arithmetic) Answer the following questions briefly. (i) Why is the rate of population growth in India declining since 1981? (ii) Discuss the major components of population growth. (iii) Define age structure, death rate and birth rate. (iv) How is migration a determinant factor of population change? Distinguish between population growth and population change. What is the relation between occupational structure and development? What are the advantages of having a healthy population? What are the significant features of the National Population Policy 2000? Provect / ACTIVITY Conduct a class census by preparing a questionnaire. The questionnaire should contain minimum five questions. Questions should relate to students, their family members, their class performance, their health, etc. Each student is required to fill in the questionnaire. Compile the information in numerical terms (in terms of percentage). Present the information through pie-chart, bar-diagram or in any other way. CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I Reprint 2025-26 Adolescence Alluvial plain Base population Biome Birth rate Depression Death rate Density of population Dependency ratio Ecosystem Environment Fault Fauna Flora Fold Geosyncline Glacier Growth rate of population Indian mainland Indian Standard Time Inland drainage GLOSSARY : Adolescence is a period in which a person is no longer a child and not yet an adult. Such persons are grouped in the age group of 10 to 19 years. : A level tract of land made up of alluvium or fine rock material brought down by a river. : The total population of an area at the beginning of a given time period. : Plant communities occuring in distinct groups in areas having similar climatic conditions. : The number of live births for every 1000 persons in a year. : In meteorology; it denotes an area of relatively low atmospheric pressure, which is found mainly in temperate regions. In geology, it refers to a hollow sunken area of the earth s surface. : The number of deaths per 1000 persons