NOTES FOR THE TEACHER

CHAPTER 3 : MONEY AND CREDIT

Money is a fascinating subject and full of
curiosities. It is important to capture this
element for the students. The history of
money and how various forms were used at
different times is an interesting story. At this
stage the purpose is to allow students to
realise the social situation in which these
forms were used. Modern forms of money are
linked to the banking system. This is the
central idea of the first part of the chapter.

The present situation in India, where
newer forms of money are slowly spreading
with computerisation of the banking system,
offers many opportunities to students to
explore on their own. We need not get into a
formal discussion of the functions of money 
but let it come up as questions. There are
certain areas that are not covered, such as
 creation of money (money multiplier) or the
backing of the modern system that may be
discussed if you desire.

As you would see in the chapter, the stock
of money consists of currency held by the
public and the demand deposits that they hold
with the banks. This is the money that people
can use as they wish and the government has
to ensure that the system works smoothy.
What would happen when the government
declares that some of the currency notes used
by people would be made invalid and would be
replaced by new currency? In India, during
November 2016, currency notes in the
denomination of Rs. 500 and Rs. 1,000 were
declared invalid. People were asked to
surrender these notes to the bank by a specific
period and receive new Rs. 500, Rs. 2,000 or
other currency notes. This is known as
 demonetisation . Since then, people were also
encouraged to use their bank deposits rather
than cash for transactions. Hence, digital
transactions started by using bank-to-bank
transfer through the internet or mobile
phones, cheques, ATM cards, credit cards,
and Point of Sale (POS) swipe machines at
shops. This is promoted to reduce the
requirement of cash for transactions and also
control corruption. Students could be asked
to debate on the process and the impact of
demonetisation. They can be guided to make

a collage of the major areas where people use
digital and cash transactions which are
legitimate and legal. They can also discuss the
transactions which are legal and why. It is also
important to intimate students that different
types of plastic cards are used in place of cash
transactions but not all of them money per se.

Credit is a crucial element in economic
life and it is, therefore, important to first
understand this in a conceptual manner.
What are the aspects that one looks at in
any credit arrangement and how this affects
people is the main focus of the second part
of the chapter. The world around us offers a
tremendous variety of such arrangements
and it would be ideal to explain these
aspects of credit from situations that are
familiar to your students. The other crucial
issue of credit is its availability to all,
especially the poor, and on reasonable
terms. We need to emphasise that this is a
right of the people and without which a large
section of them would be kept out of the
development process. There are many
innovative interventions, such as that of
Grameen Bank, of which students may be
made familiar with but it is important to
realise that we don t have answers to all
questions. We need to find new ways and
this is one of the social challenges that
developing countries face.

Sources for Information

The data on formal and informal sector credit
used in this chapter is drawn from the
survey on rural debt by the National Sample
Survey Organisation (All India Debt and
Investment Survey, 77 Round 2019,
conducted by NSSO) now known as National
Statistical Office (NSO). The information and
data on Grameen Bank is taken from
newspaper reports and websites. In order
to get the details of bank-related statistics
or a particular detail of a bank, you can log
on to the websites of the Reserve Bank of
India (www.rbi.org) and the concerned
banks. Data on self-help groups is provided
on the website of the National Bank for
Agriculture and Rural Development
(NABARD) (www.nabard.org).

ee}: Meee) NDERSTANDING EConomic DEVELOPMENT

Reprint 2025-26

MONEY AS A MEDIUM OF EXCHANGE

The use of money spans a very large
part of our everyday life. Look around
you and you would easily be able to
identify several transactions involving
money in any single day. Can you
make a list of these? In many of these
transactions, goods are being bought
and sold with the use of money. In
some of these transactions, services
are being exchanged with money. For
some, there might not be any actual
transfer of money taking place now
but a promise to pay money later.

Have you ever wondered why
transactions are made in
money? The reason is simple.

A person holding money can easily
exchange it for any commodity or
service that he or she might want.
Thus everyone prefers to receive
payments in money and then
exchange the money for things that
they want. Take the case of a shoe
manufacturer. He wants to sell shoes
in the market and buy wheat. The
shoe manufacturer will first exchange
shoes that he has produced for
money, and then exchange the money
for wheat. Imagine how much more

difficult it would be if the shoe
manufacturer had to directly
exchange shoes for wheat without the
use of money. He would have to look
for a wheat growing farmer who not
only wants to sell wheat
but also wants to buy the
shoes in exchange.
That is, both parties
have to agree to
sell and buy each
others commodities.
This is known as
double coincidence
of wants. What a person
desires to sell is exactly what the
other wishes to buy. In a barter
system where goods are directly
exchanged without the use of money,
double coincidence of wants is an
essential feature.

In contrast, in an economy where
money is in use, money by providing
the crucial intermediate step
eliminates the need for double
coincidence of wants. It is no longer
necessary for the shoe manufacturer
to look for a farmer who will buy his
shoes and at the same time sell him

Money AND Crev THY

Reprint 2025-26

| DON T NEED
SHOES. | NEED
CLOTHES.

| WANT SHOES.
BUT | DON T HAVE
WHEAT.

wheat. All he has to do is finda buyer 
for his shoes. Once he has exchanged
his shoes for money, he can purchase
wheat or any other commodity in the
market. Since money acts as an
intermediate in the exchange process,
it is called a medium of exchange.

LET S WORK THESE OUT

1. How does the use of money make it easier to exchange things?

2. Can you think of some examples of goods / services being exchanged or wages being

paid through barter?

We have seen that money is
something that can act as a medium

WY of exchange in transactions. Before
Early punch- the introduction of coins, a variety of
marked coins | 9% objects was used as money. For

(may be 2500 \% 
years old) example, since the very early ages,

Indians used grains and cattle as
money. Thereafter came the use of
metallic coins gold, silver, copper
coins a phase which continued well
into the last century.

Currency

Modern forms of money include
currency paper notes and coins.
Unlike the things that were used as
money earlier, modern currency is not
made of precious metal such as gold,
silver and copper. And unlike grain
and cattle, they are neither of
everyday use. The modern currency
is without any use of its own.

Then, why is it accepted as a
medium of exchange? It is accepted
as a medium of exchange because the
currency is authorised by the
government of the country.

In India, the Reserve Bank of India
issues currency notes on behalf of the
central government. As per Indian
law, no other individual or

MODERN FORMS OF MONEY

organisation is allowed to issue
currency. Moreover, the law legalises
the use of rupee as a medium of
payment that cannot be refused in
settling transactions in India. No
individual in India can legally refuse
a payment made in rupees. Hence,
the rupee is widely accepted as a
medium of exchange.

Deposits with Banks

The other form in which people hold
money is as deposits with banks. At
a point of time, people need only some
currency for their day-to-day needs.
For instance, workers who receive
their salaries at the end of each month
have extra cash at the beginning of
the month. What do people do with
this extra cash? They deposit it with
the banks by opening a bank
account in their name. Banks accept
the deposits and also pay an amount
as interest on the deposits. In this way
people s money is safe with the
banks and it earns an amount as
interest. People also have the
provision to withdraw the money as
and when they require. Since the
deposits in the bank accounts can be
withdrawn on demand, these
deposits are called demand deposits.

Five

Star Ser

Demand deposits offer another
interesting facility. It is this facility
which lends it the essential
characteristics of money (that ofa
medium of exchange). You would
have heard of payments being

LET US TRY AND UNDERSTAND

HOW CHEQUE PAYMENTS ARE

MADE AND REALISED WITH
AN EXAMPLE.

made by cheques instead of cash.
For payment through cheque, the
payer who has an account with the
bank, makes out a cheque for a
specific amount. A cheque is a
paper instructing the bank to pay
a specific amount from the
person s account to the person in
whose name the cheque has been
issued.

Cheque Paymenty

A shoe manufacturer, M. Salim has to make a payment to the leather supplier and writes
a cheque for a specific amount. This means that the shoe manufacturer instructs his
bank to pay this amount to the leather supplier. The leather supplier takes this cheque,
and deposits it in his own account in the bank. The money is transferred from one bank
account to another bank account in a couple of days. The transaction is complete without

any payment of cash.

State Bank of India

690) NCERT (NEW DELHI)
Shi AUROBINGO MARG,
Bank branch. New DELHI 110016

code
mw3Ge2e2e5S

Cheque number

Thus we see that demand deposits
share the essential features of money.
The facility of cheques against demand
deposits makes it possible to directly
settle payments without the use of cash.
Since demand deposits are accepted
widely as a means of payment, along
with currency, they constitute money
in the modern economy.

Check Card

ice Guarante

bank. . ; 4O1SPRY) 9 - rep

44000 cO 7S

feares/Date \9/ 6 /2016.

Hae a Or Bearer

000323" 10
Coding used by banks

You must remember the role that
the banks play here. But for the
banks, there would be no demand
deposits and no payments by
cheques against these deposits. The
modern forms of money currency
and deposits are closely linked to
the working of the modern banking
system.

UTHORIZED
SIGNATURE

oa1285H 0/04
CHCON
Money AND Creo TH 5

NOT VALID UNLESS SIGNED

BN EIitaneenseast a)

ROE F.* 
SD, ee alee seunal in Por

LET S WORK THESE OUT

1. M. Salim wants to withdraw Rs 20,000 in cash for making payments. How would he
write a cheque to withdraw money?

2. Tick the correct answer.
After the transaction between Salim and Prem,
(i) Salim s balance in his bank account increases, and Prem s balance increases.
(ii) Salim s balance in his bank account decreases and Prem s balance increases.
(iii) Salim s balance in his bank account increases and Prem s balance decreases.

3. Why are demand deposits considered as money?

LOAN ACTIVITIES OF BANKS

Let us take the story of banks
further. What do the banks do with
the deposits which they accept from
the public? There is an interesting
mechanism at work here. Banks keep
only a small proportion of their
deposits as cash with themselves. For
example, banks in India these days
hold about 5 per cent of their
deposits as cash. This is kept as
provision to pay the depositors who
might come to withdraw money from
the bank on any given day. Since, on
any particular day, only some of its
many depositors come to withdraw
cash, the bank is able to manage with
this cash.

Banks use the major portion of the
deposits to extend loans. There isa

a
&

 2.2% 
ree

v
 ,9

O75
o ,*, x
J

AH
>
n4
a
>

BS

a of
+. 4
o* 

&

>
@ a".
@
People make
withdrawals and
get interest

 
x

ey
\| . 

ee

1%

Reprint 2025-26

huge demand for loans for various
economic activities. We shall read more
about this in the following sections.
Banks make use of the deposits to
meet the loan requirements of the
people. In this way, banks mediate
between those who have surplus
funds (the depositors) and those who
are in need of these funds (the
borrowers). Banks charge a higher
interest rate on loans than what they
offer on deposits. The difference
between what is charged from
borrowers and what is paid to
depositors is their main source of
income.

What do you think would happen
all the depositors went to ask
for their money at the same time?

BORROWERS
People take
loans

People repay
loans with
interest

ee } eee) NDERSTANDING ECoNnomic DEVELOPMENT

TWO DIFFERENT CREDIT SITUATIONS

A large number of transactions in our day-to-day activities
involve credit in some form or the other. Credit (loan) refers to
an agreement in which the lender supplies the borrower with
money, goods or services in return for the promise of future
payment. Let us see how credit works through the following

two examples.

(1) Festwal Seasow

It is festival season two months from now
and the shoe manufacturer, Salim, has
received an order from a large trader in
town for 3,000 pairs of shoes to be
delivered in a month time. To complete

production on time, Salim has to hire a few
more workers for stitching and pasting
work. He has to purchase the raw

now and promises to pay him later.
Second, he obtains loan in cash from the
large trader as advance payment for
1000 pairs of shoes with a promise to
deliver the whole order by the end of the
month.

At the end of the month, Salim is able to

deliver the order, make a good profit, and
repay the money that he had borrowed.

In this case, Salim obtains credit to meet the working
capital needs of production. The credit helps him to meet the
ongoing expenses of production, complete production on time,

and thereby increase his earnings. Credit therefore plays a
vital and positive role in this situation.

(2) Swapnwy Problew

Swapna, a small farmer, grows groundnut on her three
acres of land. She takes a loan from the moneylender
to meet the expenses of cultivation, hoping that her
harvest would help repay the loan. Midway through
the season the crop is hit by pests and the crop
fails. Though Swapna sprays her crops with
expensive pesticides, it makes little difference. She

is unable to repay the moneylender and the debt
grows over the year into a large amount. Next

year, Swapna takes a fresh loan for cultivation.

It is a normal crop this year. But the earnings

are not enough to cover the old loan.

She is caught in debt. She has to sell {

a part of the land to pay off the debt.

materials. To meet these expenses, Salim
obtains loans from two sources. First, he
asks the leather supplier to supply leather

MoneY AND CreD TH? 5

Reprint 2025-26

In rural areas, the main demand
for credit is for crop production. Crop
production involves considerable
costs on seeds, fertilisers, pesticides,
water, electricity, repair of equipment,
etc. There is a minimum stretch of
three to four months between the time
when the farmers buy these inputs
and when they sell the crop. Farmers
usually take crop loans at the
beginning of the season and repay the
loan after harvest. Repayment of the
loan is crucially dependent on the
income from farming.

LET S WORK THESE OUT

1. Fill the following table.

Why did they need credit?

What was the risk?
What was the outcome?

his position after 6 years?

. Supposing Salim continues to get orders from traders. What would be

. What are the reasons that make Swapna s situation so risky? Discuss

factors pesticides; role of moneylenders; climate.

TERMS OF CREDIT

Every loan agreement specifies an
interest rate which the borrower must
pay to the lender along with the

Make your dreams
come true with our

Fast Money Personal Loans

In Swapna s case, the failure of the
crop made loan repayment
impossible. She had to sell part of the
land to repay the loan. Credit, instead
of helping Swapna improve her
earnings, left her worse off. This is an
example of what is commonly called
debt-trap. Credit in this case pushes
the borrower into a situation from
which recovery is very painful.

In one situation credit helps to
increase earnings and therefore the
person is better off than before. In
another situation, because of the
crop failure, credit
pushes the person into
a debt trap. To repay
her loan she has to sell
a portion of her land.
She is clearly much
worse off than before.
Whether credit would
be useful or not,
therefore, depends
on the risks in the
situation and whether
there is some support,
in case of loss.

repayment of the principal. In
addition, lenders may demand
collateral (security) against loans.
Collateral is an asset that the
borrower owns (such as land,
building, vehicle, livestocks,
deposits with banks) and uses this
as a guarantee to a lender until
the loan is repaid. If the borrower
fails to repay the loan, the lender has
the right to sell the asset or collateral
to obtain payment. Property such as
land titles, deposits with banks,
livestock are some common examples
of collateral used for borrowing.

A Howe Loaw

Megha has taken a loan of Rs 5 lakhs from the
bank to purchase a house. The annual interest
rate on the loan is 12 per cent and the loan is to
be repaid in 10 years in monthly instalments.
Megha had to submit to the bank, documents
showing her employment records and salary
before the bank agreed to give her the loan. The
bank retained as collateral the papers of the new
house, which will be returned to Megha only jig : 
when she repays the entire loan with interest. >

Fill the following details of Megha s housing loan. i a 3 SEES S hal Ht

Loan amount (in Rupees)

asenscesees rere 

Duration of loan
Documents required
Interest rate

Mode of repayment
Collateral

Interest rate, collateral and
documentation requirement, and the
mode of repayment together comprise
what is called the terms of credit. The
terms of credit vary substantially from
one credit arrangement to another.
They may vary depending on the
nature of the lender and the borrower.
The next section will provide examples
of the varying terms of credit in
different credit arrangements.

LET S WORK THESE OUT

1. Why do lenders ask for collateral while lending?

2. Given that a large number of people in our country are poor, does it in any way
affect their capacity to borrow?

3. Fill in the blanks choosing the correct option from the brackets.
While taking a loan, borrowers look for easy terms of credit. This
means (low/high) interest rate, (easy/
tough) conditions for repayment, (less/more) collateral
and documentation requirements.

MoneY AND CRED TE? ie

Reprint 2025-26

Example of a Village

Rohit and Ranjan had finished reading about the terms of credit in class.
They were eager to know the various credit arrangements that existed in
their area: who were the people who provided credit? Who were the
borrowers? What were the terms of credit? They decided to talk to some

people in their village. Read what they record...

farmers and

O19.

; he
directly for t a the
ourere would ve vr oreo meet Shyamal, a small
a 3.
ith potato crop ;
are plenieee en A gmall irrigated village:
farmer in QONPUt We next meet Arun who is supervising the

Shyamal tells us that every season he needs
loans for cultivation on his 1.5 acres of land. Till
a few years back, he would borrow money from
the village moneylender at an interest rate of
five per cent per month (60% per annum).
For the last few years, Shyamal has been
borrowing from an agricultural trader in the
village at an interest rate of three per cent
per month. At the beginning of the cropping
season, the trader supplies the farm inputs on
credit, which is to be repaid when the crops
are ready for harvest.

Besides the interest charge on the loan, the
trader also makes the farmers promise to
sell the crop to him. This way the trader
can ensure that the money is repaid
promptly. Also, since the crop prices are low
after the harvest, the trader is able to
make a profit from buying the crop at a low
price from the farmers and then gelling it
later when the price has rigen.

a medium landowner
Le landowner charges an interest rate of

per cent per month, Rama repays the
money by working for the landowner. Most

work of one farm labourer. Arun has seven
acres of land. He is one of the few persons
in Sonpur to receive bank loan for
cultivation. The interest rate on the loan
is 6.5 per cent per annum, and can be repaid
anytime in the next three years. Arun plans
to repay the loan after harvest by selling a
part of the crop. He then intends to store
the rest of the potatoes in a cold storage
and apply for a fresh loan from the bank
against the cold storage receipt. The bank
offers this facility to farmers who have
taken crop loan from them.

Rama is working in a neighbouring field. She
works a6 an agricultural labourer. There are
several months in the year when Rama has
No work, and needs credit to meet the daily
p venses. Expenses on Sudden illnesses or
unctions in the family are also met through
loans. Rama has to depend on her alien
in Sonpur, for credit.

7 pre time, Rama has to take a fresh loan
a ore the previous loan has been repaid.
t present, she owes the landowner

treat her well, she continues to work for hit
sific she can get loans from him when in
need. Kama tells us that the only source of
credit for the landless people in Sonpu "

the landowner-employers, pu we

Reprint 2025-26

Loans from Cooperatwey

Besides banks, the other major source of cheap credit
in rural areas are the cooperative societies (or
cooperatives). Members of a cooperative pool their
resources for cooperation in certain areas. There are
several types of cooperatives possible such as
farmers cooperatives, weavers cooperatives,
industrial workers cooperatives, etc. Krishak
Cooperative functions in a village not very far away
from Sonpur. It has 2300 farmers as members. It
accepts deposits from its members. With these
deposits as collateral, the Cooperative has obtained
a large loan from the bank. These funds are used to
provide loans to members. Once these loans are
repaid, another round of lending can take place.

Krishak Cooperative provides loans for the purchase
of agricultural implements, loans for cultivation
and agricultural trade, fishery loans, loans for
construction of houses and for a variety of other
expenses.

LET S WORK THESE OUT

1. List the various sources of credit in Sonpur.

2. Underline the various uses of credit in Sonpur in the above passages.

3. Compare the terms of credit for the small farmer, the medium farmer and the landless

agricultural worker in Sonpur.

4. Why will Arun have a higher income from cultivation compared to Shyamal?

5. Can everyone in Sonpur get credit at a cheap rate? Who are the people who can?

6. Tick the correct answer.

(i) Over the years, Rama s debt

- will rise.
- will remain constant.
- will decline.

(ii) Arun is one of the few people in Sonpur to take a bank loan because
- other people in the village prefer to borrow from the moneylenders.
- banks demand collateral which everyone cannot provide.

- interest rate on bank loans is same as the interest rate charged by
the traders.

. Talk to some people to find out the credit arrangements that exist in your area. Record

your conversation. Note the differences in the terms of credit across people.

MONEY AND CRED(1 IE: Y Se

Reprint 2025-26

FORMAL SECTOR CREDIT IN INDIA

We have seen in the
above examples that
people obtain loans from
various sources. The
various types of loans
can be conveniently
grouped as formal
sector loans and
informal sector loans.
Among the former
are loans from banks
and cooperatives. The
informal lenders include
moneylenders, traders,
employers, relatives and
friends, etc. In Graph 1
you can see the various
sources of credit to rural
households in India. Is more credit
coming from the formal sector or the
informal sector?

Moneylenders,
23%

Landlords, 1%

The Reserve Bank of India
supervises the functioning of formal
sources of loans. For instance, we
have seen that the banks maintain a
minimum cash balance out of the
deposits they receive. The RBI
monitors the banks in actually
maintaining cash balance. Similarly,

BUT WHY SHOULD
A BANK WANT US TO
HAVE A HIGHER INCOME?

Other Formal
Agencies, 5%

Graph 1 : Sources of Credit in Rural India, 2019

Other Informal

Agencies, 3%
Relatives and |

Friends, 7%

Commercial
Banks, 51%

Cooperative Banks
and Society, 10%

the RBI sees that the banks give loans
not just to profit-making businesses
and traders but also to small
cultivators, small scale industries, to
small borrowers etc. Periodically,
banks have to submit information to
the RBI on how much they are
lending, to whom, at what interest
rate, etc.

There is no organisation which
supervises the credit activities of
lenders in the informal sector. They
can lend at whatever interest rate they

choose. There is no one to stop them
from using unfair means to get their
money back.

Compared to the formal lenders,
most of the informal lenders charge a
much higher interest on loans. Thus,
the cost to the borrower of informal
loans is much higher.

Higher cost of borrowing means a
larger part of the earnings of the
borrowers is used to repay the loan.
Hence, borrowers have less income
left for themselves (as we saw for
Shyamal in Sonpur). In certain
cases, the high interest rate for
borrowing can mean that the amount
to be repaid is greater than the
income of the borrower. This could
lead to increasing debt (as we saw for
Rama in Sonpur) and debt trap. Also,
people who might wish to start an
enterprise by borrowing may not do
so because of the high cost of
borrowing.

For these reasons, banks and
cooperative societies need to lend
more. This would lead to higher incomes and many people could then
borrow cheaply for a_ variety
of needs. They could grow crops,

do business, set up small-scale industries etc. They could set up new industries or trade in goods. Cheap and
affordable credit is crucial for the
country s development.

Formal and Informal Credit:
Who gets what?

Graph 2 shows the importance of
formal and informal sources of credit
for people in urban areas. The people
are divided into four groups, from poor
to rich, as shown in the figure. You can
see that 54 per cent of the loans taken
by poor households in the urban areas
are from informal sources. Compare
this with the rich urban households.
What do you find? Only 17 per cent of
their loans are from informal sources,
while 83 per cent are from formal
sources. A similar pattern is also found
in rural areas. The rich households are
availing cheap credit from formal
lenders whereas the poor households
have to pay a large amount for
borrowing.

What does all this suggest? First,
the formal sector still meets only about
half of the total credit needs of the
rural people. The remaining credit
needs are met from informal sources.

Graph 2 : Of all the loans taken by urban households, what
percentage was formal and what percentage was informal?

Poor Households

Households with afew assets Households

Well-off Rich

Households

Money AND CRED TI? Do

Reprint 2025-26

Most loans from informal lenders
carry a very high interest rate and do
little to increase the income of the
borrowers. Thus, it is necessary
that banks and cooperatives
increase their lending particularly
in the rural areas, so that the
dependence on informal sources
of credit reduces.

Secondly, while formal sector
loans need to expand, it is also
necessary that everyone receives
these loans. At present, it is the richer
households who receive formal credit
whereas the poor have to depend on
the informal sources. It is important
that the formal credit is distributed
more equally so that the poor can
benefit from the cheaper loans.

LET S WORK THESE OUT

1. What are the differences between formal and informal sources of credit?
2. Why should credit at reasonable rates be available for all?

3. Should there be a supervisor, such as the Reserve Bank of India, that looks into the
loan activities of informal lenders? Why would its task be quite difficult?

4. Why do you think that the share of formal sector credit is higher for the richer households
compared to the poorer households?
A worker

DO YOU THINK A BANK

WILL GIVE ME A
LOAN?

In the previous section we have seen
that poor households are still
dependent on informal sources of
credit. Why is it so? Banks are not
present everywhere in rural India.
Even when they are present, getting a
loan from a bank is much more
difficult than taking a loan from
informal sources. As we saw for
Megha, bank loans require proper

Reprint 2025-26

 
La

 = oo

: bs
>
ey

. es

SELF-HELP GROUPS FOR THE POOR

documents and collateral. Absence of
collateral is one of the major reasons
which prevents the poor from getting
bank loans. Informal lenders such as
moneylenders, on the other hand,
know the borrowers personally and
hence are often willing to give a
loan without collateral. The borrowers
can, if necessary, approach the
moneylenders even without repaying

Se -{) eee) NDERSTANDING ECOoNomic DEVELOPMENT

their earlier loans. However, the
moneylenders charge very high rates
of interest, keep no records of the
transactions and harass the poor
borrowers.

In recent years, people have tried
out some newer ways of providing
loans to the poor. The idea is to
organise rural poor, in particular
women, into small Self Help Groups
(SHGs) and pool (collect) their
savings. A typical SHG has 15-20
members, usually belonging to one
neighbourhood, who meet and save
regularly. Saving per member varies
from Rs 25 to Rs 100 or more,
depending on the ability of the people
to save. Members can take small loans
from the group itself to meet their
needs. The group charges interest on
these loans but this is still less than
what the moneylender charges. After
a year or two, if the group is regular
in savings, it becomes eligible for
availing loan from the bank.
Loan is sanctioned in the
name of the group and is
meant to create selfemployment opportunities
for the members. For
instance, small loans are
provided to the members for
releasing mortgaged land,
for meeting working capital
needs (e.g. buying seeds,
fertilisers, raw materials
like bamboo and cloth), for
housing materials, for
acquiring assets like sewing
machine, handlooms, cattle,
etc.

Most of the important
decisions regarding the
savings and loan activities
are taken by the group
members. The group
decides as regards the loans

to be granted the purpose, amount,
interest to be charged, repayment
schedule etc. Also, it is the group
which is responsible for the repayment
of the loan. Any case of nonrepayment of loan by any one
member is followed up seriously by
other members in the group. Because
of this feature, banks are willing to
lend to the poor women when
organised in SHGs, even though they
have no collateral as such.

Thus, the SHGs help borrowers
overcome the problem of lack of
collateral. They can get timely loans
for a variety of purposes and at a
reasonable interest rate. Moreover,
SHGs are the building blocks of
organisation of the rural poor. Not
only does it help women to become
financially self-reliant, the regular
meetings of the group provide a
platform to discuss and act on a
variety of social issues such as health,
nutrition, domestic violence, etc.

A women s self-help group
meeting in Gujarat

Money AND CreD 1H) ie

Reprint 2025-26

 If credit can be made available to
the poor people on terms and
conditions that are appropriate and
reasonable these millions of small

people with their millions of small

pursuits can add up to create the

biggest development wonder. 
Professor Muhammad Yunus,

the founder of Grameen Bank,
and recipient of 2006 Nobel Prize for Peace

In this chapter we have looked atthe credit vary substantially between
modern forms of money and how they formal and informal lenders. At

are linked with the banking system.
On one side are the depositors who
keep their money in the banks and on
the other side are the borrowers who
take loans from these banks. Economic
activities require loans or credit. Credit,
as we saw can have a positive impact,
or in certain situations make the
borrower worse off.

Credit is available from a variety of
sources. These can be either formal

present, it is the richer households
who receive credit from formal sources
whereas the poor have to depend on
the informal sources. It is essential
that the total formal sector credit
increases so that the dependence on
the more expensive informal credit
becomes less. Also, the poor should
get a much greater share of formal
loans from banks, cooperative
societies etc. Both these steps are

sources or informal sources. Terms of

EXERCISES

In situations with high risks, credit might create further problems for the borrower.
Explain.

How does money solve the problem of double coincidence of wants? Explain with
an example of your own.

How do banks mediate between those who have surplus money and those who
need money?

Look at a 10 rupee note. What is written on top? Can you explain this statement?
Why do we need to expand formal sources of credit in India?

What is the basic idea behind the SHGs for the poor? Explain in your own words.
What are the reasons why the banks might not be willing to lend to certain borrowers?

important for development.

UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

Reprint 2025-26

In what ways does the Reserve Bank of India supervise the functioning of banks?
Why is this necessary?

Analyse the role of credit for development.

Manav needs a loan to set up a small business. On what basis will Manav decide
whether to borrow from the bank or the moneylender? Discuss.

In India, about 80 per cent of farmers are small farmers, who need credit for cultivation.

(a) Why might banks be unwilling to lend to small farmers?

(ob) What are the other sources from which the small farmers can borrow?

(c) Explain with an example how the terms of credit can be unfavourable for the
small farmer.

(d) Suggest some ways by which small farmers can get cheap credit.

Fill in the blanks:
(i) Majority of the credit needs of the households are met
from informal sources.

(ii) costs of borrowing increase the debt-burden.

(iii) issues currency notes on behalf of the Central
Government.

(iv) Banks charge a higher interest rate on loans than what they offer on

(v) is an asset that the borrower owns and uses as a guarantee
until the loan is repaid to the lender.
Choose the most appropriate answer.
(i) In a SHG most of the decisions regarding savings and loan activities are taken by
(a) Bank.

)
(ob) Members.
(c) Non-government organisation.

(ii) Formal sources of credit does not include
a) Banks.

(a)
(b) Cooperatives.
(c) Employers.

ADDITIONAL PROJECT / ACTIVITY

The following table shows people in a variety of occupations in urban areas. What
are the purposes for which the following people might need loans? Fill in the column.

Construction worker

Graduate student who is computer literate
A person employed in government service
Migrant labourer in Delhi

Household maid

Small trader

Autorickshaw driver

A worker whose factory has closed down

Next, classify the people into two groups based on whom you think might get a bank
loan and those who might not. What is the criterion that you have used for classification?

MONEY AND CrepIT

Reprint 2025-26