and political parties mobilise their supporters. This is also the period when newspapers and television news are full of election related stories and debates. But election campaign is not limited to these two weeks only. Political parties start preparing for elections months before they actually take place. ACTIVITY How was the election campaign in your In election campaigns, political parties try to focus public attention on some big issues. They want to attract the public to that issue and get them to vote for their party on that basis. Let us look at some of the successful slogans given by different political parties in various elections. = The Congress party led by Indira Gandhi gave the slogan of Garibi Hatao (Remove poverty) in the Lok Sabha elections of 1971. The party promised to reorient all the policies of the government to remove poverty from the country. = Save Democracy was the slogan given by Janata Party under the leadership of Jayaprakash Narayan, in the Lok Sabha election held in 1977. The party promised to undo the excesses committed during Emergency and restore civil liberties. a The Left Front used the slogan of Land to the Tiller in the West Bengal Assembly elections held in 1977. = Protect the Self-Respect of the Telugus was the slogan used by N. T. Rama Rao, the leader of the Telugu Desam Party in Andhra Pradesh Assembly elections in 1983. In a democracy it is best to leave political parties and candidates free to conduct their election campaigns the way they want to. But it is sometimes necessary to regulate DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 YOUR CHECK PROGRESS Voter ecause campaigns to ensure that every political party and candidate gets a fair and equal chance to compete. According to our election law, no party or candidate can: = Bribe or threaten voters; a Appeal to them in the name of caste or religion; a Use government resources for election campaign; and = Spend more than *25 lakh ina constituency for a Lok Sabha election or % 10 lakh in a constituency in an Assembly election. If they do so, their election can be rejected by the court even after they have been declared elected. In addition to the laws, all the political parties in our country have agreed to a Model Code of Conduct for election campaigns. According to this, no party or candidate can: = Use any place of worship for election propaganda; The Voter Verifiable Paper machine allows you to see a showing the Serial Numb chosen candidate. Itallows y ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA ELECTORAL POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 = Use government vehicles, aircrafts and officials for elections; and = Once elections are announced, Ministers shall not lay foundation stones of any projects, take any big policy decisions or make any promises of providing public facilities. Polling and counting of votes The final stage of an election is the day when the voters cast or poll their vote. That day is usually called the election