to only a few cartoon ; States or parties? verdict by the defeated party. . Titled Electoral Challenges to free and fair Campaigns , this elections cartoon was drawn in Questions of this kind bring the All this leads to a simple conclusion: i i P many limitations and challenges of the Latin American elections in India are basically free er lecis ti ttenti context. Does this and fair. The party that wins an elec- 4 aD COPE Our attention. apply to India tion and forms government does so ese include : and to other because people have chosen it over democracies its rivals. This may not be true for in the world? every constituency. A few candidates may win purely on the basis of money power and unfair means. But the overall verdict of a general election still reflects popular preference. There are very few exceptions to this rule in the last 60 years in our country. This is what makes Indian elections democratic. Yet the picture looks different if we ask deeper questions: Are people s preferences based on real knowledge? Are the voters getting a real choice? Is election really level playing field for everyone? Can an ordinary - ig cipal citizen hope to win elections? / le Nerilicon, E/ Economista, Cagle Cartoons Inc. 50, DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 Is this an accurate picture of what happens to the voter before and after elections? Must this always happen in a democracy? Can you think of examples when this did not happen? read the cartoon CHECK YOUR PROGRESS R.K. Laxman, The Times of India = Candidates and parties with a lot of money may not be sure of their victory but they do enjoy a big and unfair advantage over smaller parties and independents. aIn some parts of the country, candidates with criminal connection have been able to push others out of the electoral race and to secure a ticket from major parties. a Some families tend to dominate political parties; tickets are distributed to relatives from these families. a Very often elections offer little choice to ordinary citizens, for both the major parties are quite Sr oSJ Dee vos A Z> li ii similar to each other both in policies and practice. a Smaller parties and independent candidates suffer a huge disadvantage compared to bigger parties. These challenges exist not just in India but also in many established democracies. These deeper issues are a matter of concern for those who believe in democracy. That is why citizens, social activists and organisations have been demanding reforms in our electoral system. Can you think of some reforms? What can an ordinary citizen do to face these challenges? Here are some facts on Indian elections. Comment on each of these to say whether they reflect the strength or the weakness of our electoral system: = The 16th Lok Sabha has 12 per cent women members. = The Election Commission often refuses to accept the government s advice about when the