votes of one candidate and declared ELECTORAL POLITICS 53, Reprint 2025-26 11 him elected. The court later found out that more than five lakh votes cast for one candidate were counted in favour of another. Just before elections in Fiji, a pamphlet was distributed warning voters that a vote for former Prime Minister, Mahendra Chaudhry will lead to bloodshed. This was a threat to voters of Indian origin. In the US, each state has its own method of voting, its own procedure of counting and its own authority for conducting elections. Authorities in the state of Florida took many controversial decisions that favoured Mr. Bush in the presidential elections in 2000. But no one could change those decisions. Here are some reports of malpractices in Indian elections. Identify what the problem in each case is. What should be done to correct the situation? a b c Following the announcement of elections, the minister promised to provide financial aid to reopen the closed sugar mill. Opposition parties alleged that their statements and campaign was not given due attention in Doordarshan and All India Radio. An inquiry by the Election Commission showed that electoral rolls of a state contain name of 20 lakh fake voters. d The hoodlums ofa political party were moving with guns, physically preventing supporters of other political parties to meet the voters and attacking meetings of other parties. Ramesh was not in class when this chapter was being taught. He came the next day and repeated what he had heard from his father. Can you tell Ramesh what is wrong with these statements? a b c Women always vote the way men tell them to. So what is the point of giving them the right to vote? Party politics creates tension in society. Elections should be decided by consensus not by competition. Only graduates should be allowed to stand as candidates for elections. exercises Assembly elections are usually held every year in a few states of the country. You can collect information about the elections that take place during this session. While collecting news items, divide these into three parts: Important events that took place before the election main agenda discussed by political parties; information about people s demand; role of the Election Commission. Important events on the day of the election and counting - turnout in elections; reports of malpractice; re-polls; the types of predictions made; and the final outcome. Post elections - reasons offered by political parties for winning or losing elections; analysis of the election verdict by the media; selection of the Chief Minister. DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 Sy, We National Voters Day (NVD) Pledge We, the citizens of India, having abiding faith in democracy, hereby pledge to uphold the democratic traditions of our country and the dignity of free, fair and peaceful elections, and to vote in every election fearlessly and without being influenced by considerations of religion, race, caste, community, language or any inducement. \ 7 How did your school celebrate the National