But the card is not yet compulsory for voting. For voting, the voters can show many other proofs of identity like the ration card or the driving licence. Nomination of candidates We noted above that in a democratic election people should have a real choice. This happens only when there are almost no restrictions on anyone to contest an election. This is what our system provides. Anyone who can be a voter can also become a candidate in elections. The only difference is that in order to be a candidate the minimum age is 25 years, while it is only 18 years for being a voter. There are some other restrictions on criminals etc. but these apply in very extreme cases. Political parties nominate their candidates who get the party symbol and support. Party s nomination is often called party ticket . Every person who wishes to contest an election has to fill a nomination form and give some money as security deposit . Recently, a new system of declaration has been introduced on direction from the Supreme Court. Every candidate has to make a legal declaration, giving full details of : = Serious criminal cases pending against the candidate; = Details of the assets and liabilities of the candidate and his or her family; and = Educational qualifications of the candidate. This information has to be made public. This provides an opportunity to the voters to make their decision on the basis of the information provided by the candidates. Educational qualifications for candidates Why is there no educational qualification for holding such an important position when some kind of educational qualification is needed for any other job in the country? = Educational qualifications are not relevant to all kinds of jobs. The relevant qualification for selection to the Indian cricket team, for example, is not the attainment of educational degrees but the ability to play cricket well. Similarly the relevant qualification for being an MLA or an MP is the ability to understand people s concerns, problems and to represent their interests. Whether they can do so or not is examined by lakhs of examiners their voters after every five years. Even if education was relevant, it should be left to the people to decide how much importance they give to educational qualifications. In our country putting an educational qualification would go against the spirit of democracy for yet another reason. It would mean depriving a majority of the country s citizens the right to contest elections. If, for example, a graduate degree like B.A., B.Com or B.Sc was made compulsory for candidates, more than 90 per cent of the citizens will become ineligible to contest elections. DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 Why are the candidates required to give a detailed statement of their property? ELECTORAL ROLL -2018 STATE (S16) MIZORAM No. Name and Reservation Part Number Status of Assembly 7 - TUIVAWL (ST) Constituency : 14 No. Name and Reservation Status of Parliamentary Constituency (ies) in which the assembly