their own needs and views. That is why all of them deserve to have an equal say in decisions that affect them. In our country, all the citizens aged 18 years and above can vote in an election. Every citizen has the right to vote, regardless of his or her caste, religion or gender. Some criminals and persons with unsound mind can DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 Do you know, like in Panchayats, one-third of the seats in Parliament and Legislative Assemblies have also been reserved for women as per Nari Shakti Vandan Adhiniyam, 2023 (Women's Reservation Act 2023) Election Commission of India See the map above and answer the following questions. What is the number of Lok Sabha constituencies in your state and the neighbouring two states? Which states have more than 30 Lok Sabha constituencies? Why do some states have such a large number of constituencies? Why are some constituencies small in area while others are very big? Are the constituencies reserved for the SCs and STs evenly spread all over the entire country or are there more in some areas? ELECTORAL POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 LOK SABHA CONSTITUENCIES TOTAL CONSTITUENCIES GENERAL Andhra Pradesh Arunachal Pradesh Assam Bihar Chhattisgarh Goa Gujarat Haryana Himachal Pradesh Jharkhand Karnataka Kerala Madhya Pradesh Maharashtra Manipur Meghalaya Mizoram Nagaland Odisha Punjab Rajasthan Sikkim Tamil Nadu Telangana Tripura Uttar Pradesh Uttarakhand West Bengal RESERVED (Sc) J 84 RESERVED (ST) | | 47 STATES CONSTITUENCIES 2 40 2 10 14 20 48 2 1 13 1 17 80 42 412 UNION TERRITORIES Andaman & Nicobar Islands Chandigarh Dadra & Nagar Haveli Daman & Diu Delhi Jammu and Kashmir Ladakh Lakshadweep Puducherry re ee eS ee ee Ce ee Ce be denied the right to vote, but only in rare situations. It is the responsibility of the government to get the names of all the eligible voters put on the voters list. As new persons attain voting age names are added to the voters list. Names of those who move out of a place or those who are dead are deleted. A complete revision of the list takes place every five years. This is done to ensure that it remains up to date. In the last few years a new system of Election Photo Identity Card [EPIC] has been introduced. The government has tried to give this card to every person on the voters list. The voters are required to carry this card when they go out to vote, so that no one can vote for someone else. But the card is not yet compulsory for voting. For voting, the voters can show many other proofs of identity like the ration card or the driving licence. Nomination of candidates We noted above that in a democratic election people should have a real choice. This happens only when there are almost no restrictions on anyone to contest an election. This is what our system provides. Anyone who can be a voter can also become a candidate in elections. The