Mallikarjun Kharge INC 507193 50.82 Danni Mahadev B. BSP 11428 1.14 Revunaik Belamagi BJP 432460 43.33 B.T. Lalitha Naik AAAP 9074 0.91 S.M. Sharma SUC] 4943 0.50 Shankar Jadhav BHPP 2877 0.29 Ramu IND 4085 0.41 None of the Above NOTA 9888 0.99 = Whatis the percentage of voters who had actually cast their votes? = 10 win an election is it necessary for a person to secure more than half the votes polled? Earlier the voters used to indicate who they wanted to vote for by putting a stamp on the ballot paper. A ballot paper is a sheet of paper on which the names of the contesting candidates along with party name and symbols are listed. Nowadays electronic voting machines (EVM) are used to record votes. The machine shows the names of the candidates and the party symbols. Independent candidates too have their own symbols, allotted by election commission. All that the voter has to do is to press the button against the name of the candidate she wants to give her vote. Once the polling is over, all the EVMs are sealed and taken to a secure place. A few days later, on a fixed date, all the EVMs from a constituency are opened and the votes secured by each candidate are counted. The agents of all candidates are present there to ensure that the counting is done properly. The candidate who secures the highest number of votes from a constituency is declared elected. In a general election, usually the counting of votes in all the constituencies takes place at the same time, on the same day. Television channels, radio and newspapers report this event. Within a few hours of counting, all the results are declared and it becomes clear as to who will form the next government. Identify the fair and the unfair electoral practices among the following: = Aminister flags off a new train in his constituency a week before polling day. = Acandidate promises that she will get a new train for her constituency if she is elected. = Supporters of a candidate take the voters to a temple and make them take an oath that they will vote for him. = The supporters of a candidate distribute blankets in slums in return for a promise for vote. Why are party agents present in the polling booth and the counting centre? CHECK YOUR PROGRESS DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 For more details about the Election Commission of India, visit https://eci.gov.in < Why does the Election Commission have so much powers? Is this good for democracy? 3.3 WHAT MAKES ELECTIONS IN INDIA DEMOCRATIC? We get to read a lot about unfair practices in elections. Newspapers and television reports often refer to such allegations. Most of these reports are about the following: aInclusion of false names and exclusion of genuine names in the voters list; =a Misuse of government facilities and officials by the ruling party; = Excessive use of money by rich candidates and big parties;