| 20| 10| Upper Caste White Black _ Hispanic SOCIAL GROUPS Source: Figures for India from National Election Study 2004, CSDS. Figures for US from National Election Study 2004, University of Michigan. 3 Common people in India attach a lot of importance to elections. They feel that through elections they can bring pressure on political parties to adopt policies and programmes favourable to them. They also feel that their vote matters in the way things are run in the country. 3 DO YOU THINK YOUR VOTE MAKES A DIFFERENCE? Source: National Election Study 2004, CSDS. WD Has effect BB Has no effect WS Don t know ELECTORAL POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 4 The interest of voters in electionrelated activities has been increasing over the years. During the 2004 elections, more than onethird voters took part in a campaign-related activities. More than half of the people identified themselves as being close to one or the other political party. One out of every seven voters is a member of a political party. 4 THOSE WHO PARTICIPATED IN ANY ELECTION RELATED ACTIVITY IN INDIA Source: National Election Study 1996-2004, CSDS. 40 | _ a sO 1996 1998 = 1999-2004 ELECTION YEAR ACTIVITY Ask the eligible voters in your family whether they voted in the last election to the Lok Sabha or to Acceptance of election outcome One final test of the free and fairness of election has in the outcome itself. If elections are not free or fair, the outcome always favours the powerful. In such a situation, the ruling parties do not lose elections. Usually, the losing party does not accept the outcome of a rigged election. The outcome of India s elections speaks for itself: = The ruling parties routinely lose elections in India both at the national and state level. In fact in every two out of the three elections held in the last 25 years, the ruling party lost. = In the US, an incumbent or sitting elected representative rarely loses an election. In India about half of the sitting MPs or MLAs lose elections. = Candidates who are known to have spent a lot of money on buying votes and those with known criminal connections often lose elections. Barring very few disputed elections, the electoral outcomes are usually accepted as people s Irfan Khan The leader is coming out of a press conference: What was the need to say that we have distributed tickets only amongst suitable and winnable family relations? Do you think that family politics is confined to only a few cartoon ; States or parties? verdict by the defeated party. . Titled Electoral Challenges to free and fair Campaigns , this elections cartoon was drawn in Questions of this kind bring the All this leads to a simple conclusion: i i P many limitations and challenges of the Latin American elections in India are basically free er lecis ti ttenti context. Does this and fair. The party that wins an elec- 4 aD COPE Our attention.