social activists and organisations have been demanding reforms in our electoral system. Can you think of some reforms? What can an ordinary citizen do to face these challenges? Here are some facts on Indian elections. Comment on each of these to say whether they reflect the strength or the weakness of our electoral system: = The 16th Lok Sabha has 12 per cent women members. = The Election Commission often refuses to accept the government s advice about when the elections should be held. = The 16th Lok Sabha has more than 440 members whose assets are more than Rs.1 crore. = After losing an election the Chief Minister said: I respect the people s verdict . ELECTORAL POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 Code of Conduct: A set of norms and guidelines to be followed by political parties and contesting candidates during election time. Constituency: Voters in a geographical area who elect a representative to the legislative bodies. Incumbent: The current holder of a political office. Usually the choice for the voters in elections is between the incumbent party or candidate and those who oppose them. Level playing field: Condition in which all parties and candidates contesting in an election have equal opportunities to appeal for votes and to carry out election campaign. Rigging: Fraud and malpractices indulged by a party or candidate to increase its votes. It includes stuffing ballot boxes by a few persons using the votes of others; recording multiple votes by the same person; and bribing or coercing polling officers to favour a candidate. Turnout: The percentage of eligible voters who cast their votes in an election. 1 Which of the following statements about the reasons for conducting elections are false? a Elections enable people to judge the performance of the government. b People select the representative of their choice in an election. c Elections enable people to evaluate the performance of the judiciary. d People can indicate which policies they prefer. 2 Which of these is not a good reason to say that Indian elections are democratic? a India has the largest number of voters in the world. b India s Election Commission is very powerful. c In India, everyone above the age of 18 has a right to vote. d In India, the losing parties accept the electoral verdict. 3 Match the following : bate a It is necessary to keep the voters there is a fair representation of list up to date because all sections of our society Some constituencies are CveTyone has equal reserved for SCs and STs so opportunity to elect their that representative Everyone has one and only one vote so that Party in power is not allowed to use government vehicles because pate hate bate all candidates must have a fair chance of competing in elections some people may have moved away from the area where they voted last DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 exercises List all the different election related activities mentioned in the chapter and arrange them in a time