for SCs and STs so opportunity to elect their that representative Everyone has one and only one vote so that Party in power is not allowed to use government vehicles because pate hate bate all candidates must have a fair chance of competing in elections some people may have moved away from the area where they voted last DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 exercises List all the different election related activities mentioned in the chapter and arrange them in a time sequence, beginning with the first activity and ending with the last. Some of these activities are given below: releasing election manifestos; counting of votes; making of voters list; election campaign; declaration of election results; casting of votes; ordering of re-poll; announcing election schedule; filing nomination. Surekha is an officer in-charge of ensuring free and fair elections in an assembly constituency in a state. Describe what should she focus on for each of the following stages of election: a Election campaign b Polling day ce Counting day The table below gives the proportion of different communities among the candidates who won elections to the US Congress. Compare these to the proportion of these communities in the population of the US. Based on this, would you suggest a system of reservations in the US Congress? If yes, why and for which communities? If no, why not? Proportion of the community (in per cent) in the House of Population of US representatives Blacks 8 13 Hispanics 5 13 Whites 86 70 Can we draw the following conclusions from the information given in this chapter? Give two facts to support your position for each of these. a Election Commission of India does not have enough powers to conduct free and fair elections in the country. b There is a high level of popular participation in the elections in our country. c It is very easy for the party in power to win an election. d Many reforms are needed to make our elections completely free and fair. Chinappa was convicted for torturing his wife for dowry. Satbir was held guilty of practicing untouchability. The court did not allow either of them to contest elections. Does this decision go against the principles of democratic elections? Here are some reports of electoral malpractices from different parts of the world. Is there anything that these countries can learn from India to improve their elections? What would you suggest in each case? a During an election in Nigeria, the officer in charge of counting votes deliberately increased the votes of one candidate and declared ELECTORAL POLITICS 53, Reprint 2025-26 11 him elected. The court later found out that more than five lakh votes cast for one candidate were counted in favour of another. Just before elections in Fiji, a pamphlet was distributed warning voters that a vote for former Prime Minister, Mahendra Chaudhry will lead to bloodshed. This was a threat to voters of Indian origin. In the US, each state has its own method of voting, its