officers work under the control of the EC and not the government. In the last 25 years or so, the Election Commission has begun to exercise all its powers and even expand them. It is very common now for the Election Commission to reprimand the government and administration for their lapses. When election officials come to the opinion that polling was not fair in some booths or even an entire constituency, they order a repoll. The ruling parties often do not like what the EC does. But they have to obey. This would not have happened if the EC was not independent and powerful. EC issues notification constituting 14th ie I-cards not mandatory in Bihar Lok Sabha CHECK EC tightens norms for pollexpenses EC accepts new Haryana DGP YOUR EC will seek power to censure PROGRESS nolitical ads emer EC to visit Gujarat again, review poll | eee EC says no immediate plan to ban HC asks EC to bar criminal netas Exit Polls al EC shoots down HM advice on Fc orders repoll in 398 more hooths Doll reforms ; SRE en en EC to keep closer eye on hidden noll costs Read these headlines carefully and identify which powers are used by the Election Commission in each instance to ensure free and fair elections. Popular participation 1 People s participation in election Another way to check the quality of is usually measured by voter the election process is to see turnout figures. Turnout indicates whether people participate in it with the per cent of eligible voters who enthusiasm. If the election process actually cast their vote. Over the is not free or fair, people will not last fifty years, the turnout in continue to participate in the Europe and North America has exercise. Now, read these charts declined. In India the turnout has and draw some conclusions about either remained stable or actually participation in India: gone up. 1 VOTER TURNOUT IN INDIA AND THE UK UK t INDIA @= _| 56 58 59 VOTER TURNOUT (%) ELECTION YEAR 48, DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 2In India the poor, illiterate and underprivileged people vote in larger proportion as compared to the rich and privileged sections. This is in contrast to western democracies. For example in the United States of America, poor people, African Americans and Hispanics vote much less than the rich and the white people. 2 VOTER TURNOUT IN INDIA AND US BY SOCIAL GROUPS, 2004 INDIA US VOTER TURNOUT (%) 60 | 50 | 40 | 30 | 20| 10| Upper Caste White Black _ Hispanic SOCIAL GROUPS Source: Figures for India from National Election Study 2004, CSDS. Figures for US from National Election Study 2004, University of Michigan. 3 Common people in India attach a lot of importance to elections. They feel that through elections they can bring pressure on political parties to adopt policies and programmes favourable to them. They also feel that their vote matters in the way things are run in the country.