can sit together everyday and take all the decisions. But as we have already seen in Chapter 1, this is not possible in any large community. Nor is it possible for everyone to have the time and knowledge to take decisions on all matters. Therefore in most democracies people rule through their representatives. Is there a democratic way of selecting representatives without elections? Let us think of a place where representatives are selected on the basis of age and experience. Or a place where they are chosen on the basis of education or knowledge. There could be some difficulty in deciding on who is more experienced or knowledgable. But let us say the people can resolve these difficulties. Clearly, such a place does not require elections. But can we call this place a democracy? How do we find out if the people like their representatives or not? How do we ensure that these representatives rule as per the wishes of the people? How to make sure that those who the people don t like do not remain _ their representatives? This requires a mechanism by which people can choose their representatives at regular intervals and change them if they wish to do so. This mechanism is called election. Therefore, elections are considered essential in our times for any representative democracy. In an election the voters make many choices: = They can choose who will make laws for them. = They can choose who will form the government and take major decisions. = They can choose the party whose policies will guide the government and law making. What makes an election democratic? Elections can be held in many ways. All democratic countries hold elections. But most non-democratic countries also hold some kind of elections. How do we distinguish democratic elections from any other election? We have discussed this question briefly in Chapter 1. We discussed many examples of countries where elections are held but they can t really be called democratic elections. Let us recall what we learnt there and start with a simple list of the minimum conditions of a democratic election: a First, everyone should be able to choose. This means that everyone should have one vote and every vote should have equal value. DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 We have seen why democracies need to have elections. But why do rulers in non-democratic countries need to hold elections? Ah! So, elections are like exams where politicians and parties know if they have passed or failed. But who are the examiners? aSecond, there should _ be something to choose from. Parties and candidates should be free to contest elections and should offer some real choice to the voters. = Third, the choice should be offered at regular intervals. Elections must be held regularly after every few years. = Fourth, the candidate preferred by the people should get elected. a Fifth, elections should be conducted in a free and fair manner where people can choose as they really wish. These might