Minister of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, of which the Department was a part. We can guess that such a major decision would have involved other major functionaries in our country. You have already read in the previous class about some of them. Let us go over some of the main points that you covered then: = President is the head of the state and is the highest formal authority in the country. = Prime Minister is the head of the government and actually exercises all governmental powers. He takes most of the decisions in the This Office Memorandum was the culmination of a long chain of events. The Government of India had appointed the Second Backward Classes Commission in 1979. It was headed by B.P. Mandal. Hence it was popularly called the Mandal Commission. It was asked to determine the criteria to identify the socially and educationally backward classes in India and recommend steps to be taken for their advancement. The Commission gave its Report in 1980 and made many recommendations. One of these was that 27 per cent of government jobs be reserved for the socially and educationally backward classes. The Report and recommendations were discussed in the Parliament. For several years, many parliamentarians and parties kept demanding the implementation of the Commission s recommendations. Then came the Lok Sabha election of 1989. In its election manifesto, the Janata Dal promised that if voted to power, it would implement the Mandal Commission report. The Now | can see Cabinet meetings. clearly! That is why Parliament consists of the Janata Dal did form the government President and two Houses, Lok after this election. Its leader V. P. they talk of Sabha and Rajya Sabha. The Prime Singh became the Prime Minister. Viancalisation ol Minister must have the support of Several developments took place Politics, Don't they? a majority of Lok Sabha members. after that: 58 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 = The President of India in his address to the Parliament read announced the intention of the the government to implement the . recommendations of the Mandal im ag e Commission. On 6 August 1990, the Union Cabinet took a formal decision to implement the recommendations. Reservation debate _ Was such an = Next day Prime Minister V.P. Singh important issue during . . 4990-91 that informed the Parliament about this decision through a statement in both the Houses of Parliament. = The decision of the Cabinet was sent to the Department of Personnel and Training. The senior officers of the Department drafted an order in line with the Cabinet decision and took the minister s approval. An officer signed the order on behalf of the Union Government. This was how O.M. No. 36012/ 31/90 was born on 13 August 1990. For the next few months, this was the most hotly debated issue in the country. Newspapers and magazines advertisers used this theme to sell their products. Can you spot some references to political events and debates in these Amul