the Department drafted an order in line with the Cabinet decision and took the minister s approval. An officer signed the order on behalf of the Union Government. This was how O.M. No. 36012/ 31/90 was born on 13 August 1990. For the next few months, this was the most hotly debated issue in the country. Newspapers and magazines advertisers used this theme to sell their products. Can you spot some references to political events and debates in these Amul Butter hoardings? GCMMF India Reserved for this utstanding Butter Classic WORKING OF INSTITUTIONS Reprint 2025-26 were full of different views and opinions on this issue. It led to widespread protests and counterprotests, some of which were violent. People reacted strongly because this decision affected thousands of job opportunities. Some felt that existence of inequalities among people of different castes in India necessitated job reservations. They felt, this would give a fair opportunity to those communities who so far had not adequately been represented in government employment. Others felt that this was unfair as it would deny equality of opportunity to those who did not belong to backward communities. They would be denied jobs even though they could be more qualified. Some felt that this would perpetuate caste feelings among people and hamper national unity. In this chapter we won't discuss whether the decision was good or not. We only take this example to understand how major decisions are taken = and implemented in the country. Who resolved this dispute? You know that the Supreme Court and the High Courts in India settle disputes arising out of governmental decisions. Some persons and associations opposed to this order filed a number of cases in the courts. They appealed to the courts to declare the order invalid and stop its implementation. The Supreme Court of India bunched all these cases together. This case was known as the Indira Sawhney and others Vs Union of India case . Eleven judges of the Supreme Court heard arguments of both sides. By a majority, the Supreme Court judges in 1992 declared that this order of the Government of India was valid. At the same time the Supreme Court asked the government to modify its original order. It said that well-todo persons among the backward classes should be excluded from getting the benefit of reservation. Accordingly, the Department of Personnel and Training issued another Office Memorandum on 8 September 1993. The dispute thus came to an end and this policy has been followed since then. Who did what in this case of reservations for backward classes? Supreme Court Made formal announcement about this decision Implemented the decision by issuing an order Took the decision to give 27% job reservations Cabinet ~ President __ _ Government Officials a Upheld reservations as valid Need for Political Institutions We have seen one example of how the government works. Governing a country involves various such activities. For example, the government is responsible for ensuring security to the citizens and providing facilities