powers in money matters. Once the Lok Sabha passes the budget of the government or any other money related law, the Rajya Sabha cannot reject it. The Rajya Sabha can only delay it by 14 days or suggest changes in it. The Lok Sabha may or may not accept these changes. ACTIVITY When Parliament is in session, there is a special programme everyday on Doordarshan about the DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 What is the point in having so much debate and discussion in the Parliament when we know that the view of the ruling party is going to prevail? 3 Most importantly, the Lok Sabha controls the Council of Ministers. Only a person who enjoys the support of the majority of the members in the Lok Sabha is appointed the Prime Minister. If the majority of the Lok Sabha members say they have no confidence in the Council of Ministers, all ministers including the Prime Minister, have to quit. The Rajya Sabha does not have this power. A day in the life of the Lok Sabha 7 December 2004 was an ordinary day in the life of the Fourteenth Lok Sabha. Let us take a look at what happened in the course of that day. Identify the role and powers of the parliament on the basis of the proceedings for the day as given below. You can also enact this day in your classroom. 11:00 Various ministries gave written answers to about 250 questions that were asked by members. These included: = What is the government s policy on talking to militant groups in Kashmir? = What are the figures of atrocities against Scheduled Tribes, including those inflicted by the police? = What is the government doing about overpricing of medicines by big companies? 12:00 A large number of official documents were presented and were available for discussion. These included: = Recruitment rules for the Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force = Annual Report of the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur = Report and accounts of Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Limited, Visakhapatnam 12:02 The Minister of Development of North Eastern Region made a statement regarding Revitalisation of the North Eastern Council. The Minister of State for Railways presented a statement showing the grant needed by the Railways in addition to that sanctioned in the Railway Budget. The Minister of Human Resource Development introduced the National Commission for Minority Educational Institutions Bill, 2004. He also gave a statement explaining why the government had to bring an ordinance for this. 12:14 Several members highlighted some issues, including: = The vindictiveness of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) in registering cases against some leaders in the Tehelka case. = Need to include Rajasthani as an official language in the Constitution. = Need to renew the insurance policies of farmers and agricultural workers of Andhra Pradesh. 2:26 Two bills proposed by the government were considered and passed. These were: = The Securities Laws (Amendment) Bill = The Enforcement of Security Interest and Recovery of Debts Laws (Amendment)