public interest litigation. The courts intervene to prevent the misuse of the government s power to make decisions. They check malpractices on the part of public officials. That is why the judiciary enjoys a high level of confidence among the people. CHECK YOUR PROGRESS Reprint 2025-26 The Chief Justice of India, Shri Justice J.S. Khehar administering the oath of the office of the President of India to Shri Ram Nath Kovind, at a swearing-in ceremony in the Central Hall of Parliament in New Delhi on 25 July 2017. DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Coalition government: A government formed by an alliance of two or more political parties, usually when no single party enjoys majority support of the members in a legislature. Executive: A body of persons having authority to initiate major policies, make decisions and implement them on the basis of the Constitution and laws of the country. Government: A set of institutions that have the power to make, implement and interpret laws so as to ensure an orderly life. In its broad sense, government administers and supervises over citizens and resources of a country. Judiciary: An institution empowered to administer justice and provide a mechanism for the resolution of legal disputes. All the courts in the country are collectively referred to as judiciary. Legislature: An assembly of people s representatives with the power to enact laws for a country. In addition to enacting laws, legislatures have authority to raise taxes and adopt the budget and other money bills. Office Memorandum: A communication issued by an appropriate authority stating the policy or decision of the government. Political Institution: A set of procedures for regulating the conduct of government and political life in the country. Reservations: A policy that declares some positions in government employment and educational institutions reserved for people and communities who have been discriminated against, are disadvantaged and backward. State: Political association occupying a definite territory, having an organised government and possessing power to make domestic and foreign policies. Governments may change, but the state continues. In common speech, the terms country, nation and state are used as synonyms. exercises -_ If you are elected as the President of India which of the following decision can you take on your own? a Select the person you like as Prime Minister. b Dismiss a Prime Minister who has a majority in Lok Sabha. ce Ask for reconsideration of a bill passed by both the Houses. d Nominate the leaders of your choice to the Council of Ministers. 2 Who among the following is a part of the political executive? a District Collector b Secretary of the Ministry of Home Affairs c Home Minister d Director General of Police 3 Which of the following statements about the judiciary is false? a Every law passed by the Parliament needs approval of the Supreme Court b Judiciary can strike down a law if it goes against the spirit of the Constitution ce Judiciary is independent of the Executive d Any citizen can approach the courts