issues, including: = The vindictiveness of the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) in registering cases against some leaders in the Tehelka case. = Need to include Rajasthani as an official language in the Constitution. = Need to renew the insurance policies of farmers and agricultural workers of Andhra Pradesh. 2:26 Two bills proposed by the government were considered and passed. These were: = The Securities Laws (Amendment) Bill = The Enforcement of Security Interest and Recovery of Debts Laws (Amendment) Bill 4:00 Finally, there was a long discussion regarding the foreign policy of the government and the need to continue an independent foreign policy in the context of the situation in Iraq. 7:17 Discussion concluded. House WORKING OF INSTITUTIONS Reprint 2025-26 adjourned for next day. 4.3 POLITICAL EXECUTIVE Do you remember the story of the Office Memorandum with which we started this chapter? We found out that the person who signed the document did not take this decision. He was only executing the policy decision taken by someone else. We noted the role of the Prime Minister in taking that decision. But we also know that he could not have taken that decision if he did not have support from the Lok Sabha. In that sense he was only executing the wishes of the Parliament. Thus, at different levels of any government we find functionaries who take day-to-day decisions but do not exercise supreme power on behalf of the people. All those functionaries are collectively known as the executive. They are called executive because they are in charge of the execution of the policies of the government. Thus, when we talk about the government we usually mean the executive. Political and Permanent Executive In a democratic country, two categories make up the executive. One that is elected by the people for a specific period, is called the political executive. Political leaders who take the big decisions fall in this category. In the second category, people are appointed on a long-term basis. This is called the permanent executive or civil services. Persons working in civil services are called civil servants. They remain in office even when the ruling party changes. These officers work under political executive and assist them in carrying out the day-to-day administration. Can you recall the role of political and non-political executive in the case of the Office Memorandum? You might ask: Why does the political executive have more power than the non-political executive? Why is the minister more powerful than the civil servant? The civil servant is usually more educated and has more expert knowledge of the subject. The advisors working in the Finance Ministry know more about economics than the Finance Minister. Sometimes the ministers may know very little about the technical matters that come under their ministry. This could easily happen in ministries like Defence, Industry, Health, Science and Technology, Mines, etc. Why should the minister have the final say on these matters? The reason is very simple. In a democracy the will of the