is a part of the political executive? a District Collector b Secretary of the Ministry of Home Affairs c Home Minister d Director General of Police 3 Which of the following statements about the judiciary is false? a Every law passed by the Parliament needs approval of the Supreme Court b Judiciary can strike down a law if it goes against the spirit of the Constitution ce Judiciary is independent of the Executive d Any citizen can approach the courts if her rights are violated WORKING OF INSTITUTIONS 71 Reprint 2025-26 Which of the following institutions can make changes to an existing law of the country? a The Supreme Court b The President c The Prime Minister d The Parliament Match the ministry with the news that the ministry may have released: A new policy is being made to increase the jute exports from the country. pate) Ministry of Defence Telephone services will be made more accessible to rural areas. pate) bate] Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Public Distribution The price of rice and wheat sold iii Ministry of Health under the Public Distribution System will go down. A pulse polio campaign willbe iv Ministry of Commerce launched. and Industry The allowances of the soldiers v Ministry of Communications posted on high altitudes will and Information Technology be increased. Of all the institutions that we have studied in this chapter, name the one that exercises the powers on each of the following matters. a b c d Decision on allocation of money for developing infrastructure like roads, irrigation etc. and different welfare activities for the citizens Considers the recommendation of a Committee on a law to regulate the stock exchange Decides on a legal dispute between two state governments Implements the decision to provide relief for the victims of an earthquake. Why is the Prime Minister in India not directly elected by the people? Choose the most appropriate answer and give reasons for your choice. a b In a Parliamentary democracy only the leader of the majority party in the Lok Sabha can become the Prime Minister. Lok Sabha can remove the Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers even before the expiry of their term. Since the Prime Minister is appointed by the President there is no need for it. Direct election of the Prime Minister will involve lot of expenditure on election. Three friends went to watch a film that showed the hero becoming Chief Minister for a day and making big changes in the state. Imran said this is what the country needs. Rizwan said this kind of a personal DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 exercises rule without institutions is dangerous. Shankar said all this is a fantasy. No minister can do anything in one day. What would be your reaction to such a film? A teacher was making preparations for a mock parliament. She called two students to act as leaders of two political parties. She gave them an option: Each one could choose to have a