Prime Minister who can do whatever he wishes or a Prime Minister who needs to consult other leaders and parties? CHECK YOUR PROGRESS DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 Itis quite common in the US for judges to be nominated on the basis of well-known political opinions and affiliations. This fictitious advertisement appeared in the US in 2005 when President Bush was considering various candidates for nomination to the US supreme court. What does this cartoon say about the independence of the judiciary? Why do such cartoons not appear in our country? Does this demonstrate the independence of our judiciary? M.E. Cohen, National, Cagle Cartoons Inc. 4.4 THE JUDICIARY Let us return, one final time, to the story of Office Memorandum that we started with. This time let us not recall the story, but imagine how different the story could have been. Remember, the story came to a satisfactory end because the Supreme Court gave a verdict that was accepted by everyone. Imagine what would have happened in the following situations: alf there was nothing like a Supreme Court in the country. a Even if there was a Supreme Court, if it had no power to judge actions of the government. = Even if it had the power, if no one trusted the Supreme Court to give a fair verdict. = Even if it gave a fair judgement, if those who appealed against the Government Order did not accept the judgement. wee, | WORKING OF INSTITUTIONS Reprint 2025-26 ACTIVITY This is why an independent and powerful judiciary is considered essential for democracies. All the courts at different levels in a country put together are called the judiciary. The Indian judiciary consists of a Supreme Court for the entire nation, High Courts in the states, District Courts and the courts at local level. India has an integrated judiciary. It means the Supreme Court controls the judicial administration in the country. Its decisions are binding on all other courts of the country. It can take up any dispute = Between citizens of the country; = Between citizens and government; = Between two or more state governments; and = Between governments at the union and state level. It is the highest court of appeal in civil and criminal cases. It can hear appeals against the decisions of the High Courts. Independence of the judiciary means that it is not under the control of the legislature or the executive. The judges do not act on the direction of the government or according to the wishes of the party in power. That is why all modern democracies have courts that are independent of the legislature and the executive. India has achieved this. The judges of the Supreme Court and the High Courts are appointed by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister and in consultation with the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court. In practice it now means that the senior judges of the Supreme Court select the new judges of the Supreme Court and