person most likely to secure a majority support. The Prime Minister does not have a fixed tenure. He continues in power so long as he remains the leader of the majority party or coalition. The race to become minister is not new. Here is a cartoon depicting ministerial aspirants waiting to get a berth in Nehru s Cabinet after the 1962 elections. Why do you think political leaders are so keen to become ministers? Council of Ministers is the official name for the body that includes all the Ministers. It usually has 60 to 80 Ministers of different ranks. = Cabinet Ministers are usually top level leaders of the ruling party or parties who are in charge of the major ministries. Usually the Cabinet Ministers meet to take decisions in the name of the Shankar. Don t Spare Me ADDITION AND SUBTRACTION WORKING OF INSTITUTIONS Reprint 2025-26 Council of Ministers. Cabinet is thus the inner ring of the Council of Ministers. It comprises about 25 ministers. = Ministers of State with indepen dent charge are usually in-charge of smaller Ministries. They participate in the Cabinet meetings only when specially invited. = Ministers of State are attached to and required to assist Cabinet Ministers. Since it is not practical for all ministers to meet regularly and discuss everything, the decisions are taken in Cabinet meetings. That is why parliamentary democracy in most countries is often known as the Cabinet form of government. The Cabinet works as a team. The ministers may have different views and opinions, but everyone has to own up to every decision of the Cabinet. No minister can openly criticise any decision of the government, even if it is about another Ministry or Department. Every ministry has secretaries, who are civil servants. The secretaries provide the necessary background information to the ministers to take decisions. The Cabinet as a team is assisted by the Cabinet Secretariat. This includes many senior civil servants who try to coordinate the working of different ministries. ACTIVITY = List the names of five Cabinet Ministers and their ministries each at the Union level and in Powers of the Prime Minister The Constitution does not say very much about the powers of the Prime Minister or the ministers or their relationship with each other. But as head of the government, the Prime Minister has wide ranging powers. He chairs Cabinet meetings. He coordinates the work of different Departments. His decisions are final in case disagreements arise between Departments. He exercises general supervision of different ministries. All ministers work under his leadership. The Prime Minister distributes and redistributes work to the ministers. He also has the power to dismiss ministers. When the Prime Minister quits, the entire ministry quits. Thus, if the Cabinet is the most powerful institution in India, within the Cabinet it is the Prime Minister R.K. Laxman, The Times of India who is the most powerful. The powers of the Prime Minister in all parliamentary democracies of the world have increased so