should do on her own: appoint the Prime Minister. When a party or coalition of parties secures a clear majority in the elections, the President, has to appoint the leader of the majority party or the coalition that enjoys majority support in the Lok Sabha. When no party or coalition gets a majority in the Lok Sabha, the President exercises her discretion. The President appoints a leader who in her opinion can muster majority support in the Lok Sabha. In sucha case, the President can ask the newly appointed Prime Minister to prove majority support in the Lok Sabha within a specified time. The Presidential System Presidents all over the world are not always nominal executives like the President of India. In many countries of the world, the President is both the head of the state and the head of the government. The President of the United States of America is the most well known example of this kind of President. The US President is directly elected by the people. He personally chooses and appoints all Ministers. The law making is still done by the legislature (called the Congress in the US), but the president can veto any law. Most importantly, the president does not need the support of the majority of members in the Congress and neither is he answerable to them. He has a fixed tenure of four years and completes it even if his party does not have a majority in the Congress. This model is followed in most of the countries of Latin America and many of the ex-Soviet Union countries. Given the centrality of the President, this system of government is called the Presidential form of government. In countries like ours that follow the British model, the parliament is supreme. Therefore our system is called the parliamentary system of government. Eliamma, Annakutti and Marymol read the section on the President. Each of them had a question. Can you help them in answering these questions? Eliamma: What happens if the President and the Prime Minister disagree about some policy? Does the view of the Prime Minister always prevail? Annakutti: | find it funny that the President is the Supreme Commander of Armed Forces. | doubt if the President can even lift a heavy gun. What is the point in making the President the Com mander? Marymol: | would say, what is the point in having a President at all if all the real powers are with the Prime Minister? What is better for a democracy: A Prime Minister who can do whatever he wishes or a Prime Minister who needs to consult other leaders and parties? CHECK YOUR PROGRESS DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 Itis quite common in the US for judges to be nominated on the basis of well-known political opinions and affiliations. This fictitious advertisement appeared in the US in 2005 when President Bush was considering various candidates for nomination to the US supreme court. What does this cartoon say about the independence of the