established by the then Government with this purpose in view, which submitted its report to the Government of India on 31 December, 1980. . 2: Government have carefully considered the report and the recommendations of the Commission in the present context regarding the benefits to be extended to the socially and educationally backward classes as opined by the Commission and are of the clear view that at the outset certain weightage has to be provided to such classes in the services of the Union and their Public Undertakings. Accordingly orders are issued as follows : SOE fas ake . iT . . pation na ADD tO. vacan Cs O pe Tiled Dp rhe G.I., Dept. of Per. & Trg., O.M. No.36012/22/93-Est. (SCT) dated 8.9.1993 The undersigned is directed to refer to this Department s O.M. No.36012/31/90-Estt. (SCT), dated the 13" August, 1990' and 25'" September, 19917, regarding reservation for Socially and Educationally Backward Classes in Civil Posts and Services under the Government of India and to say that following the Supreme Court judgement in the Indira Sawhney and other v. Union of India and others case [Writ Petition (Civil) No.930 of 1990], the Government of India appointed an Expert Committee to recommend the criteria for exclusion of the socially advanced persons/sections from the benefits of reservations for Other . (ALG } SUBJECT: all der DOSES = )> J 1 WORKING OF INSTITUTIONS 87, Reprint 2025-26 This Order announced a major policy decision. It said that 27 per So, were all these people involved in this decision regarding the Office cent of the vacancies in civil posts Memorandum? Let us find out. and services under the Government of India are reserved for the Socially and Educationally Backward Classes A C TIVITY (SEBC). SEBC is another name for all those people who belong to castes = Which points, other than the ones mentioned that are considered backward by the instituti government. The benefit of job reservation was till then available only to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. Now a new third category called SEBC was introduced. Only Is every Office Memorandum a major political decision? If not, what made this one different? persons who belong to backward classes were eligible for this quota of 27 per cent jobs. Others could not compete for these jobs. The Decision Makers Who decided to issue _ this Memorandum? Clearly, such a big decision could not have been taken by the person who signed that document. The officer was merely implementing the instructions given by the Minister of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions, of which the Department was a part. We can guess that such a major decision would have involved other major functionaries in our country. You have already read in the previous class about some of them. Let us go over some of the main points that you covered then: = President is the head of the state and is the highest formal authority in the country. = Prime Minister is the head of