Electricity: Circuits and their Components a ey R by g RS s BS a Nihal and his classmates were excited for their school trip to the Bhakra Nangal Dam. There they would visit the hydroelectric power house where the force of falling water was used to generate electricity. They also looked forward to the free 13 kilometretrain ride from Nangal in Punjab to Bhakra in Himachal Pradesh, along the beautiful Sutlej river and through the Shivalik hills. Prior to the trip, Nihal and his classmates were given a group assignment to prepare a presentation on the uses of electricity. They began by looking around their houses, then their school, followed by their neighbourhood, their city, and finally they searched the internet. To their astonishment, their list kept growing. They decided to organise the uses under different headings. 0777CHO3 ] | Cooking Lighting Transportation Heating and Cooling Electric kettle, mixer Homes, offices, Train, bus, Fan, room heater, grinder, toaster, streets, markets, cay, scooter, immersion rod, geyser, oven, microwave, factories, lift, escalator, refrigerator, air LS | conditioner, | | Entertainment | Communication | Others Television, | Mobile phone, | | Water pump, radio, Internet, | crane, computer, Can you help Nihal by adding some more uses to his lists? Also, suggest some other ways of grouping the uses of electricity. We use electricity all the time, so let us learn something more about electricity. You have learnt earlier that electricity is generated in multiple ways by windmills, by using wind energy, by solar panels capturing the Sun s energy, by falling water and by using natural gas or coal (in the chapter Nature s Treasures in the Grade 6 Science textbook Curiosity). The electric supply from these sources reaches our homes and factories via wires. For example, at home we plug in various devices to the electrical sockets in the wall. However, to learn about electricity, we will focus on a portable source of electricity that most of us may have used. Let us start with its use in a common device like a torchlight. /\ Caution The danger signs on electric poles and other appliances warn people that electricity can be dangerous if not carefully handled. Never ever perform experiments with power supply at your home or school. Even electricity from portable generators can be dangerous. Use only batteries or cells, like those in torchlights, wall clocks, radios, or remotes, for experiments with electricity. 3.1 A Torchlight [ SSSENSS SS 2-22 oD) You might have used a torchlight, also called a torch or a flashlight. [Activity 3.1: Let us explore | Take a torchlight similar to the one shown in Fig. 3.1. Observe it carefully. Do you notice a lamp? And a switch? Slide its switch and observe. Does the torch lamp glow? Now slide the switch back to its original position and observe the torch lamp. Fig. 3.1: A torchlight You might have noticed that in the first position of the switch, the torch lamp glows and in the other