have also realised that plastic, rubber, and ceramics are electrical insulators. Have you now understood why wires are covered with those materials? Conductors and insulators are both important. Electrical wires, switches, connectors of plugs, and sockets are made of conductors. Insulators like rubber, plastics, and ceramics are used to cover wires, plug tops, and switches to protect people from electric shocks. Caution Our body is a conductor of electricity. Electric current passing through our body may cause severe injury or even death. Always handle electrical appliances with care. Never touch switches or plugs with wet hands, or use electrical devices in wet areas, or handle equipment with damaged insulation or broken plugs. battery is different from the electricity coming from a wall socket? Electricity from batteries usually powers small devices and is of a type called Direct Current (DC). In contrast, the electricity from power plants that come to the wall socket is known as Alternating Current (AC) and can run larger appliances. 4/3/2025 4:51:43 PM In a Nutshell (CSSSENS Sooo An electric cell is a portable source of electrical energy. An electric cell has two terminals; one is called positive (+ve) while the other is negative (ve). In an incandescent electric lamp, there is a thin wire called the filament, which gets hot and glows to produce light when electric current passes through it. An LED has two terminals, one is positive (attached to a longer wire) and the other is negative (the shorter wire). Electric current can pass through LED in one direction only. An LED lights up only when its positive terminal (longer wire) connects to the positive terminal of the battery and its negative terminal (shorter wire) connects to the negative terminal of the battery. A switch is a simple device that either completes or breaks a circuit. The direction of electric current in a closed electrical circuit is taken to be from the positive to the negative terminal of the electric cell. A representation of an electrical circuit using symbols is called its circuit diagram. Materials through which electric current can flow easily are called good conductors or conductors of electricity. Materials through which current cannot pass through are called insulators or poor conductors of electricity. >, ~ >, ~ >, ~ >, ~ >, ~ >, ~ Electricity: Circuits and their Components >, ~ >, >, ~ ~ >, ~ Let Us Enhance Our Learning (WELLE hel 1. Choose the incorrect statement. (i) A switch is the source of electric current in a circuit. (ii) A switch helps to complete or break the circuit. (iii) Aswitchhelps us to use electricity as per our requirement. (iv) When the switch is in OFF position, there is an air gap between its terminals. 2. Observe Fig. 3.16. With which material connected between the ends A and B, the lamp will not glow? Fig. 3.16 Chapter 3.indd 37 4/3/2025 4:51:45 PM 3. In Fig. 3.17, if the filament of one of the lamps is broken, will the other