use electrical tape to attach two wires to the two ends of the lamp (Fig. 3.8c). / \ (a) (b) (c) Fig. 3.8: (a) An electric lamp holder with wires attached (b) An incandescent lamp inside the lamp holder (c) Wires connected to incandescent torch lamp with electrical tape Now, we are ready to connect the cell to the lamp to make it glow. + We will conduct this activity in two parts prediction and observation. Some of the ways in which the lamp and the cell can be connected are shown in Table 3.1. e Predict, for each arrangement, if the lamp will glow or not and write your prediction in Table 3.1. e Now, connect the lamp and the cell, and observe if the lamp glows or not. Note down your observation in Table 3.1. Also, for the lamps which glow, colour their glass bulbs yellow. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 Chapter 3.indd 28 4/3/2025 4:51:30 PM Table 3.1: Trying to make the lamp glow Note: The lamps are not shown glowing in any circuit S.No. Arrangement of Cell and Lamp Prediction Observation 1. i] < a < a. E U = a = Ss < Ls] 4] i ) = U s 2 ho Sd uu a Ww Chapter 3.indd 29 4/3/2025 4:51:31 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 Chapter 3.indd 30 The lamp glows in the arrangements at S.No. 1 and 6 and does not glow in the remaining arrangements. Now, carefully look at the arrangements in which the lamp glows. Compare these with those in which the lamp does not glow. Can you find the reason for the difference? 3.2.5 An electrical circuit The lamp glows when one terminal of the lamp is connected to one terminal of the electric cell and the other terminal of the lamp to the other terminal of the cell as shown in Fig. 3.9. This setup forms an electrical circuit, which provides a complete path for electric current to flow through the lamp. The lamp glows only when current passes through the circuit. The direction of electric current in an electrical circuit is taken to be from the positive to the negative terminal of the electric cell. When the terminals of the lamp are connected with those of the electric cell by wires, the current passes through the filament of the incandescent lamp and makes it glow. With an incandescent lamp, it does not matter which of its terminals connects to the positive or negative terminal of the cell. The lamp will glow as long as Fig. 3.9: Anelectrical circuit the circuit is complete and current flows through the filament. FASCINATING FACTS Sometimes, an incandescent lamp does not glow even when = connected to a cell. We say the lamp has fused usually due to a broken filament. A broken filament stops the flow of current, preventing the lamp from glowing. Let us now try to make an LED glow. | Activity 3.7: