the correct word given within the brackets. The tone is (sad and serious/gentle and wishful) and the mood is (thoughtful/boring). V Identify the examples of alliteration from the poem. V = Fill in the blanks with suitable words from the poem. 1. The repetition of words and emphasises the passage of time. 2. The poet uses imagery like and to create a clear picture in the minds of the readers. \ do-mahdd 24909 PM | Poorvi VII Match the descriptions in Column 1 with what they symbolise in Column 2. 1. the child's innocence, (i) midnight stars dreams, hopes, and messages sent out into the world 2. purity, beauty, and the (ii) paper boats start of a new day 3. the vast universe and (iii) shiuli flowers the child's dreams continuing through the night Let us think and reflect I Read the extract given below and answer the questions that follow. 1. When night comes I bury my face in my arms and dream that my paper boats float on and on under the midnight stars. The fairies of sleep are sailing in them, and the lading is their baskets full of dreams. (i) Select the option that is most likely to be the speaker as per the extract. v (ii) What can be inferred about the speaker s feelings when night comes? (iii) What kind of beings are the fairies of sleep imagined as? Select the most appropriate option. A. mischievous _ B. gentle C. fearsome D. playful & | Unit 3.indd 112 06-Mar-25 2:49:03 PM y DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES (iv) Fill in the blank by selecting the correct option from those given in the brackets. The phrase lading is their baskets full of dreams suggests that the speaker imagines the fairies of sleep carefully (carrying his dreams /collecting his wishes) in their baskets. II Answer the following questions. 1. Why do you think the poet writes his personal details on the paper boats? 2. The poet talks about the imagination of a child. Support this view with examples from the poem. 3. How does the poet bring together imagination and reality to make the poem more interesting? Let us learn I The poet has used phrases like blooms of the dawn and fairies of sleep in the poem. In the same way we can create phrases. Now, select words from Column 1 and Column 2 and combine them with of . Write as many phrases as possible in Column 3. An example has been done for you. a wings of the wind vid e glimmers go II The poet uses words like dawn , night and midnight to show different parts of the day. The box given below has some more words. Write the words in the appropriate columns. twilight dawn dusk sunrise noon daybreak ' nightfall sunset midnight sunup forenoon sundown ' noontime night-time noonday midday e eee ee Afternoon \ III Match the words from the text given in Column 1 with their opposites in Column