2:48:55 PM | g II Read the highlighted phrase in the following sentence from the text. Well, that was the end of peace and quiet in the house. The highlighted phrase displays a combination of two words generally used together in a fixed order. Such phrases are called binomials. Binomials are expressions consisting of two words, usually linked by a conjunction such as and or or that are commonly used together in a fixed order. The two words convey a single meaning or an opposite. 1. Match the words in Column 1 with the correct pairs in Column 2 to make binomials. (v) now 2. Complete the following sentences with suitable binomials from 1. W (i) This project will be a moment for our team s success. (ii) After a long journey, we were relieved to arrive home (iii) Every friendship works well when there is a balance of (iv) She organised all the in the cupboard, to make space for new clothes. (v) Before making a decision, it is important to weigh the carefully. (vi) This is our final chance to perform on stage, it is 3. Complete the paragraph by using the phrasal verbs given in the box below. ~ =| =| KH Ke Ke HK He MK HK HK eK Ke eK eK eK eK eK Ke Ke ee eK ee eK Ke ee ee ee eK Ke eK eK eK KH KH eK KH 06-Mar-25 2:48:56 PM A DREAMS AND Discov! It had been raining and we (i) time to set up for the function, so we quickly (ii) some decorations using whatever materials we had. We accidentally (iii) the fire alarm because of the smoke from the bonfire. Thankfully, the rain (iv) just as the guests were arriving, and despite all the chaos, the function (v) to be a huge success. III Read the highlighted expressions in the following sentence from the text. And this is not the first time he s got on Papa s nerves or frightened someone half to death in the house. The highlighted expressions are called idioms. An idiom is a phrase or expression that has a meaning different from the literal meaning of the individual words. It is like a special saying that people understand in a specific way. For example, It is rai cats and dogs means it s raining very Heel ? . Complete the following sentences by filling in the blanks with suitable idioms from the text given in the box below. leaving the coast clear get our nerves fell over ourselves | frighten me half to death getashelling = 1. Shekhar knew he would for breaking his mother s favourite flower vase. 2. We trying to help the injured dog and get it to the vet as quickly as possible. 3. Faizy distracted Kanchan, for us to get inside the room to prepare the birthday surprise. 4. The constant power fluctuations during meetings can 5. When I am alone at home, any unexpected loud noise