from fear to comfort B. from courage to confidence C. from doubt to clarity D. from fascination to delight (iv) Fill in the blanks with the correct option from those given in the brackets. The speaker s wish to share the experience of touring the plateaus with others indicates her (ability to communicate/sense of connection) as well as the value she placeson__ (shared experiences/updating information) with her peers. II Answer the following questions. 1. Shaana mentions that she used to be afraid of tunnels. What could have been the most likely reason for her to be scared of tunnels? . Do you think Shaana s Appa and Amma enjoyed themselves, just like children do? Support your answer with evidence from the text. . Shaana mentions less snow in the glaciers and more flooding in the Sundarbans. Explain what these observations indicate. . Shaana s visits to different parts of the country highlight the diversity of India s geography. Support this statement with evidence from the text. . How does Shaana use language to convey her excitement, curiosity, and sometimes her fears about the places she visits? . What might Shaana have learnt from her travels across India? How would it impact her understanding of the country? . What could be the author s purpose of presenting the text in the form of postcards? \ d-mahdg 2:49:21 PM | eS Let us learn I Read the words from the text given in Column 1 and match them with suitable pictures in Column 2. Column 1 Column 2 1. glaciers (i) 2. treehouse (ii) p 3. wetlands (iii) 4. plateaus (iv) 5. pebbles (v) 6. rafting (vi) Za 06-Mar-25 2:49:23 PM DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES II Read the situations given in Column 1. Choose the associated words from the text given in the box below and write them in Column 2. An example has been done for you. 1. Inthe middle of the night, the little boy heard a loud scary noise. He felt so afraid that he couldn t sleep. 2. There used to be a bookstore near my house. But it is now shifted to the town. 3. The flashes of light from the car made her suddenly close and open her eyes several times. 4. The children jumped into the pool and threw water at each other with loud noises. My grandmother s place is so beautiful with all green paddy fields and palm trees. It was a great experience. 6. When I looked up at the sky, the clouds were not staying at one place. They were moving across the sky. II The following word grid has six words related to travel used in the lesson. Circle the words in the grid. You can search horizontally and vertically. The last letter of each word has been highlighted. Unit 3.indd 129 | my 25 2:49:24 PM (J IV Read the following sentences from the text and underline the subject and the verb. 1. Amma and Appa are fast asleep. \