Unit 3.indd 91 My BRoTHER S GREAT INVENTION Let us do these activities before we read. I Work in pairs and guess the invention. 1. Iam a concept invented by ancient Indian mathematicians. I add value to numbers. Without me, calculations in the modern digital world would be impossible. Who am I? 2. Iam an ancient Indian practice, now popular globally. I focus on physical and mental well-being. What am I? II Discuss in groups of four what you think the world today would have been like without inventions and discoveries. III Fill the grid given below with missing letters to complete the words. These words display qualities of an inventor. 0773CHO3 06-Mar-25 2:48:47 PM Poorvi racket: a loud and disturbing noise sopping: soaking scowling: having an angry or frowning expression rigged up: assembled something temporarily tinkering: experimenting or fiddling dynamos: electric generator Let us read I Who put that water bag here? roared my father from the front doorstep. Your burglar alarm, I hissed to my brother Anand, who was getting ready to disappear from the house. Ma rushed in to see what the racket was all about and found Papa standing there, sopping wet and scowling. IT want to know who is behind this nonsense, Papa said grimly. I think it s supposed to be a burglar alarm, Ma said, in a soothing voice. IT don t care what it s supposed to be, Papa said. Where s that boy? I m sure he rigged this up. Anand had vanished by this time and reappeared only after dinner when Papa had cooled down. Before this story, let me put you in the picture. I am Anita, fourteen years old. My brother Anand, one year younger than me, caused all that hoo-ha with his burglar alarm. And this is not the first time he s got on Papa s nerves or frightened someone half to death in the house. The trouble with him is that he thinks he is a scientist. He loves tinkering with all sorts of electrical gadgets, tools, dynamos, planks of wood, and things like that. And he keeps creating inventions that never work out as they are supposed to. Recently there had been a rush of thefts in the colony and Anand had got it into his head that what was needed was a burglar alarm. So, the minute Papa left for the office and Ma for the market, he started on his latest scheme. As usual I had to be involved, though I d have preferred to finish my novel. If you get a shelling, don t bring me in, I warned Anand. Nothing will go wrong this time. I ve planned it out carefully. See the blueprint. 06-Mar-25 2:48:48 PM Unit 3.indd 93 Anand loves words like blueprint it makes him feel professional! Anyway, I looked at the elaborate drawing of doors, wires, and bells and asked, How does this thing work? It s quite simple. The moment the door opens, this alarm