wings of the wind vid e glimmers go II The poet uses words like dawn , night and midnight to show different parts of the day. The box given below has some more words. Write the words in the appropriate columns. twilight dawn dusk sunrise noon daybreak ' nightfall sunset midnight sunup forenoon sundown ' noontime night-time noonday midday e eee ee Afternoon \ III Match the words from the text given in Column 1 with their opposites in Column 2. . stran C, Gi) halt 2. a) (ii) emptying ey (iii) sink . bulging (iv) dusk 5. float (v) ordinary ) 6. lading (vi) shrinking Let us listen You will listen to a conversation between a girl and her father about the art of paper folding called origami. As you listen, select the true statements from 1-7. (Transcript for the teacher on pg. 137) Ro % | Unit 3.indd 114 06-Mar-25 2:49:03 PM DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES . Sai was trying to make an origami boat. . Sai s father used to do origami as a child. . Paper was very expensive so it was used only for special occasions. . People have been making paper cranes for thousands of years. ao FF wo Dd . There is a belief that if you make a thousand paper cranes, your wish will come true. [op) . The art of origami is about enjoying the process. 7. Sai s father suggests making a paper bookmark next time. Let us speak Create any craft item using eco-friendly materials. Make a presentation in front of your classmates and teacher about the craft item you have made. Your presentation should include the following information: Introduction of the item Description of how you made it Reason why you like the craft * Conclusion Use the phrases given below to make your presentation. Today, I m going to show you a... I made. e This... is made of... (materials) It s... (describe colour, shape, size) It can be used to... First, I started by... Then, I used... (tool or material) to... * The most difficult part was to... This... is special to me because... I hope you enjoyed seeing my craft and learning about it. Thank you for your attention. \ \ Unit 3.indd 115 d-mahdg 2:49:04 PM | \ Poorvi Let us write A diary entry is a personal document. It records an individual s account of a day of her or his life expressing the thoughts, feelings and opinions in the individual s mind. The guidelines to compose a diary entry include: * mentioning day, date and time of writing it * beginning with a general sentence describing the day or feelings towards an event or experience * giving details * concluding with a final remark Now, write a diary entry expressing your joy experiencing a rainy day. You may begin as given below: Friday, 15 July 20XX 6:30 p.m. Dear Diary, It was quite humid today. On my journey back from school, I wished