1. Thajiwas glacier, Kashmir | white and blue glaciers; throwing snowballs walking through a thick forest to reach the tree house floating and looking at the fish; Appa and Amma went for a dive Unit 3.indd 125 Let us think and reflect I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow. 1. Amma tells me that places like the Sundarbans are called wetlands. Inever knew such a place existed, and that it was possible for trees called mangroves to grow in seawater! But Amma is sad about how much this place floods today. We also saw crocodiles and a lonely snake while boating. I hope they don t follow us home. How is everyone? Are you missing me yet? (i) What feeling does Shaana most likely experience when she says, I never knew such a place existed... ? A. pride B. hope C. relief D. wonder (ii) Complete the following sentence with a suitable reason. Amma is sad about the frequent flooding in Sundarbans because ___ (iii) Select the evidence from the text that reflects a feeling of the speaker s slight nervousness. (iv) Select the option that applies to both the Assertion and the Reason. Assertion: The speaker is missing her friends. Reason : The speaker wishes to know the well-being of her friends. A. Both the assertion and the reason are true, and the reason correctly explains the assertion. B. Both the assertion and the reason are true, but the reason does not correctly explain the assertion. C. The assertion is true, but the reason is false. D. Both the assertion and the reason are false. 2. Amma and Appa are fast asleep, and I should be sleeping too, but I just love looking out of the window. I think we re in the southwest part of the country, in Goa, and you won t believe how nice the plateaus look. There are so many hills here, and beaches too. Unit 3.indd 126 06-Mar-25 2:49:21 PM Unit 3.indd 127 DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES There are also a lot of tunnels that the train goes through. I used to be afraid of tunnels, but m not any more. Someday, I wish we could all go ona tour of the plateaus. (i) Complete the sentence with a suitable reason. The speaker chooses to stay awake because (ii) What does the speaker mean by saying, You won t believe how nice the plateaus look ? (iii) What has been the change in the speaker s attitude towards tunnels? A. from fear to comfort B. from courage to confidence C. from doubt to clarity D. from fascination to delight (iv) Fill in the blanks with the correct option from those given in the brackets. The speaker s wish to share the experience of touring the plateaus with others indicates her (ability to communicate/sense of connection) as well as the value she placeson__ (shared experiences/updating information) with her peers. II Answer the following questions. 1. Shaana mentions that she used to