for Anand, he is convinced that he is a genius and has launched a new project something about a telephone to contact creatures in outer space. Tell you all about it next time. Anita Rau BADAMI Let us discuss Arrange the following events in the correct order of occurrence. 1. The door swings open, and they see Boppa, standing there with an evil grin. 2. Boppa is nowhere to be found, but his green scarf is lying near the time machine. 3. Mrs. Sharma, her husband, and Dr. Mohan unlock the door and enter the house to help the children. 4. Anita wakes Anand up, informing him that someone is trying to get into the house. 5. Anand misleads Boppa into entering his room instead of his father s room. 06-Mar-25 2:48:54 PM DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES Let us think and reflect I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow. 1. Before beginning this story, let me put you in the picture. Iam Anita, fourteen years old. My brother Anand, one year younger than me, caused all that hoo-ha with his burglar alarm. The trouble with him is that he thinks he is a scientist. He loves tinkering with all sorts of electrical gadgets, tools, dynamos, planks of wood, and things like that. And he keeps creating inventions that never work out as they are supposed to. (i) Complete the following sentence suitably by choosing the correct option from those given in the brackets. When Anita says, ...let me put you in the picture , she wants to ___ (introduce/summarise) the situation for the benefit of the readers. (ii) Anand loves tinkering with all sorts of electrical gadgets. This means that he enjoys gadgets. A. dismantling and creating B. labelling or naming C. repairing or improving _ D. collecting and displaying (iii) Which of the following options most suitably describes Anand s personality? A. methodical and cautious B. creative and experimental C. energetic and hasty D. shy and reserved (iv) Based on the extract, compare what Anita thinks of her brother Anand with what he thinks of himself. 2. I was about to direct him upstairs, when Anand said quickly, The one next to this one. You silly goose! I said angrily as soon as the man had gone. That s your room. He ll come back as mad as mad can be. At least it will give us some time to think of something, Anand said. He'll take a while to locate the light switch. Let s shout. All of a sudden there was a crash followed by a loud scream. More strange noises emerged from the next room a few muffled thumps, an eerie whine, and a low, humming sound. (i) Complete the sentence given below with a suitable reason. Anita was angry with Anand because _ (ii) Which action of Anand shows his presence of mind? \ \ Unit 3.indd 99 d-mahdg 2:48:55 PM. | Poorvi (iii) What might be the cause of the