that you see around or you are currently studying. For example: electrician, mechanic, chef, nurse, graphic designer. You may add more vocations to the list given here. | Unit 3.indd 106 06-Mar-25 2:48:59 PM DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES Now, choose a vocation and write a paragraph. You may use the hints given below. why you like this vocation what training is needed what tools and equipment are required who would your co-workers be * highlight the importance of team work how you would deal with the customers how you plan to pursue it with a sense of pride Human beings are naturally very curious and creative, and this has led to many scientific and technological inventions. You must have heard about many famous inventions. Some of them are mentioned below. You may look for the names of more such Indian inventors and their inventions. Sushruta (sixth century B.C.), was a ~~ pioneer figure in medical science. His innovations in surgery paved the way for modern surgery. Unit 3.indd 107 Unit 3.indd 108 Poorvi Dr. Janaki Ammal (Padma Shri) was a brilliant woman scientist of India who made a significant contribution to the field of cytogenetics. * Under the directorship of Dr. A.PJ. Abdul Kalam (Bharat Ratna), Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) launched the satellite Rohini in near-earth orbit with India s first Satellite Launch Vehicle in 1980 (the project was named SLV-III ). " Dr. Narinder Singh Kapany (Padma Vibhushan) is known as Father of Fibre Optics. He played a pivotal role in inventing fibre optics. He was named one of the seven Unsung Heroes of the Twentieth Century for his ~ invention. /\ 06-Mar-25 2:49:02 PM Unit 3.indd 109 Paper Boats Let us do these activities before we read. I Read the questions given below. Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher. 1. What comes to mind when you think about paper boats ? 2. What do you think someone might hope for when they send a paper boat down a stream? 3. Read the title of the poem Paper Boats and predict what the poem might be about. II Read the given paragraph and match the highlighted words with their meanings given in the box below. I love to play beside a 1. running stream at a short distance from my grandparent s house. I love to see it 2. skipping along to join a river. On the river, I can see boats with 3. bulging sails moving swiftly. Some of them take the people from one shore to the other while in some of them people can be seen 4. lading things too. I can spend hours watching the busy river and dreaming about them, 5. burying my head in my pillow at night. Yo 06-Mar-25 2:49:02 PM |] unit 3.indd 110 Poorvi S == Let us read Day by day I float my paper boats one by one down the running stream. In big black letters I write my name on them and the name