shore to the other while in some of them people can be seen 4. lading things too. I can spend hours watching the busy river and dreaming about them, 5. burying my head in my pillow at night. Yo 06-Mar-25 2:49:02 PM |] unit 3.indd 110 Poorvi S == Let us read Day by day I float my paper boats one by one down the running stream. In big black letters I write my name on them and the name of the village where I live. I hope that someone in some strange land will find them and know who I am. I load my little boats with shiuli flower from our garden, and hope that these blooms of the dawn will be carried safely to land in the night. Ilaunch my paper boats and look up into the sky and see the little clouds setting the white bulging sails. I know not what playmate of mine in the sky sends them down the air to race with my boats! When night comes I bury my face in my arms and dream that my paper boats float on and on under the midnight stars. The fairies of sleep are sailing in them, and the lading is their baskets full of dreams. RABINDRANATH TAGORE Unit 3.indd 111 DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES Let us discuss I Choose the correct words from the brackets to complete the summary of the poem given below. The poet sends paper boats down a 1. (stream/river) each day, writing his name and the name of his 2. __ (school/ village) on them. He hopes thatsomeoneina3.__ (strange/familiar) land will find them and know who he is. The poet fills his boats with 4. (rose/shiuli) flowers from his garden, hoping they will be safely carried to another land at 5. (night/morning). As he launches his boats, he imagines that the 6. (clouds/birds) in the sky are like friends, racing with his boats. At night, he dreams that his paper boats continue to 7. (swim/float) under the midnight stars, with the fairies of sleep sailing in them, their baskets fullof8.__- (dreams/fruits). I -_ Choose the correct option for the following. The theme of the poem is 1. innocence 2. imagination 3. ignorance 4. playfulness 5. travel (i) 1, 2 and 3 Gi) 3,4 and 5 Gii) 1,4 and 5 (iv) 1,2 and 4 II -_ Identify whether the following statement is true or false. The setting of the poem is a natural, outdoor environment. IV Complete the following sentence by choosing the correct word given within the brackets. The tone is (sad and serious/gentle and wishful) and the mood is (thoughtful/boring). V Identify the examples of alliteration from the poem. V = Fill in the blanks with suitable words from the poem. 1. The repetition of words and emphasises the passage of time. 2. The poet uses imagery like and to create a clear picture in the minds of the readers. \ do-mahdd 24909 PM | Poorvi VII Match the descriptions