Gujarat and is also on the World Heritage list by UNESCO. Stepwells are a distinctive form of water resource and storage systems on the Indian subcontinent, and were constructed during ancient times. They evolved over time from what was basically a pit in sandy soil towards elaborate multi-storey . Rani-ki-V works of art and architecture. Source. UNESCO Now, find out about the unique places in your village, region or state and share the details with your classmates and the teacher. Il The Hornbill festival is a unique festival that is held annually in the Kisama village near Kohima, the capital of Nagaland. In groups of four, find out about this festival when it is held, who participates in it, what its purpose is, what events are held, etc. Share your findings with your classmates and the teacher. TRANSCRIPTS Let us listen (refer to page 105) I You will listen to a conversation between Anita and Toby. Toby is a Martian and is stranded on Earth. He has become Anita s friend. As you listen, choose the true statements from 1-5. Anita : Hi, Toby! Do you miss your planet? Topsy : Very much, Anita! I miss my people and home. Anita : Oh! I wish I could do something about it! But Iam happy to have you as my friend. Tosy : Thank you, Anita! Anita : Er... could you tell me something more about yourself? Tosy : Why not! What do you want to know about me, Anita? Anita : What do you eat for breakfast? Tosy : Well, we Martians don t need to eat anything. We get our energy from the Sun. Anita: Oh! Don t you ever feel like having ice creams and chocolates? I can t think of life without them! Tosy : No, Anita! We are made of different stuff. Anita : Okay, tell me one thing. How are you able to see with only one eye? I see only one big eye in the centre of your face. Tosy : My friend, we Martians need only one eye to see clearly. In fact, I can see even with my eye closed. I can see beyond mountains and clouds, wood and even metals. I can see that you are carrying a toy in your pocket. It s a blue aeroplane. Isn t it? And yes! That apple you just had for breakfast is going round-and-round in your stomach right now! Anita : (gasps in disbelief) Oh my goodness! II Listen to the conversation again and fill in the blanks with the exact words you hear. 06-Mar-25 2:49:26 PM DREAMS AND Discov Let us listen (refer to page 114) You will listen to a conversation between a girl and her father about the art of paper folding called origami. As you listen, select the true statements from 1-7. Fatuer : Sai dear! What are you working on there with all that paper? Sar: Baba, I am trying to make an origami crane, but it s