s shout. All of a sudden there was a crash followed by a loud scream. More strange noises emerged from the next room a few muffled thumps, an eerie whine, and a low, humming sound. (i) Complete the sentence given below with a suitable reason. Anita was angry with Anand because _ (ii) Which action of Anand shows his presence of mind? \ \ Unit 3.indd 99 d-mahdg 2:48:55 PM. | Poorvi (iii) What might be the cause of the strange noises emerging from the next room? A. The intruder moving furniture around B. Anand s time machine getting activated C. The intruder locating the light switch D. Anand s invention malfunctioning (iv) Which of the following best describes the atmosphere in this extract? A. relaxing B. peaceful C. tense D. sad E. suspenseful F. joyful (a) A,DandE (b) BandF (c) CandE (d) OnlyD II Complete the table with the suitable traits of the characters based on evidence from the text. Choose the traits given in the box below. An example has been done for you. 06-Mar-25 2:48:55 PM Unit 3.indd 101 III Answer the following questions. ao FW DY & time machine? DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES . What prompted Anand to create the burglar alarm? . How did Anand s father become the target of the burglar alarm? . How did Anand s parents and sister react to his ideas? . How did Anand behave when he was on his inventing binges ? . Why did Mr. Sharma not believe Anand when he spoke about his 6. Give an ending to this story, explaining what might have happened to _ Boppa. Let us learn I Read the highlighted word in the following sentence. It s quite simple. The moment the door opens, this alarm is tripped offand makes a clanging sound. Such sound words are called onomatopoeic words. Onomatopoeia is the use of words that imitate actual sounds of the thing they describe. The boom of a firework exploding, the ding-dong of a bell, the pitter-patter of rain drops, the tick-tock of a clock are all examples of onomatopoeia. 1. Read the sound words used in the story in Column 1. Complete Column 2 by matching expressions from the box given below. An example has been done for you. whispered angrily constant and loud construction noises sudden loud sound of breaking t I I I I I | a continuous low and soothing sound (i) Crash sudden loud sound of breaking a a (iv) Hammering, sawing, clattering 0i6-Mary3 vi \R 2:48:55 PM | g II Read the highlighted phrase in the following sentence from the text. Well, that was the end of peace and quiet in the house. The highlighted phrase displays a combination of two words generally used together in a fixed order. Such phrases are called binomials. Binomials are expressions consisting of two words, usually linked by a conjunction such as and or or that are commonly used together in a fixed order. The two words convey a