a good thing I was there to control them. < surf: (here) (s The beaches here are not like the ones wehave _ on our island. The waves are a lot rougher and , the water is browner, but I still like it here. @ i Your best friend, e Shaana \) 22 June 20XX Q, y Hi everyone, ( (* I just crossed the Pamban bridge. ( r , | could see the ocean on both sides. How amazing )( that a train can travel across the sea like this! od ( ( ad e I m almost home, and I can t wait to give you my final letter in person. . ( Lovd Shaana a, ee ea e o_ e e e & e e e e e =) \ Unit 3.indd 123 d-mahdg 2:49:19 PM | | Unit 3.indd 124 & Poorvi dive: (here) swim underwater with special breathing equipment; (past tense: dove) pebbles: small, smooth stones mR 24 June 20XX Dear classmates, I thought Amma and Appa would be tired from all our travelling, but we made one last stop at the Olaikaadu beach before we reached home. And I m so happy we did. Amma wanted to teach me how to dive, but they did not have diving suits my size, so I spent the day floating and looking at the fish while my parents dove below me. We found all sorts of pebbles on the beach, and I can t wait to give them to you in person tomorrow. Your best friend, Shaana 06-Mar-25 2:49:20 PM DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES f ( tol 25 June 20XX Dear Amma and Appa, Gro GNo I can t believe we travelled across the whole country! I know we're going to miss visiting the forests, glaciers, deserts, wetlands, plateaus, and mountains. And we are going to miss hearing all those new languages and meeting all those different people. But we re finally home now, and we can join our friends again. Tp? SN0 Gyo GN Gyo NTIS TOS I hope we get to travel like this again, and maybe next time we can take our friends with us. With love, = ofaana Lac octse OI CL OD noo eco Lo NOLO eee @ oO GO ts C.G. SALAMANDER (Excerpts from North, South, East, West) Let us discuss Complete the table given below based on Shaana s postcards. An example has been done for you. Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher. Interes ting Descriptions and Activities 1. Thajiwas glacier, Kashmir | white and blue glaciers; throwing snowballs walking through a thick forest to reach the tree house floating and looking at the fish; Appa and Amma went for a dive Unit 3.indd 125 Let us think and reflect I Read the extracts given below and answer the questions that follow. 1. Amma tells me that places like the Sundarbans are called wetlands. Inever knew such a place existed, and that it was possible for trees called