e e e e e e e .) e e@ e 7 June 20XX VA \ Dear class, Today was the best day ever! We drove east from the x > desert to the Narmada river, which flows allthe way to the centre of India, and it only took us six hours. In the eee afternoon, Amma, Appa, and I went rafting in the river the sport of ; . . travelling down 2nd you won t believe how wild and scary it was. always , ariver in an thought rivers were calm, but up close they re really fast. . air-filedrubber Appa says that there used to be a lot more water, and e boat rafting was much scarier then. e I was fully wet by the time I was done, and Appa was * so scared that he decided never to go rafting ever again. * I love the water so much and can t wait to go back. A Your best friend, 7. . Shaana P co e e e Py e @ e r e e e @ e e o ee oW%eVeoVeWe oe Ve We oe We We We O 12 June 20xx e Dear classmates, 8. Amma and Appa are fast asleep, and I should be sleeping .\. too, but I just love looking out of the window. I think we re in the southwest part of the country, in Goa, and you won t 2. believe how nice the plateaus look. There are so many hills here, and beaches too. Q. 0. Q. Q. There are also a lot of tunnels that the Q train goes through. I used to be afraid of tunnels, but I m not any more. Someday, R. I wish we could all go on a tour of the plateaus. Maybe when we're in Class 11. Q. e e e e Love, e Shaana 1 RY & | Unit 3.indd 122 06-Mar-25 2:49:18 PM DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES e? 17 June 20XX ? Dear friends, * Tcan t believe we re in the same state again! We travelled ; ; south, and I will be home soon. ELSIE. GGL that involves We reached Chennai yesterday, and on the way to standingona Puducherry, we decided to learn how to surf. I think 'm_!0ng lightweight * sood at it now because I only fell down twice. Amma and 0ard and } Appa splashed water on each other and behaved like "484 wave to t ) ; ; the seash children. It s a good thing I was there to control them. < surf: (here) (s The beaches here are not like the ones wehave _ on our island. The waves are a lot rougher and , the water is browner, but I still like it here. @ i Your best friend, e Shaana \) 22 June 20XX Q, y Hi everyone, ( (* I just crossed the Pamban bridge. ( r , | could see the ocean on both sides. How amazing