get our nerves fell over ourselves | frighten me half to death getashelling = 1. Shekhar knew he would for breaking his mother s favourite flower vase. 2. We trying to help the injured dog and get it to the vet as quickly as possible. 3. Faizy distracted Kanchan, for us to get inside the room to prepare the birthday surprise. 4. The constant power fluctuations during meetings can 5. When I am alone at home, any unexpected loud noise in the night can IV Read the highlighted words in the given sentence. It was indeed the fellow who had recently begun sweeping out the compounds in our row of houses. Here we refer to two completed actions the recent past (new action) and the later past (old action). SSN Unit 3.indd 103 Poorvi 1. Underline the verbs in simple past and past perfect tense for the following sentences from the text. (i) Ma had rushed in to see what the racket was all about and found Papa standing there, sopping wet and scowling. (ii) Anand had vanished by this time and reappeared only after dinner when Papa had cooled down. 2. Fill in the blanks with the simple past or past perfect form of the verbs given in brackets. (i) After Rohan A. (finish) his homework, he B. (decide) to go for a walk. He C. (leave) the house and D. (realise) he E. (forget) his keys inside. (ii) By the time we A. __ (reach) the station, the train B. (already/leave). We C. (wait) for the next one to arrive. 3. Combine the pairs of sentences using the time expressions in the boxes given below and rewrite them using the past perfect tenses. An example has been done for you. Example: Rohan had packed his suitcase before he left for the airport. Old Actions Time Expressions New Actions (i) Rohan packed his . He left for the airport. suitcase. (ii) We started work. ets STENT a tine morning. before, after, by the time, when (iii) They set up the The others brought tents. (iv) The students became quiet. (v) The villagers left the village. | Unit 3.indd 104 food and medicine. They heard the teacher coming. The flood submerged the entire area. 06-Mar-25 2:48:57 PM Unit 3.indd 105 DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES Let us listen I You will listen to a conversation between Anita and Toby. Toby is a Martian and is stranded on Earth. He has become Anita s friend. As you listen, choose the true statements from 1-5 given below. (Transcript for the teacher on pg. 136) 1. ao F WO WD Toby misses his school. . Anita accepts Toby as her friend. . Anita asks Toby about one of his facial features. . Toby tells Anita that she had a banana for breakfast. . Toby shares that he can see much clearer with a closed eye. II Listen to the conversation again and fill in the blanks with the exact words you hear. 1. 2. Toby: