and fill in the blanks with the exact words you hear. 06-Mar-25 2:49:26 PM DREAMS AND Discov Let us listen (refer to page 114) You will listen to a conversation between a girl and her father about the art of paper folding called origami. As you listen, select the true statements from 1-7. Fatuer : Sai dear! What are you working on there with all that paper? Sar: Baba, I am trying to make an origami crane, but it s a bit tricky. I keep messing up the folds. Fatuer : Ah, origami! I remember doing that when I was your age. You know, Sai, origami has a really interesting history. Sar: Really? I thought it was just something fun to do with paper. Fatuer : It is fun, but it s also an age-old art form. Origami started in Japan over a thousand years ago. Back then, paper was really expensive, so it was only used for special occasions, like religious ceremonies. Sar: Wow, I didn t know that. So, it wasn t just for doing crafts? Fatuer : It wasn t until the seventeenth century that people began making animals, flowers and other designs just for fun. Sal :So, people have been making paper cranes for hundreds of years? Fatuer : Yes, and the crane is especially important in Japanese culture. It s a symbol of peace and long life. There s even a belief that if you fold a thousand paper cranes, you can make a wish, and it will come true. Sar :Athousand cranes? That s a lot! But it sounds like a really nice tradition. Fatuer : It is. Origami isn t just about the final shape it s about the process, the patience and the creativity involved. And over the years, it s spread all over the world, with people adding their own styles and techniques. Sal :I had no idea origami had such a long history. It makes folding this crane feel even more special. Fatuer: I m glad you think so, Sai. Perhaps we can start with something simpler next time. How about we make an Unit 3.indd 137 origami paper boat next? It s easier, and we can float it in the stream outside. Sat :A boat sounds awesome! Let s do it! But first, I want to finish this crane. Can you help me with the last few steps? Fatuer: Of course! Let s finish this crane together. After that, we'll sail our paper boat. Let us listen (refer to page 131) You will listen to a girl speak about the story of how Agartala got its name and the importance of agar. As you listen, choose the correct option for the questions given below. Hi everyone, We all know that Agartala is the capital of Tripura. But did you know how Agartala got its name? It s made up of two words: agar , which is a type of tree, and tala , meaning underneath. So, Agartala means under