and bulbs. There was an enormous panel which was to be control switchboard. As for Anand, he went around looking like a savage. When Ma didn t notice, the fellow didn t even comb his hair. Anand just wouldn t let anyone into his room. Finally, after a frantic: fortnight of frantic activity, the time machine was ready. We Larmucetesl uve can try it out tonight, Anand announced to everyone at home disorganised at lunch time. T don t know what you ve been up to in that room, but you re not trying out anything new, Papa said firmly. But it s a time machine! I ve invented it, Anand protested. When I say NO, I mean NO, Papa said, glaring. crestfallen Poor boy, Ma said noticing Anand s crestfallen look. look: sad and , disappointed At least let s take a look at it. appearance Papa sighed. All right, but if the house falls, it s your fault. As it turned out, we could not try out the time machine that day at all. The next day, Papa and Ma were going to Kharagpur, a few hours away from Calcutta (now Kolkata), for a wedding. Ma was worried about leaving us alone, but we reassured her. We re old enough to look after ourselves, Ma, I said. And we can go next door to Sharma Aunty if we need anything. And it s only one night, Anand added. All right. But promise me you won t do anything with that time machine till we come back, Ma said sternly, looking at offended: felt Anand. He promised half-heartedly, offended at this lack of HIPSOU I AEA: respect for his creation. I breathed a sigh of relief. Let us discuss I Complete the cause-and-effect table given below. 1. Anand set up his burglar alarm and rigged it to work when the door was opened softly. & | Unit 3.indd 94 06-Mar-25 2:48:50 PM Unit 3.indd 95 2. Anita was able to avoid any responsibility as Anand faced the consequences alone. 3. We watched the movie Back to | Anand: the Future . 4. Papa firmly said NO to trying out the time machine. II Do you think Anand was able to keep his promise regarding the time machine? If yes, why? If no, why not? I They left by the afternoon train and were coming back the following evening. Anand fell asleep immediately, but I stayed up to finish a novel. At about eleven thirty I thought I heard a scratching at the front door. Telling myself it was only my imagination, I went back to the book. A little later there was a rattle and a click. I was really scared, I can tell you, what with a murder story before me and then strange noises in the middle of the night! I shook Anand and whispered, Listen, there s someone at the door. Go and open it then, he muttered groggily. You silly! Someone s trying to get