were not staying at one place. They were moving across the sky. II The following word grid has six words related to travel used in the lesson. Circle the words in the grid. You can search horizontally and vertically. The last letter of each word has been highlighted. Unit 3.indd 129 | my 25 2:49:24 PM (J IV Read the following sentences from the text and underline the subject and the verb. 1. Amma and Appa are fast asleep. \ (When the subject of a sentence has two or more nouns or pronouns that are connected by and , we use a plural verb). 2. It s hot, dry, and there is sand everywhere. (In case the subject is it , the verb that follows is either is or was depending on the tense of the sentence). 3. There are so many hills here, and beaches too. (When we begin a sentence with there , the subject comes after the verb). ww The subject of a sentence is closely linked to the i 6 verb form changes depending on whether the subject i gular or plural and if it is in the led person. Choosi e correct verb based on the subject is c ubject-ve ment. ! y oN : ere Let us understand subject-verb agreement better. Asubject and its verb must agree, even if other words or phrases come between them. The formation of paragraphs is important in writing. When the subjects are considered individually, we use a singular verb. Every man and woman has the right to vote. * Collective nouns such as class , committee , audience , team can be singular or plural, based on the context of the sentence. If the sentence implies the group is acting as one unit, the noun is singular and takes a singular verb. The committee decides on the new policy tomorrow. * The indefinite pronouns each , either , every , much , and neither always require singular verbs. Each of the children was given a gift. Subjects that look plural because they end in s but refer to one thing are singular. Mathematics is an interesting subject. IN Some nouns (like glasses, scissors, pants, and tongs) are plural but take a singular verb when the phrase pair of is placed before it. Here, pair is the subject. This pair of scissors is sharp. os, 06-Mar-25 2:49:24 PM Unit 3.indd 131 ~A DREAMS AND Discov: When subjects are joined by or or nor , the verb should match the subject that is closer to it. Y Neither the students nor the teacher wants to cancel the trip. fg Y Either the manager or the employees are responsible for the mistake. V Choose the correct option from the words given in the brackets. 1. A pair of sunglasses (is/are) essential when travelling to sunny destinations. 2. Either the tour guide or the tourists (has/have) to arrive first at the meeting point. 3. The information on travel expenses (is/are) useful for