have preferred to finish my novel. If you get a shelling, don t bring me in, I warned Anand. Nothing will go wrong this time. I ve planned it out carefully. See the blueprint. 06-Mar-25 2:48:48 PM Unit 3.indd 93 Anand loves words like blueprint it makes him feel professional! Anyway, I looked at the elaborate drawing of doors, wires, and bells and asked, How does this thing work? It s quite simple. The moment the door opens, this alarm is tripped off and makes a clanging sound. Then this water bag here is loosened and falls on the thief s head. By then we call. the police simple! But how does the alarm know that a burglar is opening the door? T ve taken care of that, Anand said loftily. Ihad my own doubts about the alarm s guessing powers, but kept them to myself because when Anand is in one of his inventive moods, nothing stops him. You see, Anand explained smugly, A thief tries to open the door stealthily. ve rigged it up so that the alarm works only when the door is opened gently. I was sceptical. Remember, if Papa asks, I m not involved, I warned. Now clean up this mess before anyone gets home. As you already know, my doubts about the alarm were quite justified. Papa, who always opens the door softly, was thoroughly soaked and angry as angry could be. Anyway, for a week after this, Anand did not dare try out anything new. Then we saw this film Back to the Future . I don t know if you have seen it, but it s all about a time machine. Well, that was the end of peace and quiet in the house. My brother decided that he had to make a time machine too. Papa locked up his tool box and hid the key while Ma kept a wary eye on her oven and mixer. Because, as I told you, when Anand is on one of his inventing binges, he takes apart all the gadgets in the house to collect parts. You can t imagine the noise that DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES elaborate: detailed clanging: a loud ringing sound like that of a metal being hit smugly: proudly stealthily: quietly or carefully so that one is not seen or heard sceptical: doubtful \ d-mahdg 2:48:49 PM | Poorvi was going on hammering and sawing and clattering. Anand s room, next to our room, was transformed into a network of wires, springs, levers, and bulbs. There was an enormous panel which was to be control switchboard. As for Anand, he went around looking like a savage. When Ma didn t notice, the fellow didn t even comb his hair. Anand just wouldn t let anyone into his room. Finally, after a frantic: fortnight of frantic activity, the time machine was ready. We Larmucetesl uve can try it out tonight, Anand announced to everyone at home disorganised at lunch time. T don t know