to the oceans blue. g rN \ { . N My \ I journey far to meet the sea, ~.__ Can you guess, who I can be? | Unit 3.indd 117 NortH, Sout, East, WEST Let us do these activities before we read. I Work in pairs. Discuss the place that you have enjoyed travelling to. Talk about who you went with, how you travelled, and what you learnt from the experience. II Which State or Union Territory of India do you live in? Write the following details about it. 1. Part of the country North, East, Northeast, West, South or Centre 2. Its capital 3. Language 4. River(s) 5. Tourist attraction 6. Food III Work in pairs. Recall the names of the states of our country which have Pradesh in their names. Mention if it is in the North, East, Northeast, West, South or Centre of our country. Recall any special feature about each Pradesh . Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher. Secon 1 art of Special Feature the Name <q Ro Te | Unit 3.indd 118 06-Mar-25 2:49:07 PM DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES Ww Cn g V9 mom s= > Let us read Shaana, who lives in Rameswaram island, is travelling the length and breadth of the country with her parents, exploring the many landscapes, people and cultures of India. She shares her travel experiences through postcards that she writes to her friends back at school. Let us read these postcards. - m way up north, at the Thajiwas glacier in Kashmir. The glaciers are white and blue and we have to wear four layers of * snowballs at each other. But they say there was much more snow last year. wearing gloves, so I don t think I can write any more. * send my love to PT Miss and Library Ma am. \ | Unit 3.indd 119 06-Mar ip 2:49:09 PM | Poorvi y 10 May 20XX Dear class, 8: We took another train yesterday and reached Himachal 2. Pradesh. It is very quiet, and we can see so many 9 e chirping: short, | sharp sound , mountains from our cabin. Colourful birds wake me * made by birds with their chirping when the Sun rises in the east. snoring: I also think I hear bears 2 making a loud noise as one breathes while sleeping growling in the west when it gets dark. But Amma says that s just Appa snoring. I would love to meet a bear and give it a hug. With love from your best friend, Shaana co IDDPOODPD BBDBOGSD DD 17 May 20XX Hi everyone, > _ Did you know that Arunachal Pradesh is far away st) from Himachal Pradesh? Himachal is in the north but Arunachal is all the way in the east. I thought all the Pradesh states sat next to each other. : ge We took two trains and drove a long time to get here. St This morning, we walked through a forest to