1-5 given below. (Transcript for the teacher on pg. 136) 1. ao F WO WD Toby misses his school. . Anita accepts Toby as her friend. . Anita asks Toby about one of his facial features. . Toby tells Anita that she had a banana for breakfast. . Toby shares that he can see much clearer with a closed eye. II Listen to the conversation again and fill in the blanks with the exact words you hear. 1. 2. Toby: I miss my and home. Toby: Well, we don t need to eat anything. We get our from the Sun. . Anita: Oh! Don t you ever feel like having ice creams and ? . Anita: Okay, tell me one thing. How are you able to see with only eye? . Toby: I can see beyond mountains and , woods and even Let us speak I Read the following sentences from the text. As usual, I had to be involved, though I'd have preferred to finish my novel. We're old enough to look after ourselves, Ma, I said. The word though is pronounced to rhyme with the word low . The word enough is pronounced to rhyme with the word puff . In ending with -ough, which are pronounced very differently. through cough ! Listen to the teacher say these English there are many words thought plough words aloud and notice how they ~------------are pronounced. \ d-mahdg 2:48:57 PM. | Poorvi Now, work in pairs. Pronounce these words out loud and put them in the correct boxes given below. Sounds like | Sounds like | Sounds like | Sounds like | Sounds like 00 off O Ow aw Share more words that sound similar to the words in the table. II Read the story given below aloud. Check the correct pronunciation with the teacher. In spite of a nagging cough, the woman continued working in her farm, right through the rough weather. She filled up the trough with water for her cows and ploughed the fields to plant the seeds. She then plucked some raw mangoes from a low bough of a mango tree to make a spicy chutney. Though the day had been tough, she smiled peacefully as she had already prepared dough to make enough rotis for dinner. III Now try saying this tongue twister fast as many times as you can clearly. The boy with the tough dough on the rose bough fell in the trough and caught a cough. Let us write Think about different vocations that you see around or you are currently studying. For example: electrician, mechanic, chef, nurse, graphic designer. You may add more vocations to the list given here. | Unit 3.indd 106 06-Mar-25 2:48:59 PM DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES Now, choose a vocation and write a paragraph. You may use the hints given below. why you like this vocation what training is needed what tools and equipment are required who would your co-workers be * highlight the importance of team work how