howl, much fainter this time, and a great clattering: deal of clattering. We shouted for all we were worth. In a few continuous loud minutes, we heard footsteps running up our drive. Thankfully noises we recognised Mrs. Sharma s voice, along with her husband and Dr. Mohan also a neighbour. Anand! Anita! Children, what s the matter? Where are you? & | Unit 3.indd 96 06-Mar-25 2:48:51 PM Ro Unit 3.indd 97 Here! we shouted in unison. In a minute the door was unlocked. What on earth has been happening here, children? Sharma Uncle asked. Both Anand and I fell over ourselves trying to explain. Where is the fellow now? The last we heard, he was in the time machine, I explained hastily, seeing everyone looking rather puzzled. We entered the room cautiously and turned on the lights. The time machine was still humming softly but otherwise there was no other sound from the room. Well, where is he? Dr. Mohan asked, peering behind the door. Did you imagine this? Oh no, I protested. How could both of us have imagined the same thing? Maybe he ran out, Anand suggested. I m sure we d have seen him. There s only one way out of this house and we came the same way as soon as we heard you, Sharma Uncle sounded very sure. Look! Anand said, pointing to the floor. He was wearing that. Near the panel of switches was the green scarf. DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES unison: together hastily: quickly peering: looking carefully | Unit 3.indd 98 & Poorvi indulgently: fondly intruders: people who enter a place without permission dismantled: taken apart niggling: slight feeling (of) Let s search the house perhaps he s still around, Dr. Mohan said, going upstairs. Boppa was nowhere to be seen. Well maybe he did run out and we missed him, Mrs. Sharma said at last, I can t imagine what else could have happened. My time machine! He s gone through that! Anand burst out, his eyes shining. What an imagination this boy has! Mr. Sharma said, smiling indulgently. Now off to bed, both of you. I ll spend the night here so you needn t worry about any more intruders now. Needless to say, Boppa was never seen again. Anand insists that his time machine worked and he disappeared into the past. The machine itself was dismantled because Papa thought it wasn t safe (maybe he also hada niggling suspicion that it worked), so we couldn t try it out. As for Anand, he is convinced that he is a genius and has launched a new project something about a telephone to contact creatures in outer space. Tell you all about it next time. Anita Rau BADAMI Let us discuss Arrange the following events in the correct order of occurrence. 1. The door swings open, and they see Boppa, standing there with an evil grin. 2. Boppa is nowhere to be found, but his green scarf is lying near the time