would you like to visit? Historic monuments C_) wildlife sanctuaries C) 7. How long a trip would you like? Short C) long C_) 132 Rt Unit 3.indd 132 06-Mar-25 2:49:25 PM Unit 3.indd 133 DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES Now, work in pairs and tell each other about your preferences with respect to the questions. You may use the phrases given below to speak about your choices. I prefer... to... because... I would rather... than... because... I like... better than... as... ...is or are better than... because... * ... appeal or appeals to me more than... as... Iam alright with both, but I prefer... because... Given a choice, I would go for... over... as... Let us write Imagine that you have to travel to your hometown to attend a family event. Write an application to the Principal of your school, requesting leave of absence. Remember to include the duration of the leave, the reason for the leave and mention how you will complete your school work. Use the format of the application and the verbal cues given below. (House no. and street) (City) (State or Union territory) (Date) The Principal (Name of your school) (City) (State or Union territory) Subject: Request for leave for... days Dear (Madam or Sir), I am writing to request __ days leave with effect from to __ in order to attend I would like to assure you that I would I would be grateful if you could grant me the leave. Yours sincerely, (Name) (Class, Section, Roll Number) do-aahsd 2:49:25 PM | Poorvi I Solve the crossword puzzle by identifying the States and Union Territories of India using the clues given. 7 8 10 11 12 13 15 Across Down 2. Pangong Lake 1. Dampa Tiger Reserve 7. Thar Desert 3. Cellular Jail 9. Serenity Beach 4. Double Decker Living 11. Hampi Root Bridge 5. Dudhsagar Falls 12. Nagarjuna Sagar Dam 6. Gangotri Glacier 8. Chilika Lake 14. Thangka Paintings 15. Rann of Kutch 16. Nalanda University 10, Chota Nagpur Plateau . Kurukshetra Unit 3.indd 134 06-Mar-25 2:49:26 PM | Unit 3.indd 135 DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES II There are many ancient places to visit in India. For example, Kailasa, the majestic cave temples of Ellora. They are officially listed on the World Heritage list by UNESCO. These caves were carved out of the vertical basalt cliffs of the Sahyadri hills. You may visit this site to know more about these caveshttps://indianculture.gov.in/stories/ kailasa-majestic-temple-ellora The Kailasa Temple 1. Rani-ki-Vav (the Queen s Stepwell) Source: UNESCO is located at Patan, Gujarat and is also on the World Heritage list by UNESCO. Stepwells are a distinctive form of water resource and storage systems on the Indian subcontinent, and were constructed during ancient times. They evolved over time from what was basically a pit in sandy soil towards elaborate multi-storey . Rani-ki-V works of art and architecture. Source. UNESCO Now, find out about the unique places in your village, region or state and share the details with your classmates and the teacher.