scratching at the front door. Telling myself it was only my imagination, I went back to the book. A little later there was a rattle and a click. I was really scared, I can tell you, what with a murder story before me and then strange noises in the middle of the night! I shook Anand and whispered, Listen, there s someone at the door. Go and open it then, he muttered groggily. You silly! Someone s trying to get in, I said. Anand sat up. Who? What? T don t know, I said. What shall we do? Let s holler for help, he said. Before we could do anything, the door swung open and we found ourselves looking at a ruffianly fellow with a green scarf around his neck. Anand gasped. Hey, it s Boppa! I whispered. It was indeed the fellow who had recently begun sweeping out the compounds in our row of houses. So, he was the thief, and no wonder. He knew exactly when the occupants were out, leaving the coast clear. The fellow gave an evil grin. One squeak out of you and see what happens, he said, brandishing his cudgel and backing out of the room. We heard him slide the latch in. What do we do now? I asked in a low voice. DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES groggily: sleepily ruffianly: rough or violent looking gasped: took a short, deep breath in surprise brandishing: waving cudgel: a short, thick stick used as a weapon Poorvi Let s shout anyway, Anand suggested. The door opened suddenly again in the middle of our discussion. No noise from you! Now, where is your father s room? I was about to direct him upstairs when Anand said quickly, The one next to this one. You silly goose! I said angrily as soon as the man had gone. That s your room. He ll come back as mad as mad can be. At least it will give us some time to think of something, Anand said. He ll take a while to locate the light switch. Let s shout. All of a sudden there was a crash followed by a loud scream. More strange noises emerged from the next room a few muffled:nota muffled thumps, an eerie whine, and a low, humming sound. very clear and 1 My time machine, he s started it! Anand gasped. I wish we oud sound ; could get out of this room and see what is happening out there. eerie: strange There was another howl, much fainter this time, and a great clattering: deal of clattering. We shouted for all we were worth. In a few continuous loud minutes, we heard footsteps running up our drive. Thankfully noises we recognised Mrs. Sharma s voice, along with her husband and Dr. Mohan also a neighbour. Anand! Anita! Children, what s the matter? Where are you? & | Unit 3.indd 96 06-Mar-25 2:48:51 PM Ro Unit 3.indd 97 Here! we shouted in unison. In a minute