subject that is closer to it. Y Neither the students nor the teacher wants to cancel the trip. fg Y Either the manager or the employees are responsible for the mistake. V Choose the correct option from the words given in the brackets. 1. A pair of sunglasses (is/are) essential when travelling to sunny destinations. 2. Either the tour guide or the tourists (has/have) to arrive first at the meeting point. 3. The information on travel expenses (is/are) useful for firsttime travellers. 4. Neither the flight crew nor the pilot (was/were) aware of the delay. 5. The news about the heavy rains (makes/make) many people reconsider their vacation plans. 6. A pair of binoculars (is/are) useful for spotting wildlife on a safari. 7. The hill stations in India (remains/remain) a popular traye! destination during winter. 8. Keeping accounts (is/are) important for spending money wisely during travel. 9. Either the ticket or the bus passes (need/needs) to be used for travelling in the tourist bus. 10. Neither the passengers nor the taxi driver (was/were) aware of the best route to the hotel. Let us listen You will listen to a girl speak about the story of how Agartala got its name and the importance of agar. As you listen, choose the correct option for the questions given below. (Transcript for the teacher on pg. 138) 1. What does the word Agartala mean? (i) under the agar tree (ii) beside the agar tree (iii) around the agar tree . Which of these is another name for agarwood trees? (i) gharuwood (ii) sandalwood (iii) rosewood 3. What kind of smell does agarwood have? (i) woody and citrusy (ii) woody and flowery (iii) fresh and citrusy 4. How is agarwood formed? (i) when the tree dries (ii) when the tree dies (iii) when the tree gets infected 5. What is agarwood used to make? (i) incense and edible oil (ii) perfumes and wood carvings (iii) gum and candies r, oo Ph Let us speak eS SS ir Read the questions listed below. ; ws . Which of the two given options do you prefer? ~ 1. How do you like to travel? Bus C) train C ) 2. What kind of a trip do you like? Family trip C) school trip =F 3. Where would you like to go? Beaches L4 mountains C) 4. What do you like to do on a trip? Adventure activities C) sightseeing (Ge 5. When do you like to travel? Winter C) summer ee) 6. What kind of places would you like to visit? Historic monuments C_) wildlife sanctuaries C) 7. How long a trip would you like? Short C) long C_) 132 Rt Unit 3.indd 132 06-Mar-25 2:49:25 PM Unit 3.indd 133 DREAMS AND DISCOVERIES Now, work in pairs and tell each other about your preferences with respect to the questions. You may use the phrases given below to speak about your choices. I prefer... to... because... I would rather... than... because... I like... better than... as... ...is