History The first known list of perfect squares and perfect cubes was compiled by the Babylonians as far back as 1700 BCE. These lists, found on clay tablets, were used to quickly find square roots and cube Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 roots in problems involving land measurement, architectural design, and other areas where geometric calculations were necessary. In ancient Sanskrit works the term varga was used both for the square figure or its area, as well as the square power, and the term ghana was used both for the solid cube as well as the product of a number with itself three times. The fourth power was called varga-varga . These terms were used in India at least from the third century BCE. Aryabhata (499 CE) states A square figure of four equal sides and the number representing its area are called varga. The product of two equal quantities is also called varga. Thus, the term varga for square power has its origin in the graphical representation of a square figure. Why is the word root (the root of a plant) used for the mathematical operation v (square root, cube root, etc.)? It is because, in ancient India, the Sanskrit word mula, meaning root of a plant, basis, cause, origin, etc., was used for the mathematical operations of taking roots. In Sanskrit, varga-mula (the basis, cause, origin of the square) was used for square-root and ghana-mula was used for cube-root. This use of mula for the mathematical concept of root was subsequently emulated in Arabic and Latin through their corresponding words for the root of a plant jidhr and radix respectively. The term mula for root has been used in India at least from the first century BCE. Another term used was pada (foot, basis, cause, origin). Brahmagupta (628 CE) explains, The pada (root) of a krti (square) is that of which it is a square. 2 Figure it Out 1. Find the cube roots of 27000 and 10648. 2. What number will you multiply by 1323 to make it a cube number? 3. State true or false. Explain your reasoning. (i) The cube of any odd number is even. (ii) There is no perfect cube that ends with 8. (iii) The cube of a 2-digit number may be a 3-digit number. (iv) The cube of a 2-digit number may have seven or more digits. (v) Cube numbers have an odd number of factors. 4. You are told that 1331 is a perfect cube. Can you guess without factorisation what its cube root is? Similarly, guess the cube roots of 4913, 12167, and 32768. = A Square and A Cube 5. Which of the following is the greatest? Explain your reasoning. (i) 67 - 66 (ii) 43 - 42 (iii) 67 66 (iv) 43? 42? = A number obtained by multiplying a number by itself is called a square number. Squares of natural numbers are called perfect squares. m= All perfect squares end with 0, 1, 4, 5, 6