a cup (Fig. 9.9). Valli: Oh Yes! And then the tea leaves will be settled at the bottom. The process of settling down of heavier insoluble componentatthe bottom ofa liquid is called sedimentation. When the water (liquid) is removed by tilting the vessel, the process is called decantation. Fig. 9.9: Decantation Oh! Decantation is also used in Washing and cleaning of rice and pu ' IRIE In the chapter Materials Around Us , you have studied that oil does not mix with water and forms a separate > layer when left undisturbed for some time. Which e method of separation would you use to separate oil and water? Dada: But I can still get a few tea leaves in my mouth because decantation does not completely separate all the tea leaves from the tea. Balan: Oh! Itmeansitis nota proper method of separation. Dada: Yes, you are right. The tea is ready now. Malli picks up the tea-strainer from the shelf and gives it to his Dada. Dada: Let me pour the tea through this strainer. You can see all the tea leaves collected in the strainer. This process of separating tea leaves from tea is called filtration. Balan asks Malli if he could use a tea strainer to filter muddy water. Let us try and find out. Dada: Also, try to filter the muddy water through a piece of cloth and observe the difference. Ne} vo ~~ 1S) vo Co & So y > aNd lo) lo} Q S & FS) WD S = =} 1S) Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 9.indd 170 10/7/2024 9:55:55 AM How many layers of cloth do I need to use to get clear water? Malli: Why should we use a piece of cloth? Dada: In a piece of cloth, there are very small holes or pores between the woven threads. These pores in the cloth can be used as a filter. People in ancient times also followed this practice. But if the water is still muddy, impurities can be separated using a filter with even smaller holes or pores. A filter paper is one such filter that has very fine pores in it. Activity 9.4: Let us experiment Try to fold the filter paper yourself and make a cone as shown in Fig. 9.10. A filter paper One-fold Two-folds Cone Sd Fig. 9.10: Folding a filter paper to form a cone Place it inside a funnel kept on a conical flask and pour muddy water into it (Fig. 9.11). Filter paper Muddy j water Tripod stand Conical flask Fig. 9.11: Filtration 3S s yn @ Whatdo you observe? Do the mud particles pass through 3 $ s the filter paper? <3 Ss The water coming from the funnel will be collected in the conical flask. Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 9.indd 171 10/7/2024 9:56:18 AM You will get mud as a residue on the filter paper and clear water as filtrate in the conical flask. More to know! Activity 9.5: Let us design and create Valli goes for