Conical flask Fig. 9.11: Filtration 3S s yn @ Whatdo you observe? Do the mud particles pass through 3 $ s the filter paper? <3 Ss The water coming from the funnel will be collected in the conical flask. Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 9.indd 171 10/7/2024 9:56:18 AM You will get mud as a residue on the filter paper and clear water as filtrate in the conical flask. More to know! Activity 9.5: Let us design and create Valli goes for a nature walk with her Dadi and collects some water from a pond in a container. She observes some unwanted substances in it. Design and create a working model of water filter using low-cost materials. Malli and Valli go on a boat ride in a nearby river with their Dada and _ his friend, Otukkam. Otukkam is a fisherman. As they cast the fishing net, water drains out through the mesh. Valli recalls the filtration method she had learnt and realises that this method of catching the fish is somewhat similar. Malli is taken aback when he sees plastic bags, broken bottles, a large fish with a straw stuck in its mouth, and food wrappers along with the other fish trapped in the net. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 9.indd 172 10/7/2024 9:56:23 AM Chapter 9.indd 173 Let us raise awareness about the issues related to river and ocean pollution by composing a poem. A few lines have been written here, add more lines Piece of plastic in my neck, As in pain I cry, Koilas, Koilas...where are you dear? Papa fish cries and Mama fish has tears. Aware of the harm, yet they let it flow, Koilas faintly hears mother s sorrow, Stop plastic pollution at source, Rivers are our huge resource. Discuss with your parents A bowl of milk in your home has gone sour. Discuss with your parents how you can use it in another way. Also, which method of separation will you use in the process? Malli and Valli take blessings from their Dada and Dadi, bid goodbye to Balan and travel to Madhya Pradesh. The train reaches Bhopal in Madhya Pradesh. The sun is rising and it is getting hot. On their way to Maasi s (maternal aunt s) home, they drink chhach (buttermilk) in the dhaba (roadside eatery). Malli asks the shopkeeper about the big painting, hanging on the wall of the dhaba. The shopkeeper explains that the picture shows a lady performing Reprint 2025-26 Churning Methods of Separation in Everyday Life 10/7/2024 9:56:25 AM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 9.indd 174 Can you name one kitchen appliance which runs on electricity that is used to prepare buttermilk? the process of churning curd using a big mathni (churner) to separate butter. In this process, the butter being lighter floats at the top, while the buttermilk is left behind. Their stay at Maasi s place has become enjoyable and they are looking forward to share