drinking. She served this water to her father while having food, who blessed her and appreciated her efforts. Learning further Fun with parents: We are proud of our Indian heritage. Under supervision of your elders, try to prepare some herbal remedies using various parts of plants. For example tulsi kadha. Which methods of separation will you use while preparing herbal kadha? @ Stage play: Imagine you and your friend are Malli and Valli. Write dialogues of a play presenting their entire Bharat ki Yatra , highlighting the different methods of separation of substances that they observed. Enact the play in your school assembly. @ Group activity: Observe and list separation methods you employed and noticed in your surroundings throughout a week. Explain the reasons behind using these methods and compile the ones you utilised or observed the most. Compare your observations with your group members. Beastalwart of your community: Interview a ragpicker(s) and prepare a case study about the method(s) of separation he/she uses in his/her daily life. Encourage children of your community below the age of 14 to join a neighbourhood school. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:12:52 PM @ Bea reporter: (i) Gather newspaper clippings and articles related to various methods of separation implemented in your society, such as in agricultural fields or at construction sites. (ii) Conduct interviews with local farmers to explore the latest agricultural separation methods that they use. Think like a scientist: You are provided with a mixture of iron nails, sand, black pepper, stones, common salt and water. Which steps will you follow to separate each component of a mixture? The given steps may help you to think like a scientist. Reflection Steps I observe . I wonder You might have wondered about questions such as = Which component should I separate first? = What method of separation should I use first? = Howcan we separate these components effectively? = Willsome of the components be soluble in water? = What properties of the components can help us in their separation? = What is the most appropriate sequence? Activity Steps * Some possible answers to the questions which occurred in my mind are | an. I performed the following methods of separation @ My findings are Hint: A mixture that has more than two components requires a combination of several methods of separation. Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 9.indd 181 Methods of Separation in Everyday Life 10/4/2024 3:12:52 PM Chapter 9.indd 182 Notes Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:12:52 PM