Chapter 9.indd 163 Methods of Separation in Everyday Life aant Just like winnowing makes the husk blow away while retaining the grains, similarly, sages let \ the virtues stay while discarding the vices. Kabir D ) 9 Pd Malli and his sister Valli are excited for their summer vacations. Their parents have planned a trip to visit their relatives and friends living across India. They always stay in touch with their relatives and friends. Do you also keep in touch with your loved ones? Their first halt is at their Nani s (maternal grandmother s) house in Haryana. It is surrounded by large fields. Malli and Valli are fascinated by the variety of grains piled up in the courtyard. Their Mami (maternal aunt) and Mama (maternal uncle), along with other community members, are busy separating small stones and husk from the grains with their hands. : ~ Malli and Valli are curious to know why this is being done. Their Nani notices their curiosity and explains, We are removing these stones so that the grains are fit for cooking. Reprint 2025-26 0677CHOS 10/4/2024 3:10:10 PM They go around the house to see the fields and the cattle. To keep them busy, Nani gives them a challenge of handpicking small stones from grains while keeping their eyes closed. The method of picking by hand from a mixture (when two or more substances are mixed) such as small stones and husk from wheat and rice is called handpicking. It is done on the basis of differences in size, colour and shape of the particles. If the particles to be _ removed are present in small quantities and can easily be picked by hand, handpicking proves to be a convenient method. At lunch, Malli and Valli are served steaming hot vegetable pulao. While eating the pulao, Nani observes that Malli is separating whole black peppers from the pulao and is placing them Fig. 9.1: Handpicking aside on his plate (Fig. 9.1). Valli playfully teases, Wow! This is a handpicking method, nice one! Nani tells them about the benefits of black pepper and 7 encourages Malli to eat it. ale Later in the day, their Mama takes them to the fields 2 where they observe bundles of harvested wheat stalks lying in the fields. Some stalks are spread in the sun for drying. Both of them pick up a stalk each and notice numerous grains attached to it. A group of farmers are beating the stalks on a large wooden log. Curiously, Valli asks Mama, Why are they doing this? Mama explains, They are beating the stalks to separate the grains (Fig. . 9.2). This process of separating grains Fig. 9.2: Threshing from the stalks is known as threshing. Farmers work hard, yet they enjoy their work. From time to time, @ they sing folk songs while working. Have fun while you learn Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 9.indd 164 10/4/2024 3:10:39 PM Chapter 9.indd 165 The separated