Mama, Why are they doing this? Mama explains, They are beating the stalks to separate the grains (Fig. . 9.2). This process of separating grains Fig. 9.2: Threshing from the stalks is known as threshing. Farmers work hard, yet they enjoy their work. From time to time, @ they sing folk songs while working. Have fun while you learn Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 9.indd 164 10/4/2024 3:10:39 PM Chapter 9.indd 165 The separated grains get mixed with A small amount of piles of husk. puffed rice is mixed Valli whispers to Malli, Will the farmers with chana dal. handpick the grains to remove them from Can you think of so much husk? She wonders, How much time will the farmers take to separate these? Let us perform an activity to find out the answer to the questions raised by Valli. Activity 9.1: Let us explore @ Take a handful of roasted peanuts and rub them between your palms. What happens? Is it possible to separate the removed skin and the peanuts? Now, try blowing it. What do you observe? Which of these components removed peanut skins or peanuts are blown away? You observe that blowing air separates the heavier and the lighter components. How do you think farmers separate so many grains from husk? Traditionally, a soop (bamboo tray) is used for separating heavier and lighter components of a mixture (Fig. 9.3). Next day, their Nana takes them to the fields to show this process at work. Malli and Valli observe a farmer standing on a raised platform. The farmer is moving the bamboo tray which contains threshed wheat grains in the direction of air or wind (Fig. 9.4). What do you infer from Fig. 9.4? Do both the components, wheat grains and husk, fall at the same place? Which of the two components get blown away? Can the wind separate the two components? Fig. 9.3: Bamboo tray Reprint 2025-26 separating the mixture by any method other than handpicking? ? Methods of Separation in Everyday Life 10/4/2024 3:10:53 PM Direction of air or wind Soop (bamboo tray) Fig. 9.4: Winnowing Valli is unable to This method of separating heavier and lighter separate husk i components of a mixture by wind or by blowing air is called winnowing. Have you seen any similar kind of activity being done at your home? from rice ina closed room. How @ can you help her? More to know! _ ~ Next day, Malli and Valli board a train to Anmedabad to visit their father s friend Ghanshyam bhai. Before leaving, Valli requests her Mami to prepare meethi puri (sweet Indian bread made from wheat flour) for their journey. Valli: Shall I help you knead the wheat flour? Mami: To prepare a dish with flour, first we need to remove bran that may be present in the flour. Valli: How do we do it? Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 9.indd 166 10/4/2024