piece of black or dark coloured thick paper and spread a few drops of the salt solution on it (Fig. 9.7a). You can also create any art of your choice with this salt solution. Allow it to dry and then observe it (Fig. 9.7b and Fig. 9.7c). (a) Before drying (b) After drying (c) Art created Fig. 9.7: A few drops of salt solution spread on thick black paper Do you observe some patches on the paper? What do you think is left on the paper? You can feel the presence of salt by touching the paper. Where has the water disappeared? Recall the chapter A Journey through States of Water . Let us probe further to get the answer. Reprint 2025-26 10/7/2024 9:55:48 AM Activity 9.3: Let us investigate This activity may be demonstrated by the teacher. @ Take some salt solution (prepared in Activity 9.2) in a china dish. If a china dish is not available, another suitable vessel may be used. @ Heat and let the water China dish A boil away as shown in Cauti Fig. 9.8. Fig. 9.8: Heating of china dish auson Allow the china dish containing salt solution Be careful ming un while heating to cool down. the china dish. What do you observe? What is left in the china dish? Did you get the salt back? You can feel the presence of salt in the china dish by touching the salt with your fingers. Observe the figure. Does it answer the question? Can you name the process involved? Is there any method through which I can get back both salt and water? It is now time for Malli and Valli to visit Dada and Dadi = (paternal grandparents) residing in Puducherry, located 28 in southern India. They are excited to meet their old eB neighbourhood friend, Balan. After reaching Puducherry, 4 they start talking about the old times and do not realise that it is already evening, Dadi s tea time. Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 9.indd 169 10/7/2024 9:55:54 AM Dada: I shall prepare tea for you. Children: We will also help you. As Dada makes the tea, he shares tips on how to make a cup of tea. Balan: After preparing tea, how do you remove the tea leaves? Dada: Obviously, with a strainer. You know if we do not have a strainer, we can still remove most of the tea leaves. Valli: How? Dada: Leave the sauce pan (vessel) containing tea undisturbed for some time and gently pour the tea in a cup (Fig. 9.9). Valli: Oh Yes! And then the tea leaves will be settled at the bottom. The process of settling down of heavier insoluble componentatthe bottom ofa liquid is called sedimentation. When the water (liquid) is removed by tilting the vessel, the process is called decantation. Fig. 9.9: Decantation Oh! Decantation is also used in Washing and cleaning of rice and pu ' IRIE In the chapter Materials Around Us , you have studied that oil does not