which we separate substances. Form two teams and see who will get the maximum correct entries. Think and start nove any ee OF the Con, xe at js no Uses Yo) <9 wv a Cn, % grate two diffe, . 0 _ysetl OM Ong ee y~ 5 This activity helps in assessing your understanding as to why we separate substances. _ ~ Keywords Create . Design ( Experiment E Explore | : Infer i | 5 Investigate 5 Observe E Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 9.indd 176 10/4/2024 3:12:41 PM Chapter 9.indd 177 a a Handpicking is used for separating solid materials on the basis of differences in size, colour and shape from a mixture. The process in which the stalks are beaten to separate grains from them is called threshing. The method of separating lighter husk from heavier grains by wind or blowing air is called winnowing. The process of separating solids from a mixture based on variations in particle size using a sieve is called sieving. Evaporation is the process in which a liquid gets converted into its vapour. It can be used to separate a solid dissolved in a liquid. The process of settling down of heavier insoluble component at the bottom of a liquid is called sedimentation. When the liquid is removed by tilting the vessel, the process is called decantation. Filtration can be used to separate insoluble solid components from a liquid. Churning is used to extract butter from curd. Separation of magnetic and non-magnetic substances by using a magnet is called magnetic separation. Play a Game WISE FISH Prepare your own fishing rod with locally available eco-friendly materials. Tie a thread to one end of the rod and a magnet to the free end of the thread. The Tank 1 has red cardboard fish and Tank 2 has blue cardboard slips attached to iron clips. Fish out a red fish representing the method of separation first and then fish out one blue slip related to the red one. Watch out for your friends. Are they fishing out correctly? Reprint 2025-26 Methods of Separation in Everyday Life @ 10/4/2024 3:12:43 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 9.indd 178 Catch me first! Tank 1 >the patie Sedimentation pah> pate agnetic separation Then me! Let us enhance our learning What purpose does handpicking serve in the process of separation? (i) Filtration (ii) Sorting (iii) Evaporation (iv) Decantation Which of the following substances are commonly separated using the churning method? (i) Oil from water (ii) Sand from water (iii) Cream from milk (iv) Oxygen from air Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:12:47 PM Chapter 9.indd 179 = Which factor is usually essential for the filtration? (i) Apparatus size (ii) Presence of air (iii) Pore size (iv) Temperature of the mixture State with reason(s) whether the following statements are True [T] or False [F]. Also, correct the False statement(s). (i) Salt can be separated from salt solution by keeping it under the Sun. [ ] (ii) Handpicking should be