train to Anmedabad to visit their father s friend Ghanshyam bhai. Before leaving, Valli requests her Mami to prepare meethi puri (sweet Indian bread made from wheat flour) for their journey. Valli: Shall I help you knead the wheat flour? Mami: To prepare a dish with flour, first we need to remove bran that may be present in the flour. Valli: How do we do it? Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 9.indd 166 10/4/2024 3:11:12 PM Mami: We use a sieve for this purpose. Sieving allows the fine flour particles to pass through the holes of the sieve as shown in Fig. 9.5. The bigger particles such as bran and small stones remain on the sieve. Carefully observe a sieve. Are all the holes of the sieve the same size? Will sieving work if the holes of the | sieve are larger than the substances? Is there any difference in the size between Fig. 9.5: Sieving the particles that pass through the sieve and the particles that remain on the sieve? Sieving is used when components of a solid-solid mixture have different sizes. Have you ever observed Upon reaching Ahmedabad, they visit _ _ sieves being used at Sabarmati Ashram along with Ghanshyam _ construction sites to i bhai where they learn about the Namak _ separate pebbles and Satyagrah (Dandi March). stones from the sand? @ (3 More to do! Malli asks, Where is namak (common salt) obtained from? From seawater , replies Ghanshyam bhai. Seawater is a mixture of salts and some other substances dissolved in water. To obtain salt, the seawater is kept in shallow pits and exposed to sunlight and air. In a few days, the water Methods of Separation in Everyday Life Fig. 9.6: Obtaining salt from seawater , 5 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 9.indd 167 10/4/2024 3:11:20 PM evaporates completely, leaving behind the solid mixture (Fig. 9.6). Common salt is then obtained from this mixture by further purification. (3) More to do! Let us explore how salt can be separated from a salt solution. Activity 9.2: Let us observe and create Ad Have you ever observed white patches on the dark coloured clothes you A wear during hot summers? How are these patches e formed? Ad Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 9.indd 168 Take a bowl or any container and fill it half with water. Add 2-3 teaspoons of salt into it and stir till the salt dissolves to form a solution. Take a small piece of black or dark coloured thick paper and spread a few drops of the salt solution on it (Fig. 9.7a). You can also create any art of your choice with this salt solution. Allow it to dry and then observe it (Fig. 9.7b and Fig. 9.7c). (a) Before drying (b) After drying (c) Art created Fig. 9.7: A few drops of salt solution spread on thick black paper Do you observe some patches on the paper? What do you