Separation in Everyday Life 10/7/2024 9:56:25 AM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 9.indd 174 Can you name one kitchen appliance which runs on electricity that is used to prepare buttermilk? the process of churning curd using a big mathni (churner) to separate butter. In this process, the butter being lighter floats at the top, while the buttermilk is left behind. Their stay at Maasi s place has become enjoyable and they are looking forward to share all their memories with their friends upon returning home. Now, itis time for them to reach their final destination of the trip, Shillong, the capital of Meghalaya. On their arrival at their Bua s (paternal aunt s) house in Shillong, they notice a carpenter making a wooden door. While working, he accidentally drops a few iron nails in the sawdust. Fig. 9.12: Magnetic separation The carpenter starts handpicking the iron nails. The children tell the carpenter to wait. They get a magnet from their Bua. They ask the carpenter to move the magnet through the sawdust. All the nails get attracted to it (Fig. 9.12). Which method of separation did the carpenter use? Recall the chapter Exploring Magnets . The substances which are attracted towards a magnet are called magnetic substances. Iron is a common example Reprint 2025-26 10/7/2024 9:56:26 AM Chapter 9.indd 175 of a magnetic substance. Separation of magnetic and non-magnetic substances by using a magnet is called magnetic separation. More to know! Malli and Valli had delightful holidays and the Bharat ki Yatra (tour of India) filled with fun will be an ever lasting memory for them. They not only enjoyed exploring different regions of India but also gained a lot of knowledge about various methods of separation of substances. Activity 9.6: Let Us py mummers Write the following phrases on small slips of paper 1. Separating small stones from pulses. 2. Churning curd to obtain butter. 3. Taking out green chillies from cooked dalia (dish made of broken wheat) or poha (dish made of flattened rice). Taking out seeds from watermelon. 5. Sorting piles of sawdust and iron nails from a mixed heap of building material. 6. Picking marigold flowers from a heap of other flowers to make a garland. 5 7. Separating pebbles from sand. SS 8. Separating coconut pieces from rice flour. 2 3 9. Separating oil from water. : : 10. Separating salt from salt solution. Reprint 2025-26 10/7/2024 9:56:28 AM Now, take two baskets, each representing one of the two purposes for which we separate substances. Form two teams and see who will get the maximum correct entries. Think and start nove any ee OF the Con, xe at js no Uses Yo) <9 wv a Cn, % grate two diffe, . 0 _ysetl OM Ong ee y~ 5 This activity helps in assessing your understanding as to why we separate substances. _ ~ Keywords Create . Design ( Experiment E Explore | : Infer i | 5 Investigate 5 Observe E