to priests, guests, workers, scholars, and monks. These inscriptions are in the Brahmi script and include a few numerals (that is, symbols for numbers) which, at times, resemble today s shapes, as shown below. This is one of the many evidences showing that modern numerals ultimately originated in India. -= F &) Pe yy THINK ABOUT IT In the above series of numerals, which ones look somewhat like our modern numerals? Which ones don t? 08-04-2025 11:38:33 Satavahanas contributed during their reign. These caves were made for Buddhist monks. Notice the magnificent pillars and the stone The Satavahanas were devout followers of Vasudeva (another name for Krishna), although they also patronised other schools of thought, which flourished during their rule. For instance, Satavahana kings often granted tax-free agricultural land to Vedic scholars, Jaina and Buddhist monks, helping them to pursue their studies and practices. Fig. 6.11. The Karla caves (near Lonavala in present-day Maharashtra) to which the Chapter 6.indd 127 This sculpture of a yaksha from Pitalkhora carries an inscription on its hand, kanhaddsena hiramakarena kata meaning made by Kanahadasa, a goldsmith . Is it not interesting to see that a goldsmith could also craft a sculpture made of stone? What do you think this tells us about people s professions at the time? In the 3rd century CE, the Satavahana Empire fragmented into smaller independent kingdoms. Several factors contributed to its disintegration, the most significant one being weak central Fig. 6.12. A yaksha (a minor deity associated with nature) from the replica of a sttipa in the centre all of Pitalkhora caves, Maharashtra, carved it carved out of a rocky hillside! in the Satavahana period. yy THINK ABOUT IT 6 - The Age of Reorganisation Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 11:38:33 control and a gradual economic decline. Once again, this will pave the way for regional powers to assert or reassert their dominance and establish new kingdoms. Coming of the Chedis Let us go back a little. Do you remember the Kalinga war mentioned in the previous chapter? After the decline of the Maurya Empire, Kalinga rose as a prominent power under the kings of the Chedi dynasty. Kharavela, one of their main rulers, was a devoted follower of Jain teachings; he was sometimes called bhikshu-radja or monk-king, although he respected all schools of thoughts. Near Bhubaneswar, the famous Udayagiri-Khandagiri caves, likely developed for Jain monks, feature intricate panels and statues, and spacious rooms carved into the rock, showcasing the skill of the craftsmen. The design and craftsmanship of these caves make them notable examples of rock-cut architecture , a style of architecture that we will turn to in higher classes. tee yO Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Fig. 6.13.1. Udayagiri caves near Bhubaneswar. Fig. 6.13.2. The Hathigumpha inscription. Fig. 6.13.3. Carved panel showing a scene from the Ramayana S Chapter 6.indd 128 08-04-2025 11:38:35 One of the caves prominently displays the Hathigumpha inscription, written in Brahmi script, which records King Kharavela s accomplishments