these caves make them notable examples of rock-cut architecture , a style of architecture that we will turn to in higher classes. tee yO Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Fig. 6.13.1. Udayagiri caves near Bhubaneswar. Fig. 6.13.2. The Hathigumpha inscription. Fig. 6.13.3. Carved panel showing a scene from the Ramayana S Chapter 6.indd 128 08-04-2025 11:38:35 One of the caves prominently displays the Hathigumpha inscription, written in Brahmi script, which records King Kharavela s accomplishments year after year, including his victorious military campaigns and his benevolent works for the welfare of his people. Kharavela also proudly declares that he created a council of ascetics and sages from a hundred regions and is accomplished in extraordinary virtues, respector of every sect and repairer of every temple . Once again, a ruler takes pride in extending his protection to all schools of thought. This is a fundamental part of what we may call the Indian ethos . Y THINK ABOUT IT Notice the regularity of the rock-cut chambers sculpted nearly two millennia ago. How did artisans achieve such precision with just a chisel and a hammer? Picture yourself as a sculptor in that era, shaping stone into art with your own hands. What tools would you use? Kingdoms and Life in the South In India s southern region, this period, between the 2nd or 3rd century BCE and the 3rd century CE, saw the rise to prominence of three powerful kingdoms the Cheras, the Cholas and the Pandyas which often competed with each other for control over the South, while also contributing to the region s growth in trade and culture. Let s remember how Ashoka s empire stopped at those south Indian kingdoms (which he mentions in his edicts), which suggests that they remained independent even at the height of Mauryan power. And although Kharavela claims that he defeated an alliance of south Indian kings that threatened his own territory, the location of that battle is unknown and he does not seem to have invaded the southern region. Y THINK ABOUT IT Chapter 6.indd 129 In the map given on next page, you may notice different symbols alongside the names of the kingdoms. What do these symbols represent? Think about how they highlight the unique identities of the kingdoms. 6 - The Age of Reorganisation Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 11:38:35 LEGEND South Indian Kingdoms ~ Chola _ Chera Pandya @ Capital Cities Rivers an 0 100 200 km a | : ew. ~ 78 E 80 E 83 N 76 E Fig. 6.14. Kingdoms in the South (note that borders are approximate and fluctuated in time). That period saw the advent of many poets whose works, collectively known as Sangam literature , defined the entire era: it came to be known as the Sangam Age . The word sangam is derived from the Sanskrit sangha, which translates to association and coming together in this context, referring to an assembly of the poets. The Sangam literature,