appear to have flourished in the Satavahana kingdom. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 S| Chapter 6.indd 124 08-04-2025 11:38:33 Coins issued by the Satavahana rulers have been found in various regions of India, from Gujarat to Andhra Pradesh India s western and eastern coasts. Indeed, many coins depicted ships, suggesting that maritime trade was animportant part of economic life. The type of ship depicted on the coin above suggests advanced shipbuilding and navigation technologies. Fig. 6.8. A Satavahana coin bearing Agriculture flourished in the Krishna- the image of a seafaring ship with Godavaririver system, which provided two masts. Notice how the masts of : 2. . the ship are prominently depicted economic stability to the kingdom. with intersecting lines, possibly The Satavahanas had active trade representing sails; the wavy lines below represent oceanic waters. networks that reached as far as the P Roman Empire and included an exchange of goods like spices, textiles, sandalwood, and luxury items like gold-plated pearls, ivory, etc. Imports included glass and perfumed ointments. Tolls and taxes on trade added revenue to the kingdom. Economic prosperity and a relatively peaceful political period facilitated the development of literature, art and culture, to which the Satavahanas made significant contributions. Fig. 6.9. The Naneghat Caves near Pune, located close to a major trade route, were used for collection of tolls and taxes, and as resting places for traders. Chapter 6.indd 125 6 - The Age of Reorganisation Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 11:38:33 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 6.indd 126 PRBAWUAY PILAZTY Ratio Gotamiputasa Siri-Sdtakanisa Fig. 6.10. Coin of the Satavahanas with an inscription in Brahmi script, king Life under the Satavahanas Inthe Satavahana tradition, princes were often named after their mothers. Thus Gautamiputra Satakarni was named after his mother, Gautami Balashri. She was a powerful queen who donated land to Buddhist monks and had an important inscription carved in Nashik, showing her influence in the kingdom. Lord Satakarni, son of Gautam? . yy THINK ABOUT IT What, according to you, could the tradition of using the mother s name at the beginning of a king s name signify? Another set of inscriptions found in the Naneghat caves near Pune (Fig. 6.9) focuses on a Satavahana widow queen who, remarkably, performed several Vedic rituals, including the ashvamedha yajra. The inscriptions mention Vedic gods like Indra, Chandra, and Surya. We also get a glimpse of the queen s donations (dana): land, cows, horses, elephants, silver coins, and other items to priests, guests, workers, scholars, and monks. These inscriptions are in the Brahmi script and include a few numerals (that is, symbols for numbers) which, at times, resemble today s shapes, as shown below. This is one of the many evidences showing that modern numerals ultimately originated in India. -= F &) Pe yy THINK ABOUT IT In the above series of numerals, which ones look somewhat like our modern numerals? Which ones don t? 08-04-2025 11:38:33 Satavahanas contributed during