80 E 83 N 76 E Fig. 6.14. Kingdoms in the South (note that borders are approximate and fluctuated in time). That period saw the advent of many poets whose works, collectively known as Sangam literature , defined the entire era: it came to be known as the Sangam Age . The word sangam is derived from the Sanskrit sangha, which translates to association and coming together in this context, referring to an assembly of the poets. The Sangam literature, the oldest in south India, consists of several collections or anthologies of poems and is much consulted by historians who investigate the society and culture of the times. Primarily, Sangam poetry expresses with great skill and delicacy personal emotions such as love or societal values like heroism and generosity. The Cholas The Sangams refer to three crowned kings the Cholas, Cheras and Pandyas. The Cholas were a powerful dynasty that ruled parts of south India from the 3rd century BCE to the 13th century CE. The Chola king Karikala is said to have defeated a combined force of the Cheras and Pandyas and established his supremacy. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 6.indd 130 08-04-2025 11:38:36 a HS ais te Chapter 6.indd 131 Silappadikaram: The Tale of the Anklet This famous epic, composed soon after the Sangam collections, tells the story of Kannagi, who lived happily with her husband Kovalan in the prosperous Chola capital city of Puhar (identified with Kaveripattinam seen earlier). However, Kovalan fell in love with a dancer and eventually lost all his wealth over her. Realising his mistake, he returned to Kannagi, who forgave him. They then travelled to Madurai, the capital of the Pandya kingdom, hoping to rebuild their Fig. 6.15. Statue of Kannagi, Chennai lives. To start anew, Kannagi gave Kovalan one of her anklets to sell; however, he was falsely accused of theft and executed by the Pandya king. Devastated, Kannagi proved his innocence by revealing her second anklet. The king, realising his mistake, died of shock. Kannagi then cursed Madurai, invoking the god of fire who destroyed the city. She then walked further west to the Chera kingdom, where she was honoured as a goddess. Even today, Kannagi is worshipped in Tamil Nadu and Kerala. Silappadikaram s exquisite poetry thus centres on the principles of justice and the ruler s dharma to protect it. It also takes us through cities rich in traded goods, through three kingdoms, and also through several schools of thought. ape 6 - The Age of Reorganisation Tapestry of the Past @ 08-04-2025 11:38:37 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 6.indd 132 yy THINK ABOUT IT ik 4 me Observe the statue of the king. How is he depicted? What do his posture, clothing, and expression say about his power and status? Fig. 6.16. Statue of King Karikala at the Grand Anicut Memorial Park in Tamil Nadu Karikala undertook many projects for the benefit of the people. Among