presentday Uttar Pradesh and is known for its distinct Indian style. Unlike the Gandhara style, it primarily used red sandstone for its sculptures and reflects less influence from _ GrecoRoman aesthetics. This art form is known for its depictions of Indian deities, including Kubera, Lakshmi, Shiva, Buddha, yakshas and yakshinis and_ generally Fig. 6.26. Kubera, God of wealth . : from the Mathura School of produced fuller figures with Art. Did you miss the prominent smooth modelling. moustache? The moustache is a distinguishing feature of some Indian sculptures. LET S EXPLORE Now that you are familiar with the basic characteristics of the Mathura and Gandhara styles of art, study the pictures of artefacts given in Fig. 6.27 on the right page and try to identify which school of art each artefact belongs to. Write your observations with justifications and discuss your answers with your classmates. Despite the political conflicts and power struggles, the period saw remarkable cultural exchange and assimilation. This shared heritage is evident in art and architecture, where styles interacted, but with a dominance of Indian themes (especially Hindu and Buddhist ones). It was also the age when Sanskrit literature flourished, with, in particular, the composition of major Indian texts such as the Mahabharata and the Ramayana (refer to the chapter Unity in Diversity, or Many in the One in your Grade 6 textbook). Recognising these connections encourages us to view this Tapestry of the Past not as confined to any one kingdom or ruler, but as a dynamic process that works through interaction and assimilation over time. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 SE Chapter 6.indd 140 10-Apr-25 10:48:20 AM Fig. 6.27.1. A scene of the death of Buddha. Fig. 6.27.2. Bodhisattva Maitreya. Fig. 6.27.3. Shiva linga being worshipped by Kushana devotees. Fig. 6.27.4. A Naga between two Nagis, with an inscription referring to the eighth year of Kanishka s reign. Fig. 6.27.5. Kartikeya, the god of war, and Agni, the god of fire. Fig. 6.27.6. Standing Buddha. 6 - The Age of Reorganisation Tapestry of the Past @ Chapter 6.indd 141 08-04-2025 11:38:49 Kharavela Kanishka Gautamiputra Satakarni Karikala Pushyamitra Shunga Kushanas Indo-Greeks 7 ao Shakas Satavahanas As Chola, Chera, Pandyas Fig. 6.28 Before we move on... > The period after the disintegration of the Maurya empire was characterised by the emergence of many big and small kingdoms across the Subcontinent. > The internal conflicts were coupled with foreign invasions, which together led to a period of reorganisation of political powers. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 e Chapter 6.indd 142 08-04-2025 11:38:50 > This period witnessed a dialogue of various cultures that absorbed each other s influence to create new styles of art, architecture, coinage, etc., with ultimately a dominance of Indian themes and flourishing Sanskrit literature. > This time was also marked by remarkable developments in trade activities, both internal and external. Questions and activities 1. Why was the post-Maurya era also known as the era of