an important naval power of the subcontinent. The later Pandyas also contributed greatly to the art, architecture, and overall prosperity of the region. Fig. 6.18. Coins under Chera Kings 6 - The Age of Reorganisation Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 11:38:38 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Se Chapter 6.indd 134 Fig. 6.19. The Heliodorus pillar near Vidisha y THINK ABOUT IT The Pandyas were known for their pearls. Why do you think pearls were an important article of trade during these times? The Pandyas left many inscriptions in which their kings asserted their great concern for their subjects welfare and their encouragements to all schools of thought and belief. Invasions of the Indo-Greeks Having completed our brief journey into south India, it is time to return to the north, where a very different kind of development is about to occur. So far, we have only visited a few native dynasties; yet the same period also witnessed the arrival of invaders who entered through the northwest frontier and took control of the northwestern, northern, and central regions of the Subcontinent. Let us first examine the legacy of Alexander s brief campaign in the Indus plains. While retreating from the areas he had conquered, he left satraps behind. Over time, these regional rulers established their independent domains and came to be known as Indo-Greeks . After the decline of the Mauryas, the areas in the northwestern regions (roughly present-day Pakistan and Afghanistan) were an easy target for the Indo-Greeks. However, while they arrived as conquerors, they were much influenced by the rich local culture. This cultural interaction led to a blend of Greek and Indian elements in governance, art, language, and daily life, shaping the cultural landscape of the region. The Heliodorus pillar, near Vidisha (Madhya Pradesh), is a notable example of such connections. It is named after an Indo 08-04-2025 11:38:39 Chapter 6.indd 135 Greek ambassador, who in his inscription praises Vasudeva as the god of gods . The inscription also states, Three immortal precepts (footsteps) [...] when practised lead to heaven: selfrestraint, charity, consciousness. During excavations in north India, archaeologists have found many Indo-Greeks coins, which have provided most of the information we have about these rulers. Those coins were made of gold, silver, copper and nickel often portraying a king on one side and Greek deities on the other. However, some coins, instead, depicted Indian deities like Vasudeva-Krishna and Lakshmi. The rule of the Indo-Greeks ended with the invasions of the Indo-Scythians or Shakas (see a little below). LET'S EXPLORE What do you think might have been the meaning of having deities like Vasudeva-Krishna or Lakshmi on some Indo-Greek Fig. 6.20. An Indo-Greek silver coin with Vasudeva-Krishna on one side coins? DON'T MISS OUT be The Shakas (sometimes Che Garette of udia called Indo-Scythians) also ae PART II Section 1 invaded the northwest of the Subcontinent and ruled from the latter part of the 2nd century BCE to the 5th century CE. Their kingdoms