The Age of Reorganisation Tapestry of the Past @ 08-04-2025 11:38:37 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 6.indd 132 yy THINK ABOUT IT ik 4 me Observe the statue of the king. How is he depicted? What do his posture, clothing, and expression say about his power and status? Fig. 6.16. Statue of King Karikala at the Grand Anicut Memorial Park in Tamil Nadu Karikala undertook many projects for the benefit of the people. Among them is the Kallanai or Grand Anicut, a complex water diversion system located at a geographically strategic point just downstream of the Srirangam island. It helped to divert waters from the Kaveri to the central and southern parts of the Kaveri delta. This enabled more land to be brought under cultivation, earning this area the name rice bowl of the South . Restored several times in the course of time, it is still in use and helps millions of people in Tamil Nadu by providing water for irrigation and thus supporting agriculture in the region. 08-04-2025 11:38:38 The Cheras Also known as the Keralaputra (sons of Kerala), the Cheras ruled over the western parts of Tamil Nadu and Kerala, with their capital at Vanji, present-day Karur in Tamil Nadu. They played an essential role in shaping the region s cultural and economic history, encouraging the growth of Tamil literature and patronising Sangam poets. The Cheras were known for their extensive trade connections with the Roman Empire and West Asia, exporting many goods from India to the outside world. The kingdom became a hub for the export of spices, timber, ivory and pearls. y THINK ABOUT IT Chapter 6.indd 133 Have you ever wondered how historians uncover the trade relations between two distant kingdoms many centuries ago? Let s take a moment to brainstorm and discuss how this information comes to light. The Chera kings issued a number of coins under their reign. Do you notice the royal emblem of Cheras on one such coin given below? The Pandyas The Pandyas rule over parts of Tamil Nadu and the surrounding regions, with their capital at present-day Madurai, goes back several centuries BCE. Successive kings expanded the Pandyan kingdom. In his work Indika, Megasthenes mentions this kingdom as a prosperous one, with a strong administration and involved in active trade with distant powers like the Greeks and Romans, apart from much internal trade (Kharavela, for instance, states that he gets hundreds of pearls brought from the Pandya kingdom). The Pandyas were also an important naval power of the subcontinent. The later Pandyas also contributed greatly to the art, architecture, and overall prosperity of the region. Fig. 6.18. Coins under Chera Kings 6 - The Age of Reorganisation Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 11:38:38 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Se Chapter 6.indd 134 Fig. 6.19. The Heliodorus pillar near Vidisha y THINK ABOUT IT The Pandyas were known for their pearls. Why do you think pearls were an