Tapestry of the Past Chapter 6.indd 119 08-04-2025 11:38:24 ai uF Matrimonial LET'S EXPLORE alliance : An alliance arranged In the previous chapter, you studied the map of the Maurya through a . 1 Ab . f th M marriage, empire (see page 100). Above is a map of the post-Maurya generally period. How many kingdoms can you count in the area that between two were previously under the control of the Maurya empire? members of royal families. In practice, this The new kingdoms now competed for territorial control. woule Sling Peaceful methods like matrimonial alliances between neighbouroffering his ing kingdoms, or the use of force in warfare, were means of mar enter er gaining control. Remember that there was constant wrestling royal family of for control over areas along the borders, as gaining control over a neighbouring them was important to keep the kingdom safe from attacks. kingdom, with the intention Together with those political events, there was a burst in the of cementing development of art, architecture and literature, and enriching between the two cultural exchanges. We will get a peek into this in the following kingdoms. sections. Dynasties from outside the Subcontinent Indo-Greeks, Shakas, Kushanas Prominent dynasties of the Subcontinent Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Fig. 6.3 e Chapter 6.indd 120 08-04-2025 11:38:25 Chapter 6.indd 121 ~ DON'T MISS OUT = Surge of the Shungas Pushyamitra Shunga founded the Shunga dynasty, which ruled over parts of north and central India. He performed the ashvamedha yajria, a Vedic ritual, to establish himself as a most powerful ruler. Although his empire was smaller than the previous Maurya Empire (compare their two maps), he kept it safe from potential invaders and maintained friendly relations with the Greeks, after some initial military campaign against them. But, again, the empire did not last long after him a century later, it was gone. The period witnessed the revival of Vedic rituals and practices, but other schools of thought nevertheless continued to flourish. Fig. 6.4. Scene from the Ramayana in which King Rama is seen performing the ashvamedha yajria (19" century painting, National Museum) The ashvamedha yajria was a Vedic ritual conducted by many rulers to declare their position as the king. In this ritual, a horse accompanied by soldiers was left to wander freely. Any territory that the horse crossed unchallenged was considered to become a part of the king s empire. If any ruler stopped the horse, it led to a battle to determine supremacy. 6 - The Age of Reorganisation Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 11:38:26 Sanskrit emerged as one of the preferred languages for philosophical and literary works. Do you recall some aspects of the Yoga Sutras in your Physical Education and Well-being classes in Grade 6? These Yoga Sutras were compiled by Patanijali during this period. The Shungas patronised literature, art and architecture. The Bharhut Stapa (in present-day Madhya Pradesh) presents us with beautiful examples of Shunga art. It was probably built during the