(see a little below). LET'S EXPLORE What do you think might have been the meaning of having deities like Vasudeva-Krishna or Lakshmi on some Indo-Greek Fig. 6.20. An Indo-Greek silver coin with Vasudeva-Krishna on one side coins? DON'T MISS OUT be The Shakas (sometimes Che Garette of udia called Indo-Scythians) also ae PART II Section 1 invaded the northwest of the Subcontinent and ruled from the latter part of the 2nd century BCE to the 5th century CE. Their kingdoms viftrer & verter PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY ae feeet, GAR, STAT 16, 2024/57 25, 1946 CF) IDAY. 16th Augi Fig. 6.21. Notice how dates are provided in both rose to power after the the Gregorian and Shaka Samvat eras on this Indo-Greeks, and they were official publication of the Government of India. in power until the arrival of the Kushanas (see below). It was during this period that the Shaka Samvat calendar was developed. It is 78 years behind the Gregorian calendar (except from January-March, when it is behind by 79 years). It was adopted as the Indian National Calendar in 1957. 6 - The Age of Reorganisation Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 11:38:39 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 6.indd 136 The Emergence of the Kushanas The Kushanas, originally from central Asia, entered India probably in the 2nd century CE. Atits peak, their empire extended from central Asia to large parts of northern India. Their rule marked a period of extensive cultural intermixing and had a profound impact on the history of the Indian subcontinent. When he was not busy with his military campaigns, Kanishka encouraged art and culture, leading to the development of new artistic styles. Fig. 6.22. Headless statue of King Kanishka LET'S EXPLORE Carefully observe this massive statue (1.85 m high) and notice the clothing, weapon, and footwear. What does it tell us about this figure? This famous headless statue is of King Kanishka, probably the most powerful ruler of the Kushana dynasty. The Brahmi inscription on the statue reads, maharaja rajadhiraja devaputra kanishka , that is, The great king, king of kings, son of God, Kanishka . LET'S EXPLORE Observe the coins carefully. Who, besides the emperor, appears on the coin? Fig. 6.23. Coins of Kanishka 08-04-2025 11:38:43 On the first coin, Kanishka is shown holding a spear, titled King of Kings , while the other side features Buddha with the inscription BOAAO (Buddha) in Greek script. On the second coin, an emperor appears on one side, and Shiva with the bull Nandi on the other. Let s reflect on the following: = Why would a powerful ruler feature Buddha and Shiva on his coins? What does it say about his values and priorities? = Can you find modern examples of such symbolic currency? The Kushanas held control over significant sections of the Silk Route (on the next page), and during their reign, trade grew, connecting India with other parts of Asia and the West. Continuing the trend set under the