afternoon, the companies were ordered to return one by one. D company with 90 soldiers was the last, and they were expected to return by 2:00 p.m. When the enemy (tribal guerrilla invaders), under the command of the Pakistani army, saw that only a small group VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS of Indian soldiers were left behind in Badgam, they attacked them. Their initial attack was met with stiffresistance by Major Somnath and his men. However, Major Somnath correctly visualised that the first attack was just a distraction. Shortly thereafter, a major attack came from another side. By then, Major Somnath Sharma and his 90 soldiers were facing about 500 invaders. The Pakistani invaders sought to capture the Srinagar airfield and its surrounding areas. It was clear to Major Somnath Sharma that defending Srinagar town, the airfield, and the wider valley was indeed difficult until reinforcements arrived. After assessing the situation, he requested air strikes. He bravely laid out ground panels to guide the aircraft towards their target. The aerial attacks were successful in hitting the tribal invaders, but they still outnumbered D Company by almost seven to one, the attack on the positions occupied by Major Somnath s men continued. Vastly outnumbered and facing devastating fire, Major Somnath Sharma and his men stood resolute. The air was thick with the sound of gunfire and the cries of battle, but Major Somnath Sharma s voice cut through the chaos, urging his men to fight with tenacity and valour. Despite heavy casualties and his own injuries, Major Somnath Sharma displayed unparalleled bravery. He moved fearlessly through the battlefield, directing fire, filling magazines for his gunners, and encouraging his men to hold their ground. cutnumberet greater in number > resolute: determined tenacity: determination unparalleled: unmatched magazines: (here) containers that hold cartridges to be fed into a gun ? POORVI ammunition: a supply of bullets, shells, and explosives crouched: sat with knees bent ON conspicuous: noticeable posthumously: after death T shall not withdraw an inch but will fight to the last man and the last round Major Somnath Sharma, PVC However, as the battle progressed, D Company began running out of ammunition. When Major Somnath Sharma informed Brigade headquarters about this, he was asked to pull back. Aware of the gravity of the situation, he responded with the words, The enemy is only 50 yards from us. We are heavily outnumbered. We are under devastating fire. I shall not withdraw an inch but will fight to the last man and the last round . Just a few minutes later, when he was crouched in a trench next to a machine gun operator, in order to help him load the gun, his position was hit by a mortar shell, killing him instantly. Despite losing their Major and faced with the overwhelming numerical superiority of the enemy, the heroic actions of late Major Somnath Sharma motivated his men to hold on to their position for over six more hours before being overrun by the enemy. Their brave