Valley. This was in violation of an existing agreement Possession of with Hari Singh, the Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir, who had committed Pakistan not to attack the state. However, instead of honouring the commitment, the Pakistani Army trained and equipped around 1000 invaders who possessed deep knowledge of mountain passes and the local terrain to enter Kashmir and take control of strategic locations, including the Srinagar airport. The ultimate goal of POORVI = + combat: a battle unfounded: not based on reason or facts =A _ > a eerily: in a strange, frightening and mysterious way their plan was to engineer a revolt in Kashmir, overthrow the government, and capture the territory. If they had succeeded, it would have allowed them to control strategic mountain passes, peaks, and rivers. On 22 October, Operation Gulmarg was launched and these infiltrators invaded Kashmir, which led to the Princely State becoming a part of India on 26 October 1947. In response to this invasion, the Government of India sent its troops to defend the people of Kashmir and India s borders on 27 October 1947. A contingent of troops posted to Jammu and Kashmir was airlifted into Srinagar because the land route through Pathankot was not in a good condition. On 31 October, the D Company of the 4th Battalion of Kumaon Regiment, under the command of Major Somnath Sharma, was also flown into Srinagar. At that time, Major Somnath Sharma s left hand was in plaster, but he insisted on being with his company while in combat. He knew that this mission would be very challenging and told his senior officers, I know my men better than anyone else, and if they are going into action, they are not going in without me. These words highlighted his commitment to his men and his country. Before their arrival in Srinagar, there had been unfounded rumours of tribal movement towards the village of Badgam, less than 5 kilometres away from the Srinagar airport. The village was on a higher altitude than the airfield, and access was through the village. Hence, it was important for Indian forces to retain control of the area in order to protect troops and facilitate supplies arriving via air. In reality, the enemy had started arriving in Badgam in small groups to avoid detection. On 03 November 1947, several companies, including Major Somnath Sharma s D Company, were sent to patrol and assess emerging threats in and around the village. Throughout the day, the valley was eerily silent. Around afternoon, the companies were ordered to return one by one. D company with 90 soldiers was the last, and they were expected to return by 2:00 p.m. When the enemy (tribal guerrilla invaders), under the command of the Pakistani army, saw that only a small group VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS of Indian soldiers were left behind in Badgam, they attacked them. Their initial attack was met with stiffresistance by Major Somnath and his men. However, Major Somnath correctly visualised that the