a few minutes later, when he was crouched in a trench next to a machine gun operator, in order to help him load the gun, his position was hit by a mortar shell, killing him instantly. Despite losing their Major and faced with the overwhelming numerical superiority of the enemy, the heroic actions of late Major Somnath Sharma motivated his men to hold on to their position for over six more hours before being overrun by the enemy. Their brave resistance provided time for reinforcements to arrive, including flying in soldiers from the Punjab regiment to Srinagar. The heroic deeds of Major Somnath and his men thoroughly demotivated the enemy, causing more than 300 casualties, including injuring their leader. In many significant ways, D Company s sacrifice and Major Somnath s leadership saved Srinagar for India. The 4 KUMAON battalion was awarded the Battle Honour, Srinagar. Major Somnath laid down his life for the nation at the young age of 24. For this act of conspicuous bravery, Major Somnath Sharma was awarded the Param Vir Chakra (PVC). His citation reflects his heroism, patriotism, and courage. He was the first recipient of the PVC, awarded posthumously for gallantry and supreme sacrifice. VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS ) MAJ SOMNATH SHARMA, PVC Subject 1- HONOURS AMD AWARDS. Herewith I am forwerding the following names for an immediate award for person*l courage 4nd bravery : i. No, Bank Nepe Unit Sprointment IC-S21 T/PAJOR SOM-NATH SHARMA 4 KUMAON .C.'D' CO . os a 2. HONOUR RECOMMENDED FoR = Iemecdate award of m.C. GAR sirfielad Major &.N.Shar Ly. view to > was despe to village, with a fr infiltrating and attacking : Airfield. jor Sherma's Coy wes involved in action g*inst pproximately 1000 enemy strong. M Jor Seren 8 leadership and personal cour ge na Foran fam f . by mov Som Dom to post er ble ons eh ab os noises g@inst an overmajor near 4 hours and inflic over 300 Soavatbaun on th s Net even after his death his z St iikeats enthusiasm made the Coy eo raene Poo st how nd only withdrew in an orderly fashion when ered by the re-inforcement Commander. But for this offrr'*s oe ph aie sacrifice of his own life it is : mead over run by th pet nd epaardnad Sat e - op+rdised KASHMIR operations. seni ba a. Pataca act :- 3 Nov 47. BADGAM VILLAGE. 2 _a Rye C02. Com 4 Kur on Regt. (CM .M. KHANNa ) POORVI legacy: life experiences, values, beliefs, and traditions passed down from generation a? to generation testament: strong evidence or proof despatches: official reports on military affairs forged: shaped or strengthened, often through hardship We have delved into how the events of 03 November 1947, played out. It is also worth knowing more about the early life of Major Somnath and the events that led him to make the ultimate sacrifice for the nation. Born on 31 January 1923, in the picturesque town of Dadh in Kangra, Himachal