other kinds of writing. Which of the following is the most appropriate title for the given extract? A. The Rise of Instant Communication B. The Fleeting Delight of Phone Calls C. The Lasting Joy of Written Words D. Living in a Fast-paced World . Your grandmother too made an important choice. She knew, in those early days, life in Anand could not offer even the simple comforts that we take for granted today. However, she ardently supported my choice to live and work in Anand. That choice of your grandmother to stand by me has given me an everlasting strength, always ensuring that I shouldered my responsibilities with poise. (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) How can we Say that the grandmother shared her husband s dedication to a greater cause? Complete the following with the correct option from the two given in brackets. The fact that the writer (grandfather) praises his wife tells us that he (truly values/quietly accepts) her role in his life. Complete the following sentence with the correct option from those given below. Based on the information in the extract, we can infer that the grandmother had all of the following traits EXCEPT A. encouraging B. understanding C. comforting D. thoughtful Select the phrase that conveys showed grace under pressure and carried out my duties with dignity and confidence . POORVI II Answer the following questions. 1. What event does Dr. Kurien refer to when he mentions receiving the Padma Vibhushan? . How did Dr. Kurien s decision to join the cooperative in Anand affect his life? . Dr. Kurien s decision to work in Anand reveals his values and sense of duty. Explain. . Why did Dr. Kurien write the letter to his grandson? . According to Dr. Kurien life is a privilege and it is wrong to waste it . What is your opinion on this? . What message does Dr. Kurien want to convey about selfless service and its long-term impact on the society? . I Replace the underlined words in each sentence with the correct synonym from the box. You may refer to a dictionary. essential swift lifelong momentary useful splendid . He received the award in a magnificent ceremony. . I felt a fleeting joy when I received the appreciation for my song. . With today s instant communication, we can share information across the world in seconds. . Our school focuses on the core values collaboration, innovation, and unity. . My teacher s advice on time management is a valuable reminder of the importance of planning. . Reading books and listening to music can give abiding pleasure that will last forever. VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS II Match the expressions from the text in Column 1 with their meanings in Column 2. 1. in all humility (i) to speak in a truthful way 2. hold their heads high (ii) doing something using all your skills, talents, and knowledge 3. to be quite honest (iii) observed with great respect and wonder 4. to the best