boys in the group? . Justify the appropriateness of the title of the poem. . What does the poem suggest about the role of empathy and humanity in society? POORVI Let us learn I The grid given below has the antonyms of the words from the text. i o, Locate these words in the grid horizontally, vertically, and diagonally. One example has been done for you. You may refer to a dictionary. II Match the words from the text given in Column 1 with the underlined phrases in Column 2. N 1. hastened | (i) The mother heard the baby move slightly in the cradle at night. 2. heeded (ii) It is our duty to give support to the poor. 3. stir (iii) The students worked quickly to complete the project and submit it on time. (iv) All the boxes were kept in a heap at one place. 5. piled (v) They came forward to help us when we were in need. 6. offered (vi) The stranded people were brought to safety because they paid attention to our advice. VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS III In the poem, the poet uses the idiom lend a hand which means help somebody . Some more idioms using hand are given in Column 1. 2 Match these idioms with their meanings in Column 2. You may refer to a dictionary. bd 4. give somebody a big hand (iv) become difficult to control 5. work hand in hand (v) be very busy 6. have your hands full (vi) allow somebody to do _ something with full freedom A IV Complete the following analogy by filling in the blanks with the correct words from the poem. 1. __ 1! winter :: heat : summer . hurt: :: old: aged . whispered : shouted :: humble: _ 3 4. eyes: :: legs : walk 5. having a lot of money: wealthy :: densely packed people: _ Read the lines from the poem given below. Lest the carriage wheels or the horses feet Should crowd her down in the slippery street. Lest is a conjunction that means to prevent something bad or unpleasant from happening. To better understand its usage in a sentence, we can replace lest with just in case . For example, in the sentence She showed all the documents lest we doubt her , the word lest can be replaced with just in case to mean that she showed the documents to prevent any doubt. POORVI Fo J e Let us listen & . I You will listen to a woman read the special broadcast of the news. As \ you listen, arrange the pictures in the correct sequence of the events that took place. (Transcript for teacher on page 99) II You will once again listen to the special broadcast of the news. As you listen, complete the following sentences with one to three exact words. : 1. The woman was having a difficult time staying afloat due to the ; 2. Rohan leapt into