with pride while the commander and his assistants inspects the parade. The sound of marching feet echo through the air as a group of cadets prepare for their drill. Meanwhile, a convoy of military vehicles pass by, drawing cheers from the gathered crowd. Let us listen I You will listen to a talk about the Param Vir Chakra. As you listen, complete the sentences by filling in the blanks with one or two exact words or phrases you hear. (Transcript for teacher on page 98) 1. TheParam Vir Chakra signifies the Wheelofthe Ultimate , 2. The Param Vir Chakra is awarded to someone who shows exemplary bravery while fighting with the 3. The Param Vir Chakra was introduced as a Gallantry Medal in 1947 by the 4. The design of the Param Vir Chakra is inspired by Sage Dadhichi, who was a 5. The state emblem in the centre of the Param Vir Chakra is surrounded by the Vajra and Let us speak I As the citizens of a nation, we all must fulfil our duty. In groups of 4-5, speak about how you propose to serve your nation. You can choose from the themes given below: Saving the environment Health and well-being Helping others Righteous conduct Wii ft You may use the sentence prompts given below to organise what you speak about. * I believe one of the best ways to serve the nation is by... Asmall change we can make is... and it will have a big impact because... If everyone contributes by... it can lead to... * One of the biggest challenges we face is... and I propose we address it by... VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS We can make a difference by working together as a team, if we... Serving the nation is not just about big actions; even small efforts like... matter. Let us write I A letter of enquiry is a formal letter written to seek detailed information about something the writer wants to know. For example, it can be used for joining a course, organising an event, knowing details about a trip, etc. The language used is formal and specific, with relevant queries. Now, write a letter of enquiry. Your school wishes to organise a visit to a Memorial in your state/region. Write the letter to the incharge of that memorial requesting for information regarding available dates for visits, the duration of the tour, any entry fees, and guidelines for student groups. * Follow the given layout. * Use the cues given below to draft the letter. (Sender s address) (Date) (Receiver s address) Subject: Enquiry about a School Visit to a Memorial Dear Sir, (Body of the letter) Yours sincerely, (Name) POORVI SS | Body of the Letter |! Prompts for Enquiry F------------------ 4------------------------------------------- 4d | Paragraph 1: State | Thisis to enquire about... | the purpose of =: vy Could you please provide details about...? | | writing 1 } Fo------------------ 4#--------------- eee -- -- - - e e e e e e