discuss Let us salute this braveheart. Vande Mataram, vande mataram Sujalam suphalam malayaja shitalam, Shasya shyamalam mataram! Vande Mataram, vande mataram vande mataram... Jai Hind I Arrange the following events in chronological order. The first and the last events have been marked for you. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. 1. Major Somnath Sharma was born in 1923 in Kangra, Himachal Pradesh. (1) . Even after losing Major Somnath Sharma, the soldiers fought bravely to save Srinagar for India. . The D Company, under the command of Major Somnath Sharma, was flown into Srinagar. . Major Somnath Sharma underwent training at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. . Major Somnath Sharma requested air strikes to combat the enemy at Badgam. . Major Somnath Sharma was commissioned into the 19th Hyderabad Regiment in 1942. . Major Somnath Sharma was killed immediately after a mortar shell hit him. . Major Somnath Sharma was the first recipient of the Param Vir Chakra. (8) - Let us think and reflect I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow. 1. Vastly outnumbered and facing devastating fire, Major Somnath Sharma and his men stood resolute. The air was thick with the sound of gunfire and the cries of battle, but Major Somnath Sharma s voice cut through the chaos, urging his men to fight with tenacity and valour. VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS POORVI Fart area erat erat aH MAJOR SOMNATH SHARMA,PVC 200: Despite heavy casualties and his own injuries, Major Somnath Sharma displayed unparalleled bravery. He moved fearlessly through the battlefield, directing fire, filling magazines for his gunners, and encouraging his men to hold their ground. (ij) Whatcan be inferred about the conditions from the line: The air was thick with gunfire... A. The gunshots had stopped for a while. B. There was intense fighting on the battlefield. C. The invaders were retreating from the fight. D. The Indian soldiers had achieved victory. (ii) Complete the sentence with a suitable reason. Despite heavy casualties, Major Somnath Sharma continued to lead his men because (iii) Select the correct option for both Assertion (A) and Reason (R) given below: (A): Major Somnath Sharma moved fearlessly through the battlefield, even though he was injured. (R): He believed his courage was important to motivate the soldiers. A. Both (A) and (R) are true, and (R) is the correct explanation of (A). B. Both (A) and (R) are true, but (R) is not the correct explanation of (A). C. (A) is true, but (R) is false. D. (A) is false, but (R) is true. (iv) Fill in the blank with the correct word from those given in the brackets: Major Somnath Sharma was filling magazines, and encouraging his men to hold their ground despite (injuries/worry) . Born on 31 January 1923, in the picturesque town of Dadh in Kangra, Himachal Pradesh, Somnath Sharma belonged to a family with a rich military legacy. His father, Major General Amar Nath Sharma, had served the nation with distinction, and young Somnath