the words given below. Circle the words you would associate with an elderly person and underline the words you would associate with a school student. Share the reasons for your choices with your classmates and teacher. ! strong worried trembling hastening ! firm bent merry grey | | slow guide helpful ( 1 III Read the lines. The woman was old and ragged and grey And bent with the chill of the Winter s day. Select the suitable meaning of ragged as used in these lines. There are other four meanings given below. Discuss with your classmates and teacher. 1. (of clothes) old and torn; synonym: shabby * aragged jacket 2. Having an outline, an edge, or a surface that is not straight or even * aragged coastline 3. Not smooth or regular; not showing control or careful preparation I could hear the sound of his ragged breathing. Their performance was still very ragged. 4. (Informal) very tired, especially after physical effort The elderly man was ragged after climbing the stairs. Sa, Let us read The woman was old and ragged and grey And bent with the chill of the Winter s day. The street was wet with a recent snow And the woman s feet were aged and slow. She stood at the crossing and waited long, Alone, uncared for, amid the throng ( Of human beings who passed her by rai Nor heeded the glance of her anxious eyes. Down the street, with laughter and shout, Glad in the freedom of school let out, ey Came the boys like a flock of sheep, Hailing the snow piled white and deep. Past the woman so old and grey he Hastened the children on their wayy ~ oe Nor offered a helping hand to her =ae d So meek, so timid, afraid to stir (\ te Lest the carriage wheels or the horses feet & Should crowd her down in the slippery street. At last came one of the merry troop, The gayest laddie of all the 0 ea He paused beside her and whispered low, T ll help you cross, if you wish to go. Her aged hand on his strong young arm She placed, and so, without hurt or harm, He guided the trembling feet along, Proud that his own were firm and strong. Then back again to his friends he went, His young heart happy and well content. She s somebody s mother, boys, you know, \ For all she s aged and poor and slow , And I hope some fellow will lend a hand . To help my mother, you understand , Tj If ever she s poor and old and grey, . aad When her own dear boy is far away. And somebody s mother bowed low her head In her home that night, and the prayer she said Was God be kind to the noble boy, Who is somebody s son, and pride and joy! nA ' e Mary Dow BRINE my \Y