is false, but (R) is true. (iv) Fill in the blank with the correct word from those given in the brackets: Major Somnath Sharma was filling magazines, and encouraging his men to hold their ground despite (injuries/worry) . Born on 31 January 1923, in the picturesque town of Dadh in Kangra, Himachal Pradesh, Somnath Sharma belonged to a family with a rich military legacy. His father, Major General Amar Nath Sharma, had served the nation with distinction, and young Somnath was deeply inspired by the valorous tales of the Mahabharata, imparted to him by his grandfather. VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS (i) What can be inferred about Somnath Sharma s early influences on his career? A. He was primarily influenced by his father s achievements in the military. B. Hisinspiration came solely from the tales of the Mahabharata. C. His family and heritage inspired his bravery and sense of duty. D. He decided to join the military out of necessity rather than passion. (ii) Identify whether the following statement is true or false: Somnath Sharma belonged to a wealthy family. (iii) What does the phrase served the nation with distinction tell us about Major General Amar Nath Sharma? (He performed his duties with exceptional dedication, honour, and excellence./He was highly respected for his contributions to the country.) (iv) Replace the underlined phrase with a word from the extract that has a similar meaning. My family and I visited a popular hill station and stayed in an old but visually charming house surrounded by trees. II Answer the following questions. 1. Major Somnath s legacy of courage and devotion to the nation remains forever alive, forever alive... What is the significance of the repetition in this line? . Why do you think Major Somnath s leadership was critical during the Battle of Badgam? . What were Major Somnath s last words? What do they reflect about his sense of duty? . What might have been the outcome of the Battle of Badgam if Major Somnath and his company had not held their ground? . Why do you think Major Somnath s story continues to inspire soldiers and civilians today? . How can the values demonstrated by Major Somnath Sharma courage, duty, and self-sacrifice be applied in our daily lives? POORVI I Let us learn I Match the expressions from the text in Column 1 with the most suitable situations given in Column 2. Now, complete the following sentences using the expressions from Column 1. A. The detective managed to by finding the hidden evidence before the culprit could get rid of it. . Thecompany s new advertising campaign was meant to to their competitors sales. . The hikers chose to despite the heavy rain, refusing to turn back on their journey. . Despite being heavily outnumbered, the soldiers vowed to defend their homeland and , refusing to surrender to the enemy forces. Read the highlighted words in the following sentence from the text. A contingent of troops posted to Jammu and Kashmir was