A TALE OF VALOUR MAJOR SOMNATH SHARMA AND THE BATTLE OF BADGAM [fm] 0873CHO2 Let us do these activities before we read. I Work in pairs. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. 1. What do you think about the Republic Day Parade on 26 January? 2. What are the highlights of this parade? 3. What bravery awards are given on this day, and who receives them? II Work in groups of four and discuss. 1. What qualities do you think a soldier should have? 2. If you had to share a message with a soldier, what would it be? = _ > a _ POORVI etched: permanently fixed in someone s memory beacon: a source of inspiration valour: courage Mera desh, mera desh re Mera desh hua re roshan, le qurban kiya tujh hee pe ye tan man... o- Azadi xa Amrit Wahotsav This is a tribute to the valiant Major Somnath Sharma, India s first recipient of the Param Vir Chakra, whose name is etched in the annals of history. His bravery and sacrifice stand as a beacon of inspiration for generations. At every intersection of patriotism whether through the National War Memorial, soul stirring patriotic songs, books, and stories recounting acts of valour, or the celebrations of Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav his memory is honoured. Major Somnath Sharma s legacy of courage and devotion to the nation remains forever alive, forever alive... reminding us of the ultimate price paid for our freedom. The serene Kashmir valley in the shadows of the majestic Himalayas witnessed a tale of extraordinary heroism and el un a ON a = ee ae ae? 5 as ama gus AND DISPOSITIONS. Ric * 4 ot ij : : = sacrifice to protect the integrity of Indian borders. The day began with the silence of a cold November dawn but ended with echoes of courage that served as an inspiration for generations to come. This is the story of Major Somnath Sharma and the brave men that he led on a mission to protect the Srinagar airport from falling into the hands of a guerrilla force trained and backed by Pakistan. This is a story of how 90 men managed to foil the plan of some 500 infiltrators who wanted to capture j veiirators: Srinagar and the Kashmir Valley and deliver a blow to _ people who newly-independent India. secretly invade The events that led to the Battle of Badgam started in August 1947, when Pakistan launched Operation Gulmargtoannexthe annex: to take Kashmir Valley. This was in violation of an existing agreement Possession of with Hari Singh, the Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir, who had committed Pakistan not to attack the state. However, instead of honouring the commitment, the Pakistani Army trained and equipped around 1000 invaders who possessed deep knowledge of mountain passes and the local terrain to enter Kashmir and take control of strategic locations, including the Srinagar airport. The ultimate goal of POORVI = + combat: a battle unfounded: not