valuable lessons they have taught you. Include how their wisdom has shaped your values and behaviour in life. 1. Thank them for teaching you important lessons, sharing stories, or helping others in the neighbourhood. 2. Share how their actions inspire you to contribute to the betterment of the society. y 95 POORVI I The White Revolution led to a increase in milk production in India primarily due to the efforts of Dr. Verghese Kurien. Therefore, he is known as the Milkman of India . The Green Revolution in _ India introduced high-yielding varieties of wheat and rice. It was initiated by Dr. M.S. Swaminathan. He was awarded the Padma Shri in 1967, Padma Bhushan in 1972, Padma Vibushan in 1989, and Bharat Ratna in 2024. The Blue Revolution focused on increasing fisheries production and productivity in India. This initiative was led by Dr. Hiralal Chaudhuri. 209 In groups of four, research more information about these revolutions. Share your findings with your classmates and teacher. II Vocational training for people in rural regions is provided by the Jan Shikshan Sansthan (JSS), under the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, Government of India. The objective of JSS is to economically uplift the rural population by imparting essential skill-based training. This enables local trades to grow and creates new opportunities for the people in the region. Find out more about JSS with the help of the link given below. https://jss.gov.in/staticPages VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS III Financial Literacy Read the passage and discuss the questions given below. Financial literacy is an essential lifelong skill that should be taught to . children from an early age. Preparing children with financial literacy skills is an investment for their future well-being. By imparting an | understanding of money, saving, budgeting, and wise spending, we empower them to navigate the financial world with confidence as they 7 grow up. Whether it is managing a cooperative society, a start-up, or a household % budget, financial literacy is an ongoing learning process that evolves as children grow and their understanding deepens. An introduction to concepts of saving, budgeting, investing, and responsible spending equips them with essential life skills. Children learn best through practical examples. Real-life situations help them understand the value of money and the importance of making wise 2 financial choices. Thinking critically before spending helps cultivate responsible habits. The concept of saving and investing can be explained through relatable examples, such as planting seeds that grow into trees bearing fruit. As children grow older, they will learn to differentiate between needs and wants, compare prices before making a purchase and understand importance of financial literacy. . . widens Bill pa ifient Discuss in groups. ee e- rat = 1. The importance of learning about money and __ sw i535 | Lor fers ar saving from a young age. Share one example ==> Sh E- ; Budgeting - - : . = 8 {6 ETAL .wis pending Loans; iE 00 of it. S80 Dy Fig~ Net bankingMoney, ; , ;