old woman: vulnerable and neglected :: The young boy: _" +? | 1. The woman was old and ragged and grey k# And bent with the chill of the Winter s day. = A The street was wet with a recent snow And the woman s feet were aged and slow. (i) What does the phrase ragged and grey refer to ? A. The woman s emotional state that day. B. The woman s old and worn-out appearance. C. The weather conditions of the particular day. D. The colour of the street and the surroundings. (ii) Complete the following sentence with a suitable reason: The woman was bent with the chill of the Winter s day because she was (iii) Identify the fact and opinion from the following sentences: A. The street was wet with recent snow. _ B. The woman was too weak to cross the street on her own. 2. He guided the trembling feet along, Proud that his own were firm and strong. (iii) (iv) Why do you think the woman s feet were described as aged and -(* slow ? Then back again to his friends he went, His young heart happy and well content. (i) What does the contrast between the trembling feet of the old woman and the firm and strong feet of the boy emphasise? (ii) Fill in the blank given below by selecting the correct option from the brackets. VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS The poem tells us that the boy was proud that his feet were strong. This tells us that the boy was . (arrogant about being strong/grateful for his ability to help) What is the boy most likely to tell his friends on getting back? A. B. Cc. D. I m so glad I could help her. I m worried about her safety. I m surprised she forgot to thank me. I m thankful for all your support. (iv) Rectify the false sentence given below. The young boy s actions were driven by a logical decision. II Answer the following questions. 1. What might be the old woman s fears as she waited for a long time at the crossing? . How does the poet show the helplessness of the old woman? Support \) your answer with evidence from the poem. ~ (Gp . Why does the boy decide to help the old woman? What does this tell | \ 5 us about him? . How was the boy s approach towards the old woman different from that of the other boys in the group? . Justify the appropriateness of the title of the poem. . What does the poem suggest about the role of empathy and humanity in society? POORVI Let us learn I The grid given below has the antonyms of the words from the text. i o, Locate these words in the grid horizontally, vertically, and diagonally. One example has been done for you. You may refer to a dictionary. II Match the words from the text given