the importance of planning. . Reading books and listening to music can give abiding pleasure that will last forever. VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS II Match the expressions from the text in Column 1 with their meanings in Column 2. 1. in all humility (i) to speak in a truthful way 2. hold their heads high (ii) doing something using all your skills, talents, and knowledge 3. to be quite honest (iii) observed with great respect and wonder 4. to the best of your ability | (iv) being humble and having no feeling of self-importance 5. looked at in awe (v) in the innermost part of the self 6. somewhere deep down _ | (vi) be confident and have a positive feeling III Make as many words as you can out of the following words. One example has been done for you. 1. community city, toy, tune, unity, mutiny, cot . important . magnificent . Satisfied . generation rn wT FP WwW ND . achievement IV Let us play a word game antakshari. 1. Write the synonym of the word according to the clues given below. 2. For example, the synonym of the first word, IMPORTANT ends with the letter T . The synonym of the second word begins with T , TROUBLE . Then write the synonym of the third word starting with the letter E . 3. Now, continue with the word game. (i) major (synonym) (ii) problem (synonym) (iii) uneven (antonym) (iv) related to post office (v) our moral duty (vi) related to time (vii) prosperous (synonym) (viii) related to being alive * - bel ad POORVI V Study the highlighted punctuation marks in the following sentences VI from the text. 1. ... but that you should not be satisfied in merely keeping my awards the challenge before you was to earn your own rewards for the work that you did in your lifetime. 2. Writing even if it is a letter not only conveys our present concerns and views of the events taking place around us, but it becomes a possession. The highlighted punctuation is a long dash that can be used to link words or numbers or to create a pause in a sentence. There are two main types: the shorter en dash (-) and the longer em dash ( ). The en dash (-) represents a span or range in numbers or dates. For example, it can indicate time periods, like train operates JuneSeptember or page numbers, such as refer to pages 50-75 or to show scores, India won the series 2-1 . The em dash ( ) is used to add extra information or to show a change in thought within a sentence. For example, The exhibition held in the main hall features local artists. Or I bumped into someone unexpected my old teacher. Note: Do not add spaces around the dash and avoid overusing them. Read the sentences below and insert either an em dash ( ) or an en dash (-) suitably. Gi)