the letter. (Sender s address) (Date) (Receiver s address) Subject: Enquiry about a School Visit to a Memorial Dear Sir, (Body of the letter) Yours sincerely, (Name) POORVI SS | Body of the Letter |! Prompts for Enquiry F------------------ 4------------------------------------------- 4d | Paragraph 1: State | Thisis to enquire about... | the purpose of =: vy Could you please provide details about...? | | writing 1 } Fo------------------ 4#--------------- eee -- -- - - e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e eee 4 | Paragraph 2: Ask iv Firstly, I request you to share... | for more details ' v Secondly, I would appreciate it if you | could explain... ; I would also be grateful to get further | ; details on... : iv Lastly, could you clarify if... ? Fe--------- ee eee eee F---- -- eee er ee er ee ee er ee er er er er er ee ee ee ee ee eer rrr 4d ) Paragraph 3: | An early reply will be greatly appreciated, | Request anearly | asit will help... ; Tesponse ' Ilook forward to your guidance and support | 1 I I 1 for making this trip meaningful. : Let us explore I Out of twenty-one PVC awardees, Major Somnath Sharma was the first recipient of the PVC, and Captain Vikram Batra was the last recipient of the PVC, the highest gallantry award. Captain Vikram Batra, is popularly remembered as the Shershah of Kargil . His iconic success signal was 6 Yeh Dil Mange More . Captain Vikram -/ Batra, the D Company commander was tasked to capture Point 5140 on 20 June 1999, which he did with exemplary courage. After Point 5140 was captured, 13 JAK RIF was tasked to capture Point 4875. On 07 July 1999, ~ . Captain Batra led the assault from the A bust of Param Vir Chakra Awardee Captain Vikram Batra at the National War Memorial in Delhi. front and engaged m a physical fight (Source: National War Memorial) with the enemy. He killed five enemy soldiers at point blank range and himself sustained serious injuries. Despite his injuries, his dauntless determination inspired his men to clear the enemy from a dominating position. Later, he succumbed to his injuries. His fearless determination and leadership encouraged his company men to avenge his death and finally captured Point 4875. if PF aie \ eS j ite rere |poRemesitos Jiven VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS His inspiring leadership, dedication to duty, and steadfast love for his country continue to be an inspiration for the younger generation. , He attended the call of duty with absolute disregard for his personal safety. He was awarded the Param Vir Chakra, (Posthumously). bs II Gallantry awards in India are given to military personnel and others for displaying extraordinary courage in the line of duty. Some of the gallantry awards in India are: Param Vir Chakra: The highest military award in India, awarded for the most conspicuous bravery