via Humhama, Major Sharma urged his company to fight the enemy tenaciously. With extreme bravery, he kept rushing across the open ground to his sections exposing himself to heavy and accurate fire to urge them to hold on. Keeping his nerve, he skillfully directed the fire of his section into the everadvancing enemy. He repeatedly exposed himself to the full fury of enemy fire and laid out cloth strips to guide our aircraft onto their target in full view of the enemy. Realising that casualties had affected the effectiveness of his light automatics, this officer, whose left hand was in plaster, personally commenced filling magazines and issuing them to light machine gunners. A mortar shell landing right in the middle of the ammunition resulted in an explosion that killed him. Major Sharma's company held onto its position and the remnants withdrew only when almost completely surrounded. His inspiring example resulted in the enemy being delayed for six hours. Thus, gaining time for our reinforcements to get into position at Humhama to stem the tide of the enemy advance. His leadership, gallantry and tenacious defence were such that his men were inspired to fight the enemy by seven to one for six hours, one hour which was after this gallant officer had been killed. He has set an example of courage and qualities seldom equaled in the history of the Indian Army. POORVI In the quiet of the Kashmir Valley, where the echoes of ~ D Company s battle with infiltrators have long since faded, the story of Major Somnath Sharma remains a beacon of courage and sacrifice. His valour ensured that the tricolour would continue to fly over Srinagar, and his name is forever etched in the golden pages of India s military history. The life poignant: and legacy of Major Somnath Sharma stands as a poignant emotlonalland reminder of the price of freedom and the enduring spirit sad of those who fought to protect it. His story, marked by : selflessness and bravery, will continue to inspire and guide a? generations to come, ensuring that his sacrifice is never to - be forgotten. His name is etched on the Honour Wall of the - National War Memorial. N a ) \ Y : SEP PARTAP:SINGH LINK RATTAN SINGH SEF KUMAON WWADN, pyc }LNK BHAGY MA SOMNATH SHARMA: f ve | \F j 10.28 OHAN siNGr sUB MY RIF Honour Wall with Names of Bravehearts at the National War Memorial Medal of Honour N @ eo . 4 Let us discuss Let us salute this braveheart. Vande Mataram, vande mataram Sujalam suphalam malayaja shitalam, Shasya shyamalam mataram! Vande Mataram, vande mataram vande mataram... Jai Hind I Arrange the following events in chronological order. The first and the last events have been marked for you. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. 1. Major Somnath Sharma was born in 1923 in Kangra, Himachal Pradesh. (1) . Even after losing Major Somnath Sharma, the soldiers fought bravely to save Srinagar for