cannot be proven. musings 2 _ thoughts on / something one has been thinking about carefully for a long time /) / POORVI I Identify which of the following statements are facts and which are & _ opinions. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. \ 1. But speaking on the telephone only gives us an immediate but fleeting joy. 2. Istarted my working life soon after our country became independent. 3. To be quite honest, service to our nation s farmers was not the career I had envisioned for myself. . I knew I could make a more meaningful contribution by working here in Anand, Gujarat. . ... values that I saw in my mentor and supporter here in Anand Tribhuvandas Patel. . Life is a privilege, and to waste it would be wrong. . [hope that you, too, will discover, as I did, that failure is not about not succeeding. . ... the magnificent ceremony in which the President awarded me the Padma Vibhushan in 1999? Let us think and reflect I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow. 1. In today s fast-paced world we have become so addicted to instant communication that we prefer to use a telephone. But speaking on the telephone only gives us an immediate but fleeting joy. y Writing is different. Writing even if it is a letter not only conveys our present concerns and views of the events _ taking place around us but it becomes a possession that <> can be treasured and re-read over the years, with great, Pe abiding pleasure. (i) Fill in the blank given below by selecting the correct option \ 7 from the brackets. PD 4 When the writer refers to a fast-paced world , he is speaking ofa \ world where . (communication happens quickly but lacks depth/people have more time to write and reflect) (ii) Select the option that applies correctly to both Assertion (A) and Reason (R). (A): Writing letters can be treasured and re-read over the years. (R): Speaking on the telephone provides long lasting joy. (iii) (iv) VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS A. Both (A) and (R) are true, and (R) is the correct explanation of (A). B. Both (A) and (R) are true, but (R) is not the correct explanation of (A). C. (A) is true, but (R) is false. D. Both (A) and (R) are false. Identify whether the statement given below is true or false. The writer feels that letter-writing is a class apart from other kinds of writing. Which of the following is the most appropriate title for the given extract? A. The Rise of Instant Communication B. The Fleeting Delight of Phone Calls C. The Lasting Joy of Written Words D. Living in a Fast-paced World . Your grandmother too made an important choice. She knew, in those early days, life in Anand could not offer even the simple comforts that we take for granted today. However, she ardently supported my choice to