I write to you last? I have trouble even remembering! In today s fast-paced world we have become so addicted to instant communication that we prefer to use a telephone. But speaking on the telephone only gives us an immediate but fleeting joy. Writing is different. Writing even if it is a letter not only conveys our present concerns and views of the events taking place around us but it becomes a possession that can be treasured and re-read over the years, with great, abiding pleasure. You may not wish to read it all right away but, perhaps, a couple of decades or more from now, you will pick up these jottings of mine again and they will give you a deeper understanding of what I have done, and the reasons I pursued a life of service to our nation s farmers. You will then discover in them a valuable reminder of the days just before the world entered the twenty-first century. And you may want to share my memories with those of your generation, or even younger, to provide a glimpse of the world your grandparents lived in and knew. I started my working life soon after our country became independent. The noblest task in those days was to contribute in whatever way we could towards building an India of our dreams a nation where our people would not only hold their heads high in freedom but would be free from hunger and poverty. A nation where our people could live with equal respect and love for one another. A nation that would eventually be counted among the foremost nations of the world. It was then that I realised, in humility, that choosing to lead one kind of life means putting aside the desire to pursue other options. This transformation took place within me fifty years ago, when I agreed to work for a small cooperative of dairy farmers who were trying to gain control over their lives. To be quite honest, service to our nation s farmers was not the career I had envisioned for myself. But somehow, a series of events swept me along and put me in a certain time with a choice that would transform my life. I could have pursued a career in metallurgy and become the addicted: dependent on something fleeting: momentary or short-lived abiding pleasure: a feeling of happiness that continues for a long time jottings: brief notes foremost: leading humility: modesty/ quality of being humble pursue: follow envisioned: imagined or expected something to happen ina particular way fill POORVI ardently: ina way that shows strong feelings poise: ina calm and confident manner adhered: to continue to support integrity: honest and strong moral principles correlation: a connection between two or more things V KURIEN ANAND 388001 INDIA chief executive of a large company. Or, opted for a commission in the Indian Army and maybe retired as a general. Or, I could have left for the US and gone on to become a