traditions passed down from generation a? to generation testament: strong evidence or proof despatches: official reports on military affairs forged: shaped or strengthened, often through hardship We have delved into how the events of 03 November 1947, played out. It is also worth knowing more about the early life of Major Somnath and the events that led him to make the ultimate sacrifice for the nation. Born on 31 January 1923, in the picturesque town of Dadh in Kangra, Himachal Pradesh, Somnath Sharma belonged to a family with a rich military legacy. His father, Major General Amar Nath Sharma, had served the nation with distinction. Young Somnath was also deeply inspired by the valorous tales of the Mahabharata, imparted to him by his grandfather. From his early education at Sherwood College, Nainital, to his rigorous training at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst, Major Somnath Sharma s life was a testament to discipline and dedication. Commissioned into the 8th Battalion, 19th Hyderabad Regiment in 1942, he served with distinction during World War II in the Arakan Campaign in Burma, earning mentions in despatches for his bravery. However, it was during the Indo- Pakistan War of 1947-1948, particulary in the battle of Badgam, that the legacy of Major Somnath Sharma was truly forged. The life and sacrifice of Major Somnath Sharma embody the highest ideals of duty, honour, and patriotism. He has been a source of inspiration for soldiers and citizens alike. Most importantly, his story is a reminder of the sacrifices made by countless men and women in defence of the motherland and highlights the profound sense of duty that inspired them. MAJOR SOM WATH SHARMA PVC | FR 1923-1847 Ld ca\ 4 ; -_ g FPO No6n Ss S--76 o> We nat WSR Ae 6s) PVC SERIES-1 ISSUED BY THE ARMY POSTAL SERVICE VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS MINISTRY OF &) gz i DEFENCE CITATION IN RESPECT OF IC-521 MAJOR SOMNATH SHARMA CITATION On 03 Nov 1947, Major Somnath Sharma's company was ordered on a fighting patrol to Badgam in the Kashmir Valley. He reached his objective at first light on 03 Nov and took up a position south of Badgam at 1100 hours. The enemy, estimated at 500, attacked his company position with three sides, the company began to sustain heavy casualties. Fully realizing the gravity of the situation and the direct threat that would result to both the aerodrome and Srinagar if the enemy attack was not held until reinforcements could be rushed to close the gap leading to Srinagar via Humhama, Major Sharma urged his company to fight the enemy tenaciously. With extreme bravery, he kept rushing across the open ground to his sections exposing himself to heavy and accurate fire to urge them to hold on. Keeping his nerve, he skillfully directed the fire of his section into the everadvancing enemy. He repeatedly exposed himself to the full fury of enemy fire and laid out cloth strips to guide our aircraft onto their target in full view of