evidence before the culprit could get rid of it. . Thecompany s new advertising campaign was meant to to their competitors sales. . The hikers chose to despite the heavy rain, refusing to turn back on their journey. . Despite being heavily outnumbered, the soldiers vowed to defend their homeland and , refusing to surrender to the enemy forces. Read the highlighted words in the following sentence from the text. A contingent of troops posted to Jammu and Kashmir was air-lifted into Srinagar... There are many such collective nouns used in the context of armed forces. Match the collective nouns in Column 1 to their meanings in Column 2. You may refer to a dictionary. VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS 1. regiment (i) a large body of troops ready : for battle, especially an infantry unit 2. squadron a permanent unit of an army typically commanded by a lieutenant _colonel/colonel and divided into several companies 3. fleet a small unit, typically comprising 12-24 aircrafts and their crews used in air force, naval, or army aviation services. 4. battalion a group of ships sailing together, engaged in the same activity, or under the same ownership Now, fill in the blanks suitably with words from Column 1 in the table. A. The commanding officer addressed the entire of soldiers during the morning assembly. B. The admiral ordered the entire to set sail for battle. C. The of infantry advanced slowly through the dense forest. D. A of fighter jets was sent to intercept the enemy planes. POORVI III Read the following words from the text and fill in the blanks with the & correct words by taking clues from the meanings given below in the box. Meanings 1. To take and seize control: 2. To invade or occupy an area in large numbers: 3. To flood or overpower someone or something emotionally: Now, create a list of at least five other verbs that begin with over and frame sentences of your own. 7 IV In the following pairs of words, c is used for nouns, while s is used a J for verbs. * advice (noun) and advise (verb) * practice (noun) and practise (verb) device (noun) and devise (verb) * council (noun) and counsel (verb) Now, fill in the blanks correctly with the words given in the brackets. 1. The teacher s (i) is always helpful, and she continues to (ii) students on their career choices. (advice/advise) 2. The musician believes that daily (i)_ helps a lot, so she is always ready to (ii) her harmonium lessons. (practice/practise) 3. The scientist uses a strange (i) _ for experiments and plans to (ii) new methods for his analysis. (device/devise) 4. The village (i) met to discuss issues and decided to Gi) the villagers on important matters. (council/counsel) Read the highlighted word in the following sentence from the text. Most importantly, his story is a reminder of the sacrifices made by countless men and women in defence of the motherland. In terms of meaning, there