you, too, will discover, as I did, that failure is not about not succeeding. Rather, it is about not putting in your best effort and not contributing, however modestly, to the common good. In life you, too, will discover as I did, that anything can go wrong atany time and mostly does. Yet, there is little correlation between the circumstances of people s lives and how happy they are. Most of us compare ourselves with someone we think is happier a relative, an acquaintance, or often, someone we barely know. But when we start looking closely we realise that what we saw were only images of perfection. And that will help us understand and cherish what we have, rather than what we don t have. VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS V KURIEN ANAND 388001 INDIA Do youremember when you accompanied me atthe magnificent ceremony in Delhi where our President awarded me the Padma Vibhushan in 1999? With great pride, you slipped the medal around your neck, looked at it in awe and asked me very innocently if you could keep it. Do you remember the answer your grandmother and I gave you? We told you that of course, this medal was yours as much as it was mine but that you should not be satisfied in merely keeping my award the challenge before you was to earn your own reward for the work that you did in your lifetime. And in the end, if we are brave enough to love, strong enough to rejoice in another s happiness and wise enough to know that there is enough to go around for all, then we would have lived our lives to the fullest. I would like to dedicate these musings to you, Siddharth, and to the millions of other children of your generation in our country, in the hope that upon reading them you will be inspired enough to go bravely out into the world and work tirelessly in your chosen field for the larger good of the country, for the larger good of humanity. Remember, rewards that come to you then are the only true rewards for a life well-spent. With my fondest love, awe ff Matta (V KURIEN) Who says one man cannot make a change? Let us discuss A fact is something that can be proven true or false. A fact is not based on people s beliefs. An opinion on the other hand is a belief, feeling or judgement, and can vary from one person to another. An opinion cannot be proven. musings 2 _ thoughts on / something one has been thinking about carefully for a long time /) / POORVI I Identify which of the following statements are facts and which are & _ opinions. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. \ 1. But speaking on the telephone only gives us an immediate but fleeting joy. 2. Istarted my working life soon after our country became independent. 3. To be quite honest, service to our