love for his country continue to be an inspiration for the younger generation. , He attended the call of duty with absolute disregard for his personal safety. He was awarded the Param Vir Chakra, (Posthumously). bs II Gallantry awards in India are given to military personnel and others for displaying extraordinary courage in the line of duty. Some of the gallantry awards in India are: Param Vir Chakra: The highest military award in India, awarded for the most conspicuous bravery in the presence of the enemy. , pe Maha Vir Chakra: The second-highest military award in India, : . awarded for acts of gallantry in the presence of the enemy. . | Vir Chakra: Awarded for acts of gallantry in the presence of the enemy. = Find out more about gallantry awards. 4 LJ III The Indian government has been steadfast in its initiatives to boost the . representation of women in the Indian Armed Forces. These women ss have been serving the nation selflessly and with pride. Find out the key roles of women in the Indian Army. Share the information with your classmates and teacher. IV Birsa Munda: A Saga of Courage and Sacrifice Birsa Munda, a revered tribal freedom fighter, spiritual leader, oe and folk hero, belonged to the Munda tribe. Celebrated as a ch valiant warrior and a charismatic figure, he emerged as a powerful symbol of tribal resistance against British colonial rule. Among the people of Jharkhand, he is affectionately known as Dharti Aaba Father of the Land and is honoured : Pazar aor aft 150d oreicht as a divine figure for his selfless dedication to his people. 1S00 BRTH ANNIVERSARY OF IRSA MUNDA A commemorative stamp designed by Shri Sankha Samanta captures his powerful presence. It features Birsa Munda addressing his followers, with a determined expression that reflects his unwavering vision of tribal unity, empowerment, and self-governance. This stamp serves as a lasting tribute to his pivotal role in India s freedom struggle and his relentless commitment to protecting tribal rights. Source: https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2073652 V Make a list of the patriotic songs in any language, including songs from your region. Share the songs with your classmates and teacher. SOMEBODY S MOTHER Let us do these activities before we read. I Recall a time you helped someone. Write two words describing: 1. What were your feelings after you did so? 2. What might have been the feelings of the person whom you helped? Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. II Work in pairs. Read the words given below. Circle the words you would associate with an elderly person and underline the words you would associate with a school student. Share the reasons for your choices with your classmates and teacher. ! strong worried trembling hastening ! firm bent merry grey | | slow guide helpful ( 1 III Read the lines. The woman was old and ragged and grey And bent with the chill of the Winter s day. Select the suitable meaning of