when the situation arose. Describe how you helped the other person. ay? v Describe the reaction of the person you helped. Mention how you felt during and after helping the person. x Conclude by mentioning why you would do something like this again. ' You may begin like this: P 26 April 20xx, Saturday 8:00 p.m. Dear Diary, \\/- Today, I feel was a special day... g ssl S Let us explore I Did you know that even Earth has been referred to as mother in the ancient scriptures of India? In section 12.1.12 of Prthvi-Suikta (hymn-tothe-earth) of Atharva Veda, Earth is referred to as mother and us as her children by stating: It can be translated as Earth is my mother and I am her child . II Work in groups of four. Find out the names of countries that refer to their country as motherland and a few others as fatherland . Share your findings with your classmates and teacher. VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS III Read the poem and enjoy. A Nation s Strength Not gold, but only men can make A people great and strong... Men who for truth and honour s sake Stand fast and suffer long. Brave men who work while others sleep, Who dare while others fly... They build a nation s pillars deep And lift them to the sky. RALPH WALDO EMERSON (Note: Here, men refers to both men and women) IV Make a gratitude card for your mother/grandmother to thank her for at least five things that she does for you. Also write two things that you would do regularly to help them. Use recycled material to make and decorate the card. *: Write your own message : VERGHESE KURIEN I TOO HAD A DREAM Let us do these activities before we read. I Arrange the worldwide means of communication given below in the timeline provided. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. _ 4S 1. telephone 3. postcard & 4. telegraph 5. mobile phone 6. carrier pigeons old new II Workin pairs and discuss the following things. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. 1. The reasons for change in the means of communication over the years. 2. The means of communication that you prefer to use and the reason for your choice. 3. Communication through social media: its benefits and precautions that one should take against its misuse. VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS Let us read V KURIEN ANAND 388001 INDIA TO MY GRANDSON Anand, 2005 My dear Siddharth, When did I write to you last? I have trouble even remembering! In today s fast-paced world we have become so addicted to instant communication that we prefer to use a telephone. But speaking on the telephone only gives us an immediate but fleeting joy. Writing is different. Writing even if it is a letter not only conveys our present concerns and views of the events taking place around us but it becomes a possession that can be treasured and re-read over