(ii) her harmonium lessons. (practice/practise) 3. The scientist uses a strange (i) _ for experiments and plans to (ii) new methods for his analysis. (device/devise) 4. The village (i) met to discuss issues and decided to Gi) the villagers on important matters. (council/counsel) Read the highlighted word in the following sentence from the text. Most importantly, his story is a reminder of the sacrifices made by countless men and women in defence of the motherland. In terms of meaning, there is no difference between the two words (defence, defense). In American English the word is spelt with an s , whereas in British English it is spelt with a c , which is the preferred spelling. The word has several different meanings, but it is mostly used to mean the act of protecting someone or something against attack or criticism . VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS V Read the highlighted words in the following sentences from the text. e ...ended with echoes of courage that serve as an inspiration... % A contingent of troops posted to Jammu and Kashmir was airlifted Py into Srinagar... ' * D Company with 90 soldiers was the last and they were expected to return by 2:00 p.m. The life and sacrifice of Major Somnath Sharma embody the highest ideals of duty, honour, and patriotism. . The highlighted words are either singular verbs or plural verbs. They are in agreement with the subject of the sentence. This is called Subject-Verb Agreement. Now, fill in the blanks for the following sentences by choosing the correct | verb given within brackets. YU, 1. The bouquet of flowers (is/are) beautiful. 7 + 2. Neither the teacher nor the students (was/were) aware of the change in the schedule. 3. Each of the participants (has/have) submitted their projects on time. 4. The data collected by the researchers (shows/show) significant trends. 5. One of the players (was/were) injured during the match. 6. Either the children or their guardian __ (has/have) to attend the meeting. 7. A pair of shoes (is/are) missing from the rack. 8. Neither of the statements (is/are) true. 9. The members of the jury (has deliver/have delivered) their verdict to the court. 10. Mathematics (is/are) an interesting subject for many students. VI Read the following passage and correct the incorrect usage of verbs. One example has been done for you. A battalion of soldiers stand at attention as the National flag are raised. A battalion of soldiers stands at attention as the National flag is raised. POORVI Each soldier salute with pride while the commander and his assistants inspects the parade. The sound of marching feet echo through the air as a group of cadets prepare for their drill. Meanwhile, a convoy of military vehicles pass by, drawing cheers from the gathered crowd. Let us listen I You will listen to a talk about the Param Vir Chakra. As you listen, complete the sentences by filling in the blanks with one or two exact words or phrases you hear. (Transcript