will listen to a woman read the special broadcast of the news. As \ you listen, arrange the pictures in the correct sequence of the events that took place. (Transcript for teacher on page 99) II You will once again listen to the special broadcast of the news. As you listen, complete the following sentences with one to three exact words. : 1. The woman was having a difficult time staying afloat due to the ; 2. Rohan leapt into the river to save the woman without any > a 3. Rohan s act of bravery was witnessed by 4. Rohan was honoured at the Vigyan Bhawan for his incredible courage and 5. Rohan proved that when it comes to saving lives, age is VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS fp Let us speak I Read aloud the list of words from the poem that end in -ed . As you read, focus on the final sound of each word and place them in the appropriate AF columns. One example has been done for you. ragged aged waited heeded offered paused guided whispered Note: Adjectives that come before a noun and end with ed have /id/as = = 5] a at the final sound. I -_ Work in pairs. Narrate an incident where you helped someone in the past. Take turns to speak and use the cue cards given below. at school in the neighbourhood classmate explaining a concept cleanliness campaign at the market place in the playground elderly carrying bags a friend gets injured You may use the following prompts. Beginning the Story Describing the Experience It all started when... At that moment, I realised... The day began like any other... | * I was completely taken by I still remember... surprise... + At that moment, I realised... * The next few hours were... * I couldn t believe my eyes when I saw... Beginning the Story Describing the Experience Iwas overjoyed/thrilled/ From that day on... extremely satisfied * This memory reminds me to A wave of relief/joy/excitement always... washed over me... * This experience taught me the I felt a mixture of emotions... value of... I have never felt... In the end, I realised... POORVI Let us write I Write a diary entry of a day you helped someone in need. Remember to include the following points while writing it. Start with a sentence describing the day. Mention whom you helped. v Explain the situation in which the other person needed help. v Add the place and time of the day when the situation arose. Describe how you helped the other person. ay? v Describe the reaction of the person you helped. Mention how you felt during and after helping the person. x Conclude by mentioning why you would do something like this again. ' You may begin like this: P 26 April 20xx, Saturday 8:00 p.m. Dear Diary, \\/- Today, I feel was a special day... g ssl S Let us explore I Did you know that even Earth has