scores, India won the series 2-1 . The em dash ( ) is used to add extra information or to show a change in thought within a sentence. For example, The exhibition held in the main hall features local artists. Or I bumped into someone unexpected my old teacher. Note: Do not add spaces around the dash and avoid overusing them. Read the sentences below and insert either an em dash ( ) or an en dash (-) suitably. Gi) Theconference will be held from March 15 March 20. (ii) Ihave lived in Kanpur Raipur for five years now. (iii) The artist known for her vibrant paintings will be showcasing her work in Guwahati. (iv) The scores for the final match were 2 3. (v) Myfavourite snacks samosas, pakoras, and jalebis are all from India. (vi) The train journey from Belagavi Bengaluru takes less than ten hours. (vii) I just finished reading the book it was absolutely amazing! (viii) The event will take place on September 1 September 5. Study the highlighted words in the following sentences from the text. 1. We told you that of course, this medal was yours as much as it was mine... 2. ...who were trying to gain control over their lives. 3. I have always emphasised that it s a recognition of the achievements of many people... VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS In the given sentences, yours and theirs indicate possession something belonging to you and them, respectively. But, it s does not 6, indicate possession rather is the contracted form of it is . Note the following differences It s: is the contraction of it is or it has It s getting dark outside. Its: indicates that something belongs to you. The dog wagged its tail. You're: is the contraction of you are %0, > * You re going to love this book. 7 | Your: indicates that something belongs to you. Can I have one of your books? | They re: is the contraction of they are 7 * They re coming to the field trip. Their: indicates possession We should contact their manager. Fill in the blanks by choosing the correct word from the options given in the brackets. (i) Please remember to bring ___(your/you re) assignment book. (ii) The team celebrated __ (their/they re) victory after the match. (iii) (its/it s) important to stay hydrated during the hot summer days. (iv) I can t believe (your/you re) going to the mango festival today. (v) The students said (they re/their) excited for the field trip tomorrow. (vi) The tree lost (its/it s) leaves in the winter. VII Read the following phrases from the text. 1. In today s fast-paced world 2. On the telephone 3. With great, abiding pleasure 4. In the chapters that follow POORVI 5. Ata certain time 6. With equal respect and love The given phrases are Prepositional Phrases. Prepositional phrases are groups of words that begin with a preposition and include a noun or pronoun as the object of