to a woman read a special broadcast of the news. As you listen, arrange the pictures in the correct sequence of events that took place. Now, for the special broadcast, we bring you the story of a young hero whose courage has captured the nation s heart. On a fateful morning in Rajouri, young Rohan Ramchandra Bahir, a 15-year-old student, became a local hero when he fearlessly saved the life of a woman who had fallen into the Domri River while washing clothes. The 43-year-old woman was struggling to stay afloat in the strong currents, when Rohan, without a moment s hesitation, leapt into the river, _ putting his own life at risk. J "~ With great determination and courage, Rohan managed to reach the woman and pullher to safety, despite the dangerous conditions of the river. Onlookers who witnessed the incident were in awe of the young boy s bravery. Rohan s selfless act did not go unnoticed. His incredible courage was recognised at Vigyan Bhawan, where he was honoured with the prestigious Pradhan Mantri Rashtriya Bal Puraskar 2023 by the President of India, Droupadi Murmu. This remarkable young boy is now a symbol of heroism in his community, and his story is an inspiration to all. We . commend Rohan for his bravery and for showing that age is no barrier when it comes to saving lives. Vl, (Adapted) & _ \ Courtesy: Times of India Source: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/delhi/they-know-nofear-childrens-acts-of-bravery-innovative-ideas-honoured/ articleshow/97261236.cms II You will once again listen to a special broadcast of the news. As you listen, complete the following sentences in one to three exact words. ~ ! \ wy Let us listen (refer to page 93) I You will listen to the passage about Evelyn Glennie s journey in overcoming her hearing loss through music and turning a physical disability into a success story. Evelyn Glennie s loss of hearing had been gradual. By the time she was 11 her performance in school had deteriorated and her headmistress urged her parents to take her to a specialist. It was then discovered that her hearing was severely impaired as a result of gradual nerve damage. Everything suddenly looked black, says Evelyn. But Evelyn was not going to give up. She was determined to lead a normal life and pursue her interest in music. One day she noticed a girl playing a xylophone and decided that she wanted to play it too. Most of the teachers discouraged her but percussionist Ron Forbes spotted her potential. He began by tuning two large drums to different notes. Don t listen through your ears, he would say, try to sense it some other way. Says Evelyn, Suddenly I realised I could feel the higher drum from the waist up and the lower one from the waist down. Forbes repeated the exercise, and soon Evelyn discovered that she could sense certain notes in different parts of her body. I had learnt to open my mind and body to sounds and vibrations. She explains, It