you know who is Sharadindu Bandyopadhyay? He was a Bengali writer. He is remembered for his most famous creation of a fictional detective, Byomkesh Bakshi. He was actively involved with Bengali cinema as well as __ forte: a thing at which Bollywood. He wrote different forms of prose: novels, short | Someone excels stories, plays and screenplays. Besides, he wrote many songs and poems. However, his forte was short stories and novels. He also wrote historical fiction and supernatural stories. Sharadindu Bandyopadhyay started writing Byomkesh stories in 1932 at the age of 33. He has written 32 Byomkesh stories. He continued to write till his death in 1970. He portrayed himself as a narrator of his stories named Ajit Bandhopadhyay who is also a companion of Byomkesh Bakshi. In some stories Ajit also investigates in the absence of Byomkesh. These stories are written in traditional G\ S Bengali language and have now been translated into other languages. S His stories are very engrossing and consist of a series S of events. Byomkesh solves cases from international drug S) racket to household mysteries and crimes. Byomkesh Ck) OTT \! Same Unit 9 iS) 5S Ce tk) Nea Me MaMa Meatata Waa MatlaWMatlatatMatahatatatababh| identifies himself as Satyanweshi meaning truth seeker rather than a detective. Where he stands out from other legendary detectives like Hercule Poirot or Sherlock Holmes is that he is more concerned with truth than with the law. (Source: An excerpt from A well-known literary figure of Bengal / The Asian Age online: http://dailyasianage.com/news/ 109713/a-we-known-literaryfigure-of-bengal) 1. Who among the following is not a detective? (a) Byomkesh Bakshi (b) Sharadindu Bandyopadhyay (c) Hercule Poirot (d) Sherlock Holmes , 2. Sharadindu Bandyopadhyay is known for his in Fun fact fe (a) Short stories and novels a bolt of lightning (b) Poems and songs a deck of cards (c) Historical fiction (d) All of the above a swarm of bees a school of fish a fleet of cars 3. State whether true or false. a flock of birds an army of caterpillars (a) Byomkesh is a truth seeker . a herd of cows (b) Byomkesh is a detective like Hercule Poirot and Sherlock Holmes. (c) Byomkesh is concerned with truth rather than with the law. (d) Byomkesh follows law to solve his cases. 5. What is the role of Ajit in Byomkesh stories? 6. Find the antonyms of the words given below. All of them iQ) Ifa) / are given in the text. @ (a) natural S (b) fact UTC) i) (c) passively @/7), SNe e 5 WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1 MEMS MEMS HE HEM SHSM SMS MSHS HSS 4 S45 HE HEH SMe MS 41S (4 (d) discontinued "+~ _ ites (e) presence (f) modern (g) unconcerned. Cs) VocaBULARY 1. The following words and phrases occur in the passages. Try to guess the meanings. Match the words with their meanings. You may refer a dicitionary later. database the act of going against or refusing to obey a law, an agreement, etc. violation