dove grew heavier. The equal balance was not arrived at. But the king remained calm and unperturbed. The Gods in the guise of dove and eagle were assured of Shibi s righteousness. The forms of the eagle and the dove soon disappeared. In their place stood Indra, the king of the Gods and Agni, the God of fire smiling and blessing the king for his benevolence and greatness. 1... Why were the Gods in heaven afraid of King Shibi? magnanimous: generous or benevolence: kindness, generosity and helpfulness 2. What made the eagle angry? S Yay J YOIO~e om, Saxe ea 2 WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] MEMS MEMS HE HEM SHSM SMS MSHS HSS 4 S45 HE HEH SMe MS 41S (4 What did the eagle demand? Was the eagle satisfied? Who were in the disguise of the eagle and the dove? King Shibi was blessed for his: ) 3 SPEAKING 1. In a group of four, discuss and take down notes based on the discussion. Theft in the digital age. Theft that occurs when someone uses another s unique personal details like his/her name, credit card numbers, without his/her permission, to commit fraud or other crimes. You may talk to the manager of a Bank, Cyber crime cell, etc., about online identity theft cases and measures to avoid them. e Discuss this in groups of four in the class. e Prepare posters on creating awareness about online identify theft. Ck) @ WrITING 1. Sometimes we think about what we are like and how each of us is different. We all are interesting people with our physical differences and attitudes to life. Write in about 300-400 words what you are like, your identity and what you enjoy doing and how do you envision yourself in future. Unit 9 xe Let the cat out of the bag Give away a secret Ni< 8 Fun fact | A stitch in time saves nine Fix the problem now before it gets worse ME Fun fact Cross your fingers For good luck G\ D LS) a A *) OG) ly % S 5) Or THON +) S @ Nea Me MaMa Meatata Waa MatlaWMatlatatMatahatatatababh| 2. Complete the following story. It has to be a scary story that terrifies people. Give a suitable title to your story. I stopped my scooter in front of an old and dilapidated building. A haggered, skinny old man with drooping shoulders came towards me. Don t go in, Sir , he whispered. It is dangerous... BS ) Ck) NY I m all ears . o. . 1. Going digital means more transparency, saving of papers, accountability and ease of transaction. The Government has initiated the programme Digital India . Collect more information about this programme. You can interview people, collect photographs, anecdotes, data, etc. Prepare a report based on your findings. You have my full attention. 2. Prepare a street play (nukkad natak) on how someone was duped by an unknown person when he/she was trying to withdraw money from