be uncomfortable, but I am. e Few people take the trouble to visit me. / People generally do not take the trouble to visit me. e Better be quick. / Better not be late. 1. Change affirmative sentences into negative sentences without changing the meaning. One has been done for you. I know all the answers. / There are no answers that I we FS don t know. Some words that go (a) All the members liked the programme. hand-in-hand Blood-red Sky-blue Pitch-dark (b) Amritsar is colder than Delhi. Smig deep Lifelong Worldwide Heart-wrenching Noteworthy (c) Iam free to go places and do nothing. scoicilen Homesick Headstrong Handmade (d) The farmer was too weak to walk. (e) She is always on time. (f) The intruder was foolish to let Gerrard go. S Sq e OIOX OG) hy 3 Unit 9 iS) 5 Nea Me MaMa Meatata Waa MatlaWMatlatatMatahatatatababh| PST4 Fun fact i Once in a blue moon Rarely NV 4 Cutting corners Doing something poorly in order to save time or money PS 4 Don t cry over spilt milk There is no reason to complain about something that can t be fixed S Yay J S @ S @/7), e fe) MEMS MEMS HE HEM SHSM SMS MSHS HSS 4 S45 HE HEH SMe MS 41S (4 2. Let us look at the sentence given below. I am glad you are pleased to see me. Here, to see is an example of the infinite form of a verb. The infinite form of a verb is usually preceded by to . Choose the words from the box and complete the sentences given below. phone up, pay, assist, change, clear off, help, team up, stay (a) Before we begin I would like you my place. (b) Ill be glad you. (c) You mean (d) But are you sure it s going you? (e) Those are just the things I want with me? () Be willing to make sacrifices in order. out there. (g) Anju asked Hemant Rs. 100 to avoid a scene. (h) Well, tell him directly. CK] 3 Epitine Some words are missing in the passage given below, indicated by / . Rewrite the passage by providing the missing words, and using appropriate punctuation marks in the space given below. Sherlock Holmes is/ fictional private detective, the first scientific detective, created/ British author Sir arthur conan doyle. He is a consulting detective in the stories written by Sir Doyle. Holmes is known for his skills of observation, knowledge of forensic science, / logical reasoning. He employs all these while investigating cases for/ wide variety of clients. Sir Doyle s four novels and 56 short stories, excluding one, are set in the victorian or edwardian eras, between about 1880 and 1914 Most are narrated by Dr Watson, Holmes s friend. he is also his biographer/ usually accompanies Holmes during his investigations/ often shares quarters with him at the address of 221B Baker Street, london, where many of the stories begin. Sherlock