science, / logical reasoning. He employs all these while investigating cases for/ wide variety of clients. Sir Doyle s four novels and 56 short stories, excluding one, are set in the victorian or edwardian eras, between about 1880 and 1914 Most are narrated by Dr Watson, Holmes s friend. he is also his biographer/ usually accompanies Holmes during his investigations/ often shares quarters with him at the address of 221B Baker Street, london, where many of the stories begin. Sherlock Holmes is arguably/best known fictional detective, with guinness World Records listing him as the WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] most portrayed movie character in history The stories have been adapted into stage/ radio plays, television films video games, and other media for over one hundred years. Many have believed Holmes to be not a fictional character/ a real individual because of his popularity/ fame. widely considered a British cultural icon, the Character and Stories have had a profound/ lasting effect on mystery Writing and popular culture/a Whole. Unit 9 Nea Me MaMa Meatata Waa MatlaWMatlatatMatahatatatababh| Ck) @ LisTENING Listen to the story of Shibi Rana and answer the questions that follow. There are many stories in our mythology when gods have disguised themselves in the forms of human beings, birds, etc. This is done either to test the efficiency and ability of the kings or to see if people are happy and contented on earth. This is another aspect of changing the identity. Let us listen to story of King Shibi. There was a great king, Shibi Rana who had immense power then, even gods in heavens were amazed. They feared that Shibi might take away their kingdoms. They devised a plan to test his sense of justice. So they decided to reach Shibi s kingdom in disguise. One day, Shibi Rana was sitting on his throne. His courtroom was surrounded by majestic gardens. There came a scared dove flying to him and it was followed by a fierce looking eagle. The king gave shelter to the dove and saved her. The eagle argued that the king has taken away his food the dove. It would starve. The king foraivi : assured the eagle that he would give equal quantity of orgiving, especially towards ; . a rival or less powerful any other food. The eagle asked for King Shibi s flesh. The person magnanimous king agreed with a smile. A balance was brought in the court. It was soon found that with each addition of the king s flesh the dove grew heavier. The equal balance was not arrived at. But the king remained calm and unperturbed. The Gods in the guise of dove and eagle were assured of Shibi s righteousness. The forms of the eagle and the dove soon disappeared. In their place stood Indra, the king of the Gods and Agni, the God of fire smiling and blessing the king for his benevolence and greatness. 1... Why were the Gods in heaven afraid of King Shibi? magnanimous: