to start? : Usually, this is what I tell people, If you want to find someone, I need the name with the exact spelling, the DOB if you know it, the social security number, and a last known, official address where they ve lived within the past 15 years. Because that means they'll be in our database. : Do most private investigators have a relationship with local police? : I would say that s kind of a myth. Most cops wouldn t even do it in the first place, because they know how serious a violation it is. : Do most private eyes carry guns? : I don t think so. We don t kill people but help them. surveillance: close observation, especially of a suspected spy or criminal DOB: Date of Birth e S a S S A Ck) Oa) [&: S Nea Mea MaMa Matata Waa Mata Matlatatatatatatatablabh| Interviewer : What do films and television shows get wrong about being a PI? Detective : The big difference is, the things you see in films do happen to private detectives, but they re shrinking down maybe 20 years of adventure into an episode. After 30 years, I probably have one good movie worth of experiences. (Adapted from https: //www.thrillist.com/.../private-detective-interviewquestions-you-ve-always-want) 1. What is the profession of the person being interviewed? 2. Complete the following sentence. As soon as the detective entered the room, he (a) examined the place carefully. (b) was vague and uncertain. (c) knew what he was doing. (d) got ready for the interview. 3. Which of the following was not a part of the job of the detective? (a) to wander about (b) to find lost people (c) to carry guns (d) to keep a watch 4. According to the detective, there are some qualities that are essential in his profession. What are these and why are they essential? S Yay J YOIO~e om, Saare ea 2 WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] MEMS MEMS HE HEM SHSM SMS MSHS HSS 4 S45 HE HEH SMe MS 41S (4 5. What information should the PI have in order to locate someone? ME Common Error Incorrect Which kind of car? Correct 6. In the sentence given below the word aviators means Which type of car? sunglasses. Now choose the appropriate meaning for the underlined word from the options given. Under the sanctuary of his aviators, his eyes scanned the room. (a) shelter (b) shade (c) hideout (d) refuge Read the passage and answer the questions that follow. SHARADINDU BANDYOPADHYAY Do you know who is Sharadindu Bandyopadhyay? He was a Bengali writer. He is remembered for his most famous creation of a fictional detective, Byomkesh Bakshi. He was actively involved with Bengali cinema as well as __ forte: a thing at which Bollywood. He wrote different forms of prose: novels, short | Someone excels stories, plays and screenplays. Besides, he wrote many songs and poems. However, his forte was short stories and novels. He also wrote historical fiction and supernatural stories.