@/7), SNe e 5 WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1 MEMS MEMS HE HEM SHSM SMS MSHS HSS 4 S45 HE HEH SMe MS 41S (4 (d) discontinued "+~ _ ites (e) presence (f) modern (g) unconcerned. Cs) VocaBULARY 1. The following words and phrases occur in the passages. Try to guess the meanings. Match the words with their meanings. You may refer a dicitionary later. database the act of going against or refusing to obey a law, an agreement, etc. violation open to more than one interpretation; not having one obvious meaning. surveillance |a structured set of data held in a computer, especially one that is accessible in various ways. insurance close observation, especially of a suspected spy or criminal. an agreement made with a company or the Government that provides a guarantee of compensation for specified loss, damage, illness, or death in return for payment of a specified premium. an action or event regarded as morally or legally wrong and causing general public outrage. sinister to make an illegal copy of something in order looking to deceive. suggesting evil or harm 2. The contextual meaning of sanctuary in the comprehension passage I is shade . The same word sanctuary is used in a variety of sentences given below. They have different meanings in different contexts. Refer to a dictionary and write the meanings. (a) Banita s home was a sanctuary for runaway kids. Q) es S Ck) OG) ly % Unit 9 S 5 Cee +) Nea Me MaMa Meatata Waa MatlaWMatlatatMatahatatatababh| S = @ (b) The refugees found sanctuary when they reached India. (c) The sanctuary contains the altar of sacrifice. (d) I found sanctuary in the cave to save myself from the storm. (e) Bhadra Wildlife Sanctuary is a protected area for tigers. sik 3. Use the following pair of opposites in sentences. One Fun fact | has been done for you. Commonly misspelt lose/gain words You ve nothing to lose, but what have you to gain? Incorrect Correct Inadvertant Inadvertent (a) hot/ cold Indispensible Indispensable Withold Withhold Bizzare Bizarre (b) beautiful/ugly Carribean Caribbean Fourty Forty (c) smart/foolish (d) lonely/busy (e) great/little < (f) live/die YWO~e Oo See a @ WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1 MEMS MEMS HE HEM SHSM SMS MSHS HSS 4 S45 HE HEH SMe MS 41S (4 CK] 3 GRAMMAR An affirmative sentence can be changed into a negative sentence without changing the meaning of the original sentence. Look at the examples given below. e You may be comfortable, but Iam not. /You may not be uncomfortable, but I am. e Few people take the trouble to visit me. / People generally do not take the trouble to visit me. e Better be quick. / Better not be late. 1. Change affirmative sentences into negative sentences without changing the meaning. One has been done for you. I know all the answers. / There are no answers that I we FS don t know. Some words that go (a) All the members liked the programme. hand-in-hand