Unit 9.indd 124 976CHI1 eo ~<O ey) Ms Gaye O) ) LET S BEGIN ee ee ee ee eee eee eee eee eee enn In the play IfI Were You , you have read how Gerrard outsmarts the intruder with his presence of mind . The intruder wanted to steal Gerrard s identity. In our day-to-day life we share personal information like telephone number, house address, mobile number, date of birth, e-mail address, etc., everyday with people whom we may not know very well. Don t you think it is not safe to share information in today s digital age? Someone like the intruder in the play If I Were You might misuse your unique and personal identity details. This is called identity theft. The cases of online identity thefts are increasing day by day. Collect information about cases of identity theft and share it in the class. ee ee Ck] ReapING COMPREHENSION Read the following text and answer the questions that follow. INTERVIEW WITH A DETECTIVE His appearance was clean, cool and deliberately ambiguous. Under the sanctuary of his aviators, his eyes silently scanned the room. He is a Manhattan-based, third-generation private detective who s been in the business for more than three decades specialising in surveillance and being an overall mystery-tinged badass. We asked him everything we ve ever wanted to know about the profession. Reprint 2025-26 20-02-2023 09:29:55 Interviewer Detective Interviewer Detective Interviewer Detective Interviewer Detective Interviewer Detective Unit 9 : So, what exactly do you do? : I do a lot of surveillance. Basically, someone who wonders, What is this other person up to? If it s insurance company (surveying someone on workers compensation), they'll ask, Is he back working? Things like that. Another very common _ request is locating people, and it could be for a lot of reasons. I had a case recently, a man hadn t been in touch with his mother for 20 years and I helped him find her. : What kind of skills make for a good PI (Private Investigator)? : Patience Number one. You have to pay attention. You have to be the kind of person, if you sit in front of a door watching it for six hours, and you haven t seen your guy. You have to plan accordingly, and be willing to make sacrifices in order to stay out there. It s not a job for people who want to slack off. : If you needed to locate someone, what s the ideal information you need to start? : Usually, this is what I tell people, If you want to find someone, I need the name with the exact spelling, the DOB if you know it, the social security number, and a last known, official address where they ve lived within the past 15 years. Because that means they'll be in our database. : Do most private investigators have a relationship with local police? : I would say that s kind of a myth. Most cops