They are locating the distances of the school and garden from their houses. If, instead, each of them had thought of distances from a same object or point, say, the bus stand, then their observations would have been the same. When distance is stated with respect to a fixed object or point, then this point is called a reference point. A few days later, Hardeep tells his friends excitedly, Let us all go to the playground. The sports teacher wants us to help her to draw lines with chuna powder (limestone powder) for making the Kabaddi court for the sports day. Padma: We will need a longer measuring tape. Let us take it from the sports room. (Fig. 5.10) Deepa: Let us first decide the point on the ground from which we will measure the distances to start drawing the lines. Let us call this our reference Fig. 5.10: point. (Fig. 5.11) A measuring tape Fig. 5.11: Drawing lines for Kabaddi court Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:16:48 PM After a few days, Padma was travelling by bus to visit her grandparents in Delhi. She was eager to reach Delhi and was reading the kilometre stones on the side of the road. On one of the kilometre stones, it was written Delhi 70 km (Fig. 5.12). Further on, the next kilometre stone read Delhi 60 km . Each kilometre stone Fig. 5.12: indicated that she was getting closer to her A kilometre stone syandparents house. These kilometre stones indicated her distance from Delhi. So, Delhi is What do such i the reference point in this situation. kilometre stones e indicate? How could Padma conclude that she was getting closer to her destination? Fig. 5.13: Positions of kilometre stones with respect to Delhi as a reference point If the kilometre stone reads Delhi 70 km as shown in Fig. 5.13, we can say that the position of Padma is 70 km from Delhi. When the kilometre stone reads Delhi 60 km , the position of Padma is 60 km from Delhi. Does this mean that the position of Padma, with respect to the reference point, is changing with time? When i ] does the position of an object change with respect to a reference point? Does e it change when an object is moving? Measurement of Length and Motion Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 5.indd 89 10/4/2024 3:16:52 PM es 5.6 Voving Things Activity 5.2: Let us explore SE Look around and prepare a list of five objects that are in motion and five objects that are at rest. Record your observations in Table 5.3. @ Think about how you decided whether an object was in motion or at rest. Write your explanation (justification) in Table 5.3. Table 5.3: Observing things around you j in wee ge jects at Y Ae Objects Justification obje Justification motion rest Cow grazing Tree in the field Compare and analyse your justifications. How can one decide if an object is in motion or at rest? An object is said