that are at rest. Record your observations in Table 5.3. @ Think about how you decided whether an object was in motion or at rest. Write your explanation (justification) in Table 5.3. Table 5.3: Observing things around you j in wee ge jects at Y Ae Objects Justification obje Justification motion rest Cow grazing Tree in the field Compare and analyse your justifications. How can one decide if an object is in motion or at rest? An object is said to be in motion if its position changes with respect to the reference point with time. If an object is not changing its position with respect to the reference point with time, it is said to be at rest. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 5.indd 90 10/4/2024 3:16:52 PM Deepa looked around her in the bus and noticed that all the passengers were seated. She looked around again after a minute and found them still occupying their seats. She wondered, Are they moving? She concluded that the position of the passengers was not changing with time. Therefore, they were certainly at rest. However, when she looked outside, she felt they were in motion as their positions were changing with respect to things outside. The reference point is important in deciding whether an object is at rest or in motion. If Deepa considered herself (or the bus) as the reference point, then the passengers were at rest. However, if she considered any object J outside the bus (say a building) as the reference point, then the passengers (and the bus) were in motion. More to know! Suppose you are travelling on a ship which is LY) moving at a constant speed along a straight line on a calm sea. Suppose there is no window Think it onthe ship. Is there any way that you can determine whether the ship is moving or is stationary? over! mums 5.7 Types of Motion Chapter 5.indd 91 Activity 5.3: Let us explore @ Take an eraser and drop it from a certain height. @ Observe its motion. Does it move along a straight line? When an orange drops from the tree, does it move in a straight line? Have you seen the Republic Day parade? Recall the march-past of students during the parade. Do they move on a straight-line path? When a heavy box is pushed, it may also move along a straight line (Fig. 5.14). Reprint 2025-26 Measurement of Length and Motion 10/4/2024 3:17:13 PM When an object moves along a straight line, its motion is called linear motion. Identify such linear motion in your surroundings. Fig. 5.14: Linear motion But do things always move along a straight line? You might have enjoyed playing on swings and merry-go-rounds. Are these types of motion also linear motion? Activity 5.4: Let us investigate LS Tie an eraser (or a potato) to one end of a thread. Hold the other end of the thread with your hand and whirl it (Fig.