Let us measure py @ Select some objects around you, such as a comb), a pen, a pencil, and an eraser to measure their lengths. @ Measure their lengths one by one using a metre scale and note down the measurements in Table 5.2. Table 5.2: Measuring lengths Object Length of the object While writing the length, do not forget to write the unit also. Thus, your result will consist of two parts one part is a number and the other part is the unit of measurement. Some of your friends in the class would have measured the length of the same objects. Compare the lengths measured by you with that of your friends. Are the measured lengths the same or slightly different? If not the same, discuss the possible reasons for the differences. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 5.indd 86 10/4/2024 3:16:34 PM Mmmm 5.4 Measuring the Length of a Curved Line Anish and his parents fixed electric string lights on the arches of the verandah of their house, as shown in Fig. 5.7, for a celebration at home. How would they have measured the required length of string lights? In the case of a curved line, measurements can be made with the help of a flexible measuring tape or by using a thread as shown in Fig. 5.8. Fig. 5.7: House decorated with string lights The thread can then be straightened and its length can be measured using a metre scale. Fig. 5.8: Measuring the length of a curved line mum 5.5 Describing Position Bus stand School Chapter 5.indd 87 One day the teacher informs her students that she has planned an educational visit to a nearby garden. She asks the students to reach there directly in the morning. Deepa and her friends start discussing whether the garden would be closer than their school or farther. Tasneem and Padma say that the garden would be closer, while Deepa and Anish feel that the school would be closer, Hardeep thinks that both would be almost at an equal distance (Fig. 5.9). Deepa s Anish s Hardeep s Tasneem s Padma s house house house house house Garden Fig. 5.9: Location of bus stand, school, garden and houses of Deepa and her friends Reprint 2025-26 Measurement of Length and Motion @ 10/4/2024 3:16:44 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 5.indd 88 Who do you think is correct? All of them are correct (Fig. 5.9). Then, why are their observations different? They are locating the distances of the school and garden from their houses. If, instead, each of them had thought of distances from a same object or point, say, the bus stand, then their observations would have been the same. When distance is stated with respect to a fixed object or point, then this point is called a reference point. A few days later, Hardeep tells his friends excitedly, Let us all go to the playground. The sports teacher wants