Measurement of Length and Motion Deepa, a curious eleven-year old girl, livesina town in the state of Haryana. The new school year has started. Deepa needs a new uniform since she has grown taller. Her mother takes her to acloth shop. She asks for a two-metre cloth piece. The shopkeeper measures the ee cloth using a metal measuring rod. Sere. Then, the tailor takes her measurements | | using a flexible measuring tape. Her mother instructs the tailor to increase the length of her /\./ uniform by char angula (four fingers width). / @ Are the tape and rod similar to the scale that the elder sister has in her geometry box? What did mother mean by char angula? Deepa shares her experience with her school friends Anish, Hardeep, Padma, Tasneem and this leads to a discussion amongst them. Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 5.indd 79 10/4/2024 3:15:23 PM Hardeep Padma Deepa Tasneem es 5 |] HOW do we Measure? Hardeep says, I have seen my grandmother measuring cloth by the length of her arm. Have you ever seen how a farmer measures length to divide his field into beds? He walks and counts the number of his strides, says Padma. Oh, not just the length of the strides sometimes they also use the length of their feet to measure, adds Anish. Deepa says excitedly, Measuring length using body parts must be so much fun! Let us also measure something using a body part. What should we measure? Okay, let us measure the length ofthe table in our classroom, says Tasneem. Padma adds, And which body part should we use to measure it? Deepa says, Let us use our handspan. I will show you how to use it. I have seen my mother using it. She calls it balisht. Hardeep adds, Okay. Let us also note down Fig. 5.1: Use ofhandspan our measurements. for measuring Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 5.indd 80 10/4/2024 3:15:25 PM Chapter 5.indd 81 Table 5.1: Measuring the length of the table Name of the Student Number of Handspans Anish Slightly more than 13 Padma 13 Tasneem Slightly less than 13 Deepa Between 13 and 14 Hardeep 14 Padma says, Oh, the number of handspans is different for all of us. So, what can we say about the length of the table? But why should the number be different? Hardeep asked thoughtfully. Tasneem says, I can guess. Our handspans are of different sizes. Anish gives an idea, Let us check this. So, all five of them put their handspans along each other and arrive at the conclusion that the lengths of their handspans are different. Deepa says thoughtfully, No wonder people use scales and measuring tapes. Deepa and her friends compare the length of the table with the length of their handspans. The length of the table is expressed in terms of their handspans. Here, the handspan used for measurement is an example ofa unit. And the length is expressed in two