Estimate how many coins are required to be placed one after the other lengthwise, without leaving any gap between them, to cover the whole length of the chosen side of a notebook. Verify your estimate by measuring the same side of the notebook and the size of the coin using a 15-cm scale. Give two examples each for linear, circular and oscillatory motion. Observe different objects around you. It is easier to express the lengths of some objects in mm, some in cm and some in m. Make a list of three objects in each category and enter them in the Table 5.6. Table 5.6: Sizes of objects around us Size Objects mm cm. m A rollercoaster track is made in the shape shown in Fig. 5.19. A ball starts from point A and escapes through point F. Identify the types of motion of the ball on the rollercoaster and corresponding portions of the track. Fig. 5.19: Rollercoaster track Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:17:56 PM Chapter 5.indd 99 12. 13. Tasneem wants to make a metre scale by herself. She considers the following materials for it plywood, paper, cloth, stretchable rubber and steel. Which of these should she not use and why? Think, design and develop a card game on conversion of units of length to play with your friends. Learning further 3 i i H Can you find the thickness of a single page of your notebook or textbook using a scale? Think of a way and write it. Carry out the activity and report your result. Collect fallen leaves from the same tree. Identify the name of the tree whose leaves you have taken. Measure length and breadth of all these leaves using a 15-cm scale, as shown in Fig. 5.20. Record your observations in the Table 5.7. Fig. 5.20: Measuring a leaf Table 5.7: Length and breadth of leaves Length Breadth S. no. Name of tree of leaf of leaf Discuss why the leaves of the same tree vary in length and breadth. Reprint 2025-26 Measurement of Length and Motion a 10/4/2024 3:18:02 PM Fig. 5.21: A maze Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 5.indd 100 Ad Discuss with elders in your community what units were used for measurement of length in the olden days. Also, using the internet, try to find out about the length scales found in excavations of archaeological sites in India. Create amaze using lines of 1 cm, 2cmand their combination. Part of it has been made for you in Fig. 5.21. Now use your imagination and expand it to a size as big as you want. How tall am I? Stand along a wall and with the help of an adult, mark your height (Fig. 5.22). Repeat it every three months to maintain a height record for yourself and your siblings. Let us design a fun method for measuring the distance between two places by using a bicycle. Attach a flexible metal strip to the spoke of the front wheel