always leave a space between the number and the unit. Also, note that writing sec for second and hrs for hour is incorrect. FASCINATING FACTS The hole in the bowl of Ghatika-yantra was made in such a manner that it took 24 minutes to fill and sink. The time unit measured by this clock was called ghatika or ghati. It became the standard unit of time measurement and continued until the end of the nineteenth century. A 24-hour-long day was, thus, divided into 60 equal ghatis. Chapter 8.indd 111 4/3/2025 4:54:38 PM [Activity 8.3: Let us identify * Look at the wall clock shown in Fig. 8.9 carefully. What is the smallest interval of time you can measure with it? One second is the smallest interval of time that we can Fig. 8.9: A wallclock measure using this clock. SCIENCE AND SOCIETY In today s world, measuring tiny fractions of a second is very important! For example, in sports, timekeeping devices can record events down to one-hundredth or even one-thousandth of a second (a millisecond) to determine the winners in a race. In medicine, heart monitors like Electrocardiogram (ECG) machines measure the millisecond variations in heartbeats to detect health issues. In music, digital recordings capture sound thousands of times per second for smooth playback. Many devices use even shorter intervals, smartphones, and computers process signals in microseconds (one-millionth of a second), allowing them to operate very fast. Scientists continue to develop even more precise time-measuring tools for space exploration, medicine, and advanced science experiments. The faster and more accurate our clocks become, the more they help society in ways we may not even notice! For races covering the same distance, we can tell who was faster by measuring time. But how can we tell that when comparing races for different distances? 8.2 Slow or Fast What do we mean when we say something is moving fast or slow? Suppose you are watching a 100 metre race on a straight track. All the players begin from the starting line together but after sometime they are not running together (Fig. 8.10). How do you decide who is running faster amongst them? Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 Chapter 8.indd 112 4/3/2025 4:54:39 PM Chapter 8.indd 113 Fig. 8.10: Boys running a race ona straight track Someone who is ahead of others at some instant of time, is running faster than them. Hence, someone who has covered more distance within the same time is running faster. The distances moved by objects in a given interval of time decide which one is faster or slower. We often say that the faster runner has a higher speed. You are probably familiar with the word speed . 8.3 Speed [SS Sennnnsso>> ene | By comparing the distances moved by two or more objects in a unit time, it can be found out which of them is moving faster. The unit time may be one second or one minute or one hour. We call the