motion of an eraser hung with a thread. Is the pendulum similar to that? Rigid support Long thread d B Extreme O Extreme < Bob position Mean position position (a) (b) Fig. 8.7 A simple pendulum The pendulum at rest is in its mean position. When the bob of the pendulum is moved slightly to one side and released, it starts oscillatory motion. Its motion is periodic in nature because it repeats its path after a fixed interval of time. The pendulum is said to have completed one oscillation when its bob, starting from its mean position O, moves to extreme position A, changes direction and moves to another extreme position B, changes direction and comes back to O (Fig. 8.7b). The pendulum also completes one oscillation when its bob moves from one extreme position A to another extreme position B and comes back to A. The time taken by the pendulum to complete one oscillation is called its time period. Let us now set up a pendulum and measure its time period. [Activity 8.2: Let us experiment e| + Collect a piece of string around 150 cm long, a heavy metal ball with hook/ a stone (bob), a stopwatch/ watch, and aruler. >, ~ Tie the bob at one end of the string. Fix the other end of the string to a rigid support such that the length of the string in between support and bob is around 100 cm. Wait for the bob to come to rest. Your pendulum is now ready. >, ~ >, ~ Measurement of Time and Motion 4/3/2025 4:54:35 PM >, ~ Gently hold the bob, move it slightly to one side and release it. Take care not to push the bob while releasing it and that the string is taut. Is your pendulum now oscillating? >, ~ Using a watch, measure the time it takes for the pendulum to complete 10 oscillations. Record the time in Table 8.1. >, ~ Repeat this activity 3-4 times. Divide the time taken for 10 oscillations by 10 to calculate the time period of your pendulum. Note it down in Table 8.1. Table 8.1 Time period of a simple pendulum Length of the string = 100 cm >, ~ Time taken for 10 oscillations Time period S.No. (seconds) (seconds) 1. 2. 3. Is the time period of your pendulum almost the same every time? What do you conclude from this observation? The time period of the pendulum is almost the same every time. THINK LIKE A SCIENTIST! You just did an important historical experiment which was first done by Galileo, except you used a watch to measure time in place of your pulse beat. Suppose you were Galileo experimenting with pendulums, what all would you investigate? What questions could you ask? Would all pendulums have the same time period? How would you test this? Repeat Activity 8.2 using the same bob but with pendulums of two or three different lengths. Does the time period change? If so,