type, water flowed out from a vessel which had markings for time (Fig. 8.2a). In the other type, there would be a bowl, with a fine hole at the bottom, which was floated on the surface of water (Fig. 8.2b). ; ; It gradually filled up in a fixed time and me. O27 Awa) Floating Whi dg our-dype finally sank. Then, it was lifted up and floated again. In an hourglass (Fig. 8.3), time was measured on the basis of the flow of sand from one bulb to another. Candle clocks (Fig. 8.4) were candles with markings that indicated the passage of time when burned. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 Chapter 8.indd 106 4/3/2025 4:54:32 PM Chapter 8.indd 107 FASCINATING FACTS The world s largest stone sundial, the Samrat Yantra, was built around 300 years ago at the Jantar Mantar, in Jaipur, Rajasthan, a UNESCO World Heritage site that houses several astronomical instruments. With its imposing height of 27 metres, its shadow moves at about 1 millimetre per second and falls on a scale finely marked to measure time intervals as short as 2 seconds. Like any sundial, it measures local or solar time , requiring a correction to determine Indian Standard Time. Should we make a simple water clock? [Activity 8.1: Let us construct + Take a used transparent plastic bottle (1/2 litre or larger) with its cap. >, ~ Cut it into two, roughly in the middle as shown in Fig. 8.5a. Using a drawing pin, make a small hole in the cap of the bottle (Fig. 8.5b). >, ~ (a) (b) Fig. 8.5: Making a simple water clock (d) >, ~ Place the upper part of the bottle in an inverted position over the lower half (Fig. 8.5c). Fill the upper part of the bottle with water. You may add a few drops of ink or colour to make the water level easily visible (Fig. 8.5d). The water will start dripping into the lower part of the bottle. Using a watch, mark the level of water after every one minute till all the water drips down. >, ~ >, ~ Your water clock is ready. Can you now guess how to use it? Pour the water from the lower part back into the top part and watch the level of water dripping into the lower part. Every time it touches a mark made by you, one more minute has passed. Measurement of Time and Motion 4/3/2025 4:54:33 PM FASCINATING FACTS In ancient India, time was measured using both shadows and water clocks. The earliest reference to shadow-based time measurement appears in the Arthasastra by Kautilya (was composed and revised between the second century BCE-third century CE). An accurate expression for time in terms of the shadow of a vertical stick was given by Varahamihira around 530 CE. The water clock with water flowing out was described in the Arthasastra, Sardulakarnavadana, and some other texts (early CE centuries). These clocks were not very accurate because