You just did an important historical experiment which was first done by Galileo, except you used a watch to measure time in place of your pulse beat. Suppose you were Galileo experimenting with pendulums, what all would you investigate? What questions could you ask? Would all pendulums have the same time period? How would you test this? Repeat Activity 8.2 using the same bob but with pendulums of two or three different lengths. Does the time period change? If so, how does the length affect it? If changing the length influences the time period, does the bob s mass also matter? Test this by repeating Activity 8.2 . with a fixed pendulum length but with bobs of different mass. Do you observe any change? The time period of a simple pendulum depends on its length but not on the bob s mass. All pendulums of the same length have the same time period at a given location. The time period of a simple pendulum of a given length is constant at a place. This property is used in the measurement of time. C) cS he rT) C) 15) < ao U n a] =) x td x = > 2 he = s) Chapter 8.indd 110 4/3/2025 4:54:36 PM All clocks, old or modern, are based on some process repeating continuously, which can be used to mark equal intervals of time. Modern clocks measure time using the same basic principle periodically repeating processes but use tiny and very rapid IVE vibrations either from a quartz crystal (quartz clocks) or from some \ EEPER specific atoms (atomic clocks). While Huygens early pendulum clocks could gain or lose 10 seconds each day, today s atomic clocks & are so precise that they lose only one second in millions of years! Scientists are constantly searching for even better ways to measure time with greater accuracy. Measurement of Time and Motion Fig. 8.8: Some common clocks and watches 8.1.2 SI unit of time The SI unit of time is the second. Its symbol is s. The larger units of time are minute (min) and hour (h). 60s=1min 60 min=1h IV Units of time, such as second, minute, and hour begin with a EEPER _ )!owercase letter, except at the beginning of a sentence. Their ~ symbols s , min , and h are also written in lowercase letters G) and in singular. Note that a full stop is not written after the symbol, except at the end of a sentence. While writing the time, always leave a space between the number and the unit. Also, note that writing sec for second and hrs for hour is incorrect. FASCINATING FACTS The hole in the bowl of Ghatika-yantra was made in such a manner that it took 24 minutes to fill and sink. The time unit measured by this clock was called ghatika or ghati. It became the standard unit of time measurement and continued until the end of the nineteenth century. A 24-hour-long day was,