Chapter 8.indd 105 Measurement of Time and Motion Prerna and her younger sister are watching a sports channel on television. Prerna enjoys running and she has been declared the fastest runner among the girls in her district for winning the 100 metre sprint at an interschool competition held at the district level. She is now training to compete at the state level. She dreams of representing India at the international level in 100 metre sprint contests in future. While watching the rerun of sprints at the Olympic games held in the past, Prerna is always amazed that the measurement of the time taken for the race is so advanced that they could identify the winner even when two sprinters seemed to cross the finish line almost together. However, in her school, the sports teacher only used a special kind of watch called a stopwatch for timing the school races. She had noticed her mother wearing a watch on her wrist and her sister looking at her mobile phone when she needed to check the time. Her uncle used a Braille watch and had recently acquired a talking watch that announced the time at the touch of a button. There was also a large clock on the wall near the school entrance. Her thoughts turned to people in the ancient past, who did not have the modern gadgets we have today and she wondered... os _ Vo nates! ent a! if ih fa . pak 4/3/2025 4:54:31 PM How was time measured when there were no clocks and watches? 8.1 Measurement of Time Humans got interested in keeping track of time long ago. They started noticing that many events in nature repeat themselves after definite intervals of time. For example, the rising and setting of the Sun, the phases of the Moon and the changing seasons. They started using the cycles of these events for timekeeping. First, they devised calendars. A day was defined by the cycle of rising and setting of the Sun. Then began the quest to find ways of knowing the time of day. So, they made many devices which helped them to measure smaller intervals of time within a day. Some of these were sundials, water clocks, hourglasses, and candle clocks. In a sundial, time is determined with the changing position of the shadow of an object cast by the light of the Sun during the day (Fig. 8.1). The water clocks used the flow of water out or into a vessel to measure time. In one type, water flowed out from a vessel which had markings for time (Fig. 8.2a). In the other type, there would be a bowl, with a fine hole at the bottom, which was floated on the surface of water (Fig. 8.2b). ; ; It gradually filled up in a fixed time and me. O27 Awa) Floating Whi dg our-dype finally sank. Then, it was lifted up and floated again. In an hourglass (Fig. 8.3), time was measured on the basis of