PM O CLIT) CLO) oO C{chapte 8 Nature of Matter: Elements, Compounds, and woneures 125 As you heat the sugar, it turns brown (Fig. 8.12b). Later, it begins to char, i.e., it turns blackish (Fig. 8.12c). You will find small droplets of water inside the boiling tube near its open end. Where did this water come from? Was it in the dry sugar, or did it come by the condensation of water vapour in the air? Since we are heating the tube, the water must have come from the dry sugar and not from the air. Can you predict what is left behind? Charcoal (carbon) is left behind in the boiling tube. You can scoop it out in a watch glass (Fig. 8.12c) and explore if it burns like coal. Sugar decomposes on heating and gives carbon and water. As you know, water consists of hydrogen and oxygen. Hence, sugar cannot be an element. It may be stated that sugar is a chemical compound consisting of the elements carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen. Let us explore more about compounds. (Demonstration activity) Safety first area. Do not inhale the gases. Activity 8.5: Let us experiment This activity may be demonstrated under the supervision of the teacher. It may be performed in a fume hood or a well-ventilated _ 2 holder tube Spirit lamp (a) Heating of sugar Water ry Test tube holder droplets Boiling _ tube Sugar after heating Spirit lamp (b) Colour of the sugar changes on heating Watch glass Charcoal (carbon) (c) Charcoal placed on a watch glass Fig. 8.12: Heating sugar in a boiling tube ou e Take 5.6 grams of iron filings (Fig. 8.13a) and 3.2 grams of sulfur powder (Fig. 8.13b) on a watch glass. Observe them carefully. (a) (b) Fig. 8.13: (a) Iron filings; (b) Sulfur powder 6/28/2025 2:51:54 PM e Mix them thoroughly ina watch glass. Label this mixture as Sample A (Fig. 8.14). e Observe it carefully. e Isthis a uniform or a non-uniform mixture? Can you still Fig. 8.14: A mixture ofiron observe both iron and sulfur as separate substances? filings and sulfur powder e Take half of Sample A in a china dish and gently heat it (Fig. 8.15a) with continuous stirring until a black mass is formed. e Let the content of the china dish cool. e Place this black mass in a mortar and grind it with the help of a pestle. e Now, put it on another watch glass and label it as Sample B (Fig. 8.15b). e Now, you have two samples Sample A and Sample B (Fig. 8.16a and 8.16b). Compare both the Samples A and B step by step and record your observations in Table 8.2. Sample B (b) Fig. 8.15: (a) Heating Sample A; (b) Black mass (a) Fig. 8.16: (a) Sample A; (b) Sample B Step 1 Appearance e Compare the appearance of Sample A and Sample B like colour and texture. (a) Sample A M gre Step 2 Magnet test e Take a