everything around us is matter. Light, heat, electricity, and even thoughts and emotions are important parts of our world, but they are not made of matter. Understanding what matter is and what it is not helps us better understand the world around us. Snapshots A mixture consists two or more substances mixed together. These substances retain their individual properties and do not react chemically with each other. The individual substances that make up a mixture are called its components. A pure substance consists the same type of particles. All the constituent particles of that substance behave identically. Pure substance can be either an element or a compound. Elements are the simplest substances that cannot be broken down further into simpler substances. They are the building blocks of all matter. @ Substances which are composed of two or more elements combined chemically in a fixed ratio and have different properties from their constituent elements are called compounds. Minerals are natural, solid substances found on the Earth. They have a fixed chemical composition. Most often they are compounds but rarely, they can also be pure elements. uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 | TTT] CF) OLLI OJ O CLL OL) Oo Chapter 8.indd 130 6/28/2025 2:52:15 PM Chapter 8.indd 131 O CLIT) CLO) oO C{chapte 8 Nature of Matter: Elements, Compounds, and woneures 131 Keep the curiosity alive 1. Consider the following reaction where two substances, A and B, combine to form a product C: A+B- >C Assume that A and B cannot be broken down into simpler substances by chemical reactions. Based on this information, which of the following statements is correct? (i) A, B, and C are all compounds and only C has a fixed composition. (ii) Cis a compound, and A and B have a fixed composition. (iii) A and B are compounds, and C has a fixed composition. (iv) A and B are elements, C is a compound, and has a fixed composition. 2. Assertion: Air is a mixture. Reason: A mixture is formed when two or more substances are mixed, without undergoing any chemical change. (i) Both Assertion and Reason are true and Reason is the correct explanation for Assertion. (ii) Both Assertion and Reason are true, but Reason is not the correct explanation for Assertion. (iii) Assertion is true, but Reason is false. (iv) Assertion is false, but Reason is true. 3. Water, a compound, has different properties compared to those of the elements oxygen and hydrogen from which it is formed. Justify this statement. 4. In which of the following cases are all the examples correctly matched? Give reasons in support of your answers. (i) Elements water, nitrogen, iron, air. (ii) Uniform mixtures minerals, seawater, bronze, air. (iii) Pure substances carbon dioxide, iron, oxygen, sugar. (iv) Non-uniform mixtures air, sand, brass, muddy water. 5. Iron reacts with moist air to form iron oxide, and magnesium burns in oxygen to form magnesium oxide. Classify all the substances involved in the above reactions as elements, compounds