elements exist in a gaseous state at room temperature, all of which are non-metals like oxygen, helium, nitrogen, etc. @ Only two elements are liquid at room temperature mercury, which is a metal and bromine, which is a non-metal. Although gallium and caesium are solid elements, they become liquid at a temperature around 30 C (303 K) and turn into liquid. Chapter 8.indd 123 6/28/2025 2:51:49 PM A step further More than 45 different elements, like aluminium, copper, silicon, cobalt, lithium, gold, silver, etc., are used in manufacturing a mobile phone, including its screen, battery, and other components. Oxygen 8.3.2 Compounds Why cannot we separate hydrogen and oxygen present in water by physical means? In water, the particles of hydrogen and oxygen are so tightly attached to each other that it is generally impossible to separate them apart using physical methods. That is why water is a compound. Compounds are formed when different elements combine in fixed ratios to form something entirely new. The properties of compounds are different from those of elements forming that compound. The constituent elements of a compound cannot be separated by any physical method. From Activity 8.3, we find that molecules of water are made of two different elements: hydrogen and oxygen (Fig. 8.11), combined chemically in a fixed ratio. The ratio of the number of atoms of hydrogen to oxygen in water has been found to be 2:1. Are common salt and sugar elements or compounds? Let us find out. Sodium, a soft metal, and chlorine, a hazardous gas, combine to form a harmless yet taste-enhancing substance that is essential for our lives. This substance is known as sodium chloride, which is made up of particles of sodium and chlorine in a 1:1 ratio. We learnt that dissolved sodium chloride (common salt) may be separated from water by the physical process of evaporation. Is it possible to separate sodium chloride into its elements by physical processes? Let us now explore if we can separate the elements in sugar! | Activity 8.4: Let us experiment e Putateaspoon ofsugar ina boiling tube. Hydrogen Fig. 8.11: Depiction of molecules of water Oh! This is really fascinating hydrogen is a fuel, oxygen supports combustion, whereas water extinguishes fire. e Heat it gently as shown in Fig. 8.12a. This activity must be performed in the presence of a teacher. > \\ { Ws e What do you observe? uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 | TTT] CF) OLLI OJ O CLL OL) Oo Chapter 8.indd 124 6/28/2025 2:51:50 PM O CLIT) CLO) oO C{chapte 8 Nature of Matter: Elements, Compounds, and woneures 125 As you heat the sugar, it turns brown (Fig. 8.12b). Later, it begins to char, i.e., it turns blackish (Fig. 8.12c). You will find small droplets of water inside the boiling tube near its open end. Where did this water come from? Was it in the dry sugar, or did it come by the condensation of water vapour in the air? Since we are heating