when water was cooled or heated? We observed that on cooling water gets converted into ice, and on boiling it gets converted into vapour. We can get back water up on heating ice or cooling water vapour. It shows that during these processes, the particles of water remain the same. Now, let us perform another activity in which we pass electricity through water and observe its effect. Activity 8.3: Let us experiment (Demonstration activity) Safety first This activity must be performed under the supervision of the teacher. Be careful while handling sulfuric acid. Do not use lithium-ion ()/ battery. Test tubes Water Test tube stand Test tubes filled with wat e Collect two small test tubes, a beaker or a glass (a) Test tubes filled with water tumbler, and a 9 V battery. e Fill 2/3rd of the beaker with water and add a few drops of dilute sulfuric acid to it. e Fill both the small test tubes completely with water taken from the beaker (Fig. 8.8a). e Place a 9 V battery inside the beaker (Fig. 8.8b). e Without spilling the water, carefully place the water-filled (b) 9 V battery placed inside test tubes on each of the terminals of the battery (Fig. 8.8c). */ Beaker containing water Chapter 8.indd 121 6/28/2025 2:51:40 PM Water filled test tube placed on the terminal of the battery Water filled test tube . . placingon @ Wait for a few minutes. the terminal e Do youobserve the formation of any gas bubbles battery at both the terminals inside the test tubes? e Let it continue for 10-15 minutes. e Observe the volume of gas collected in each test tube (Fig. 8.8d). e Is the volume of the gas collected the same in (c) Water filled test tubes placing over both the test tubes? the terminals of the battery e Remove these test tubes one-by-one carefully. e Test these gases one-by-one by bringing a Oxygen gas burning candle close to the mouth of the test Hydrogen gas tubes. < - Test tube e What happens in each case? Gas bubbles e Which gas is present in each test tube? Water containing a few drops of sulfuric acid 9 V battery Can these _ collected (d) Gases collected in the test tubes gases be water vapour? Fig. 8.8: Passing electricity through water These gases are not water vapour otherwise they would have condensed back to form water. Let us try to identify these gases. Safety first f Ls Perform gas testing with care. Maintain a NO" Ke safe distance from the set-up. To test the gases present in the two test tubes, bring a burning candle near the mouth of each test tube. A pop sound can be heard from one, indicating the presence of hydrogen gas (Fig. 8.9a). In the other test tube, the flame of the burning candle will glow brighter, confirming the presence of oxygen gas (Fig. 8.9b). Flame glows Pop sound Ruy brighter ~ + Candle Test tube >