substances only. Mixtures could be of several types depending on the physical state of their components. Some mixtures with their examples are shown in Table 8.1. Complete the third column Table 8.1: Different types of mixtures non-uniform Gas and gas Uniform 2. Gas and liquid Aerated water (sodawater) eaeeseeeseceneeeeeees Oxygen dissolved in water ha eecetnteeeeeeeeees Solid and gas Carbon particles in air hneeeesteeeeeeeeeee 4. Liquid and Acetic acid in water (vinegar) haaeeeeeeeeeeetteeee liquid Oilandwater an eeeeteeeeeeneeeee 5. Solidandliquid Sandand water 2 ha eeeeesteeeeeeeteee Seawater aaa ateeeeeeeeeeeeee 6. Solid and solid Baking powder (bakingsodaand en. eeeeeeeeeeeeeeees tartaric acid) Alloys i ateetteeeeeenees You learnt in earlier grades about the separation of mixtures. It is done to separate the components of a mixture. The examples discussed were from everyday life, where separation is done to obtain the component of interest and other components are discarded. However, in science, the purpose of separating a mixture is to obtain pure substances. 8.2 What Are Pure Substances? Have you ever noticed the word pure written on the packs of some consumables, such as milk, ghee, and spices (Fig. 8.7)? The word pure has slightly different meanings in common usage and in science. In common usage, pure means unadulterated products. Adulteration is an illegal process of adding substances which are cheaper, or of a poor quality, to a product. This is usually Fig. 8.7: Some done to increase the quantity or reduce the manufacturing cost. consumable items However, it deteriorates the quality of the product. It can also make the product hazardous to health. uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 | TTT] CF) OLLI OJ O CLL OL) Oo Chapter 8.indd 120 6/28/2025 2:51:38 PM O CLIT) CLO) oO C{chapte 8 Nature of Matter: Elements, Compounds, and woneures 121 In science, however, a pure substance is the one that has no other substance present in it. For a scientist, even these products that look pure can be considered impure if they are made of more than one substance. A pure substance is a kind of matter that cannot be separated into other kinds of matter by any physical process. When a scientist says that something is pure, it means that the substance consists of the same type of particles. A step further According to science, how would you classify milk, packed fruit juice, baking soda, sugar, and soil as mixtures or pure substances? 8.3 What Are the Types of Pure Substances? Recall the different states of water that you studied in Curiosity, Grade 6. What happened when water was cooled or heated? We observed that on cooling water gets converted into ice, and on boiling it gets converted into vapour. We can get back water up on heating ice or cooling water vapour. It shows that during these processes, the particles of water remain the same. Now, let us perform another activity in which we pass electricity through water and observe its effect. Activity 8.3: Let us experiment (Demonstration activity) Safety first This activity must be