Maintain a NO" Ke safe distance from the set-up. To test the gases present in the two test tubes, bring a burning candle near the mouth of each test tube. A pop sound can be heard from one, indicating the presence of hydrogen gas (Fig. 8.9a). In the other test tube, the flame of the burning candle will glow brighter, confirming the presence of oxygen gas (Fig. 8.9b). Flame glows Pop sound Ruy brighter ~ + Candle Test tube > Test tube stand Water Water (a) (b) Fig. 8.9: Testing the nature of gas (a) hydrogen; (b) oxygen uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 | TTT] CF) OLLI OJ O CLL OL) Oo Chapter 8.indd 122 6/28/2025 2:51:42 PM O CLIT) CLO) oO C{chapte 8 Nature of Matter: Elements, Compounds, and woneures 123 From Activity 8.3, we can infer that water is composed of two different constituents hydrogen and oxygen. Water > Hydrogen + Oxygen Ever heard of ... When electric current is passed through water, it breaks down into hydrogen and oxygen. Is this a chemical change or a physical change? Recall Curiosity, Grade 7, chapter Changes Around Us: Physical and Chemical . 8.3.1 Elements The two substances hydrogen and oxygen formed in Activity 8.3, are pure substances and are termed as elements. Each element is made up of identical particles called atoms. These particles are different from the particles of any other element. Elements are substances that cannot be further broken down into simpler substances. They are the building blocks of all matter. Some other examples of elements are gold, silver, sulfur, carbon, etc. A step further The atoms of most of the elements cannot exist independently. Two or more such atoms combine and form a stable particle of that element called a molecule. For example, two atoms of hydrogen combine to form one molecule of hydrogen. Similarly, two atoms of oxygen combine to form one molecule of oxygen (Fig. 8.10). eM Fig. 8.10: Depiction of molecules of (a) hydrogen; (b) oxygen Elements can be classified into metals and non-metals. You have already studied that gold, silver, magnesium, iron, and aluminium are metals, whereas carbon, sulfur, hydrogen, and oxygen are non-metals. Isn't it interesting to know that some elements like silicon and boron have intermediate properties between those of metals and non-metals? They are called metalloids, about which you will learn in higher grades. A step further The number of elements known at present is 118, and most of them exist in a solid state. @ Eleven elements exist in a gaseous state at room temperature, all of which are non-metals like oxygen, helium, nitrogen, etc. @ Only two elements are liquid at room temperature mercury, which is a metal and bromine, which is a non-metal. Although gallium and caesium are solid elements, they become liquid at a temperature around 30 C (303 K) and turn into liquid. Chapter 8.indd 123 6/28/2025 2:51:49 PM A step further More than 45 different elements, like aluminium, copper, silicon, cobalt,