Nature of Matter: Elements, Compounds, and Mixtures Probe and ponder Which of the entities in the picture above consist of matter, and which of them do not? How can elements be combined to form a compound? How could the discovery of a compound that absorbs carbon dioxide from the air contribute to solving environmental challenges? Share your questions Chapter 8.indd 116 6/28/2025 2:51:17 PM | Chapter 8.indd 117 LC] CLLLOI CLO) OO C{chapte 8 Nature of Matter: Elements, Compounds, and woneures 117 Have you ever wondered what the world around you is made of? Look around! The staircase you use, the air you breathe, the water in your bottle, the food in your lunch box, the clothes and shoes you wear, the book you read, the trees outside, the ball you play with and even the stick you carry all of these are examples of matter, which you have learnt in earlier grades. You have also learnt that all these things are made up of tiny particles. Most of the things around us are not made of just one substance; rather they are made up of two or more substances mixed together. Let us now understand how different substances come together to form mixtures. 8.1 What Are Mixtures? Have you ever wondered what makes your poha (Fig. 8.1) so delicious or how to make the perfect sprout salad? While these dishes may seem very different, they share something in common they are both made by mixing several ingredients. We observe the mixing of substances in everyday life. Sugar dissolved in water is also a mixture, and so are soups and lemonade. When two or more substances are mixed, where each substance retains its properties, it is called a mixture. The individual substances that make up a mixture are called its components. The components of a mixture do not react chemically with each other. In some mixtures, the components like green gram, chickpeas, onion, and tomato in a sprout salad (Fig. 8.2), are easy to Fig. 8.2: Sprout salad see. Such mixtures, where the different components are generally visible with the naked eye or with a magnifying device, are non-uniform in nature. Can you identify a few more examples of non-uniform mixtures around you? On the other hand, some mixtures have components that cannot be seen separately even with the help of a microscope. For example, sugar and water particles cannot be seen separately in their mixture. Such types of mixtures, where the components are evenly distributed and cannot be distinguished, are uniform in nature (Fig. 8.3). Can you list a few uniform mixtures? Fig. 8.1: Poha Fig. 8.3: Uniform mixture of sugar and water 6/28/2025 2:51:20 PM A step further Do you know that stainless steel is also a mixture? Stainless steel contains iron, nickel, chromium, and a small amount of carbon. They are mixed so uniformly that the entire mixture appears the same throughout and one cannot see the individual substances. Such mixtures are known as alloys. Brass, a