properties. For example, they have developed alloys like stainless steel, which is stronger and more durable than pure iron. Wood, steel, and concrete, which are used as building materials, are all mixtures. You learnt that various metals are obtained from minerals. Let us learn about these minerals. A step further An example of a wonder material developed by material scientists is graphene aerogel. This is made from carbon and is said to be the lightest material on earth. It is so light that even grass can hold it (Fig. 8.21). It is highly porous and therefore, has a high absorbing capacity. For this reason, it can potentially be used as an environmental cleaner, for example, to clean up oil spills in both seas and on land. It is useful in fabricating energy-saving devices and special coatings for buildings. 8.5 What Are Minerals? Most rocks are a mixture of minerals, which can be viewed with the eyes, or by using a magnifying glass or a microscope. Some of the minerals are called native minerals, which are pure elements and not compounds. These can be metals, such as gold, silver, copper, etc., or non-metals like sulfur, carbon, etc. Most of the minerals are compounds made up of more than one element. Some common examples of minerals include quartz, calcite, mica, pyroxene, and olivine (Fig. 8.22). Many things that we use in our everyday life are made up of minerals or elements extracted from minerals. For example, cement is made from calcite, quartz, alumina, and iron oxide, which are minerals or are obtained from Olivine minerals. Talcum powder is made from the mineral talc. Fig. 8.22: Some minerals Fig. 8.21 Chapter 8.indd 129 6/28/2025 2:52:05 PM Our scientific heritage Use of elements, compounds, and mixtures in Indian Art The Dhokra art is an old craft from Bihar and Odisha that uses different metals to create beautiful figures inspired by nature (Fig. 8.23). The process begins with shaping a design in beeswax. This wax model is covered with clay to make a mould. After the clay hardens, the wax is melted out, leaving a hollow space. This space is then filled with molten brass or bronze which makes Dhokra art strong and gives it a shiny golden colour. The figures often show animals, people, and nature, reflecting tribal creativity and tradition. Fig. 8.23: Dhokra art Elements and compounds are the building blocks of matter everything that has mass and takes up space. They make the materials we see and use every day. However, not everything around us is matter. Light, heat, electricity, and even thoughts and emotions are important parts of our world, but they are not made of matter. Understanding what matter is and what it is not helps us better understand the world around us. Snapshots A mixture consists two or more substances mixed together. These substances retain their individual properties and do not react chemically with each other. The individual substances that make up a mixture are called its components. A