of the two elements iron and sulfur. Its components retain their properties, and their black and yellow coloured particles can be seen. On bringing magnet near Sample A, the iron filings get attracted towards the magnet. Hence, iron and sulfur can be separated. You might have observed that in Sample A, iron in the mixture reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid to form iron chloride and hydrogen gas. The gas is colourless, has no smell, and burns with a pop sound. The reaction can be represented as Iron + Dilute Hydrochloric acid ~ Iron chloride + Hydrogen gas Sulfur on the other hand, is left as a yellow solid at the bottom of the test tube. This shows that sulfur does not react with hydrochloric acid. Sample B: The black mass obtained in Sample B is iron sulfide. We observe that the texture andthe colour are the same throughout. It is formed by heating the two elements, iron and sulfur. It is not attracted by a magnet. The new substance has completely different properties, and iron and sulfur can no longer be separated. Hence, we can say that a compound has been formed. Can you explain now why the magnet has no effect on Sample B? Also, Sample B, iron sulfide, reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid, to form iron chloride and hydrogen sulfide gas. The gas is colourless and has a rotten egg-like odour. The reaction can be represented as Iron sulfide + Dilute Hydrochloric acid ~ Iron chloride + Hydrogen sulfide 8.4 How Do We Use Elements, Compounds, and Mixtures? Elements, compounds, and mixtures are all around us. The air we breathe is a mixture of gases like oxygen, nitrogen, and carbon dioxide. Water, which is essential for life, is a compound uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 | TTT] CF) OLLI OJ O CLL OL) Oo 6/28/2025 2:52:01 PM O CLIT) CLO) oO C{chapte 8 Nature of Matter: Elements, Compounds, and woneures 129 made of elements, hydrogen and oxygen. Elements like iron and aluminium are used to construct bridges, buildings, and vehicles. Understanding these concepts is not just about recognising what surrounds us; it is also the key to innovation. For instance, chemists study how elements combine to create compounds, enabling them to invent life-saving medicines and vaccines to fight diseases. This knowledge also helps in the creation of fertilisers thereby enhancing crop production that feeds the ever-increasing human population globally. Engineers and material scientists rely on their understanding of compounds and mixtures to design materials with unique properties. For example, they have developed alloys like stainless steel, which is stronger and more durable than pure iron. Wood, steel, and concrete, which are used as building materials, are all mixtures. You learnt that various metals are obtained from minerals. Let us learn about these minerals. A step further An example of a wonder material developed by material scientists is graphene aerogel. This is made from carbon and is said to be the lightest material on earth. It is