4. In which of the following cases are all the examples correctly matched? Give reasons in support of your answers. (i) Elements water, nitrogen, iron, air. (ii) Uniform mixtures minerals, seawater, bronze, air. (iii) Pure substances carbon dioxide, iron, oxygen, sugar. (iv) Non-uniform mixtures air, sand, brass, muddy water. 5. Iron reacts with moist air to form iron oxide, and magnesium burns in oxygen to form magnesium oxide. Classify all the substances involved in the above reactions as elements, compounds or mixtures, with justification. Prepare some questions based on your learnings so far ... 6/28/2025 2:52:21 PM 6. Classify the following as elements, compounds, or mixtures in Table 8.3. Carbon dioxide, sand, seawater, magnesium oxide, muddy water, aluminium, gold, oxygen, rust, iron sulfide, glucose, air, water, fruit juice, nitrogen, sodium chloride, sulfur, hydrogen, baking soda. Identify pure substances amongst these and list them below. Pure substances 8. Gas (A) ? Dilute hydrochloric acid 9 Tron filings Fig. 8.24 10. What new substance is formed when a mixture of iron filings and sulfur powder is heated, and how is it different from the original mixture? Also, write the word equation for the reaction. Is it possible for a substance to be classified as both an element and a compound? Explain why or why not. . How would our daily lives be changed if water were not a compound but a mixture of hydrogen and oxygen? Analyse Fig. 8.24. Identify Gas A. Also, write the word equation of the chemical reaction. 11. Write the names of any two compounds made only from non-metals, and also mention two uses of each of them. 12. How can gold be classified as both a mineral and a metal? Reflect on the questions framed by your i. Shouldn't it , ange friends and try to answer ... Chapter 8.indd 132 6/28/2025 2:52:28 PM O CLIT) CLO) oO C{chapte 8 Nature of Matter: Elements, Compounds, and woneures 133 Discover, design, and debate e Design and create comic strips from real-life examples to differentiate between elements, compounds, and mixtures with diagrams and illustrate their properties and uses. e Search for discoveries of some elements (such as phosphorus, sodium), compounds (such as penicillin) and mixtures (such as brass, bronze, stainless steel). Present your findings in the class. e Let us search: Read labels on items like detergents or snacks, and try to list the mixtures and compounds they contain. e Work in groups: Each group will pretend to be in the role of either an element, a compound, or a mixture. Debate which category among them is the most important. Chapter 8.indd 133 6/28/2025 2:52:37 PM