but this is a very grown-up madam. Do you think a mere girl could pay her own fare and travel to the city all alone? Valli shot an angry glance at the conductor and said, I am not a madam. Please remember that. And you've not yet given me my ticket. Tll remember, the conductor said, mimicking her tone. Everyone laughed, and gradually Valli too joined in the laughter. The conductor punched a ticket and handed it to her. Just sit back and make yourself comfortable. Why should you stand when you've paid for a seat? Because I want to, she answered, standing up again. But if you stand on the seat, you may fall and hurt yourself when the bus makes a sharp turn or hits a bump. That s why we want you to sit down, child. Tm not a child, I tell you, she said irritably. Tm eight years old. Of course, of course. How stupid of me! Eight years my! The bus stopped, some new passengers got on, and the conductor got busy for a time. Afraid of losing her seat, Valli finally sat down. An elderly woman came and sat beside her. Are you all alone, dear? she asked Valli as the bus started again. Valli found the woman absolutely repulsive such big holes she had in her ear lobes, and such ugly earrings in them! And she could smell the betel nut the woman was chewing and see the betel juice that was threatening to spill over her lips at any moment. Reprint 2025-26 haughtily proudly mimicking copying repulsive causing strong dislike First Flight ~ i) Ugh! who could be sociable with such a person? Yes, I m travelling alone, she answered curtly. And I ve got a ticket too. curtly Yes, she s on her way to town, said the showing displeasure conductor. With a thirty-paise ticket. Oh, why don t you mind your own business, said Valli. But she laughed all the same, and the conductor laughed too. But the old woman went on with her drivel. Is it proper for such a young person to travel alone? drivel Do you know exactly where you're going in town? Silly nonsense What s the street? What s the house number? You needn t bother about me. I can take care of myself, Valli said, turning her face towards the window and staring out. Oral Comprehension Check 1. Why does the conductor call Valli madam ? 2. Why does Valli stand up on the seat? What does she see now? 3. What does Valli tell the elderly man when he calls her a child? 4. Why didn't Valli want to make friends with the elderly woman? Ill Her first journey what careful, painstaking, elaborate plans she had had to make for it! She had thriftily saved whatever stray coins came her way, resisting every temptation to buy peppermints, toys, thriftily balloons, and the like, and finally she had saved a_ spend money total of