seat? What does she see now? 3. What does Valli tell the elderly man when he calls her a child? 4. Why didn't Valli want to make friends with the elderly woman? Ill Her first journey what careful, painstaking, elaborate plans she had had to make for it! She had thriftily saved whatever stray coins came her way, resisting every temptation to buy peppermints, toys, thriftily balloons, and the like, and finally she had saved a_ spend money total of sixty paise. How difficult it had been, carefully particularly that day at the village fair, but she had resolutely stifled a strong desire to ride the merry go-round, even though she had the money. resolutely stifled After she had enough money saved, her next suppressed/ problem was how to slip out of the house without controlled with determination her mother s knowledge. But she managed this without too much difficulty. Every day after lunch her mother would nap from about one to four or so. Valli always used these hours for her excursions as she stood looking from the doorway of her house Reprint 2025-26 or sometimes even ventured out into the village; today, these same hours could be used for her first excursion outside the village. The bus rolled on now cutting across a bare landscape, now rushing through a tiny hamlet or past an odd wayside shop. Sometimes the bus seemed on the point of gobbling up another vehicle that was coming towards them or a pedestrian crossing the road. But lo! somehow it passed on smoothly, leaving all obstacles safely behind. Trees came running towards them but then stopped as the bus reached them and simply stood there helpless for a moment by the side of the road before rushing away in the other direction. Suddenly Valli clapped her hands with glee. A young cow, tail high in the air, was running very fast, right in the middle of the road, right in front of the bus. The bus slowed to a crawl, and the driver sounded his horn loudly again and again. But the more he honked, the more frightened the animal became and the faster it galloped always right in front of the bus. ventured out went cautiously, courageously Reprint 2025-26 se Ud a | Oa First Flight ~ 1) Somehow this was very funny to Valli. She laughed and laughed until there were tears in her eyes. Hey, lady, haven t you laughed enough? called, the conductor. Better save some for tomorrow. At last the cow moved off the road. And soon the bus came to a railroad crossing. A speck of a train could be seen in the distance, growing bigger and bigger as it drew near. Then it rushed past the crossing gate with a tremendous roar and rattle, shaking the bus. Then the bus went on and passed the train station. From there it traversed a busy, well-laid-out shopping street and, turning, entered a wider thoroughfare. Such big, bright-looking shops! What