the cow moved off the road. And soon the bus came to a railroad crossing. A speck of a train could be seen in the distance, growing bigger and bigger as it drew near. Then it rushed past the crossing gate with a tremendous roar and rattle, shaking the bus. Then the bus went on and passed the train station. From there it traversed a busy, well-laid-out shopping street and, turning, entered a wider thoroughfare. Such big, bright-looking shops! What glittering displays of clothes and other merchandise! Such big crowds! Struck dumb with wonder, Valli gaped at everything. Then the bus stopped and everyone got off except Valli. Hey, lady, said the conductor, aren t you ready to get off? This is as far as your thirty paise takes you. No, Valli said, I m going back on this same bus. She took another thirty paise from her pocket and handed the coins to the conductor. Why, is something the matter? No, nothing s the matter. I just felt like having a bus ride, that s all. Don t you want to have a look at the sights, now that you re here? All by myself? Oh, 'd be much too afraid. Greatly amused by the girl s way of speaking, the conductor said, But you weren t afraid to come in the bus. Nothing to be afraid of about that, she answered. Well, then, why not go to that stall over there and have something to drink? Nothing to be afraid of about that either." Oh, no, I couldn t do that. Well, then, let me bring you a cold drink. Reprint 2025-26 thoroughfare a busy public road merchandise things for sale No, I don t have enough money. Just give me my ticket, that s all. It'll be my treat and not cost you anything. No, no, she said firmly, please, no. The conductor shrugged, and they waited until it was time for the bus to begin the return journey. Again there weren t many passengers. Oral Comprehension Check 1. How did Valli save up money for her first journey? Was it easy for her? What did Valli see on her way that made her laugh? 2. 3. Why didn't she get off the bus at the bus station? 4. Why didn t Valli want to go to the stall and have a drink? What does this tell you about her? IV Won t your mother be looking for you? the conductor asked when he gave the girl her ticket. No, no one will be looking for me, she said. The bus started, and again there were the same wonderful sights. Valli wasn t bored in the slightest and greeted everything with the same excitement she d felt the first time. But suddenly she saw a young cow lying dead by the roadside, just where it had been struck by some fast-moving vehicle. Isn t that the same cow that ran in front of the bus on our