house, With her little black kitten and her little grey mouse, And her little yellow dog and her little red wagon, And her realio, trulio little pet dragon. Belinda is as brave as a barrel full of bears, And Ink and Blink chase lions down the stairs, Mustard is as brave as a tiger in a rage, But Custard keeps crying for a nice safe cage. OGDEN NasH Ogden Nash wrote over four hundred pieces of comic verse. The best of his work was published in 14 volumes between 1931 and 1972. His work is perhaps best described in this poetic tribute by Anthony Burgess: ...he brought a new kind of sound to our literary diversions. And didn t care much about breaking the poetic laws of the Medes and the Persians. He uses lines, sometimes of considerable length that are colloquial and prosy. And at the end presents you with a rhyme... This bringing together of the informal and the formal is what his genius chiefly loves. | am trying to imitate him here, but he is probably quite inimitable. Reprint 2025-26 = = > _ _ OO c ow Lot ou _ >= =) Ld ico} i=] First Flight F grog: a drink typically drunk by sailors gyrate: to move around in circles Thinking about the Poem 1. 2. 3. Who are the characters in this poem? List them with their pet names. Why did Custard cry for a nice safe cage? Why is the dragon called cowardly dragon ? Belinda tickled him, she tickled him unmerciful... Why? The poet has employed many poetic devices in the poem. For example: Clashed his tail like iron in a dungeon the poetic device here is a simile. Can you, with your partner, list some more such poetic devices used in the poem? Read stanza three again to know how the poet describes the appearance of the dragon. Can you find out the rhyme scheme of two or three stanzas of the poem? Writers use words to give us a picture or image without actually saying what they mean. Can you trace some images used in the poem? Do you find The Tale of Custard the Dragon to be a serious or a light-hearted poem? Give reasons to support your answer. This poem, in ballad form, tells a story. Have you come across any such modern song or lyric that tells a story? If you know one, tell it to the class. Collect such songs as a project. Writing 4 Have fun writing your ballad. Gather information (choose/decide an idea/theme), organise your materials under characters and story and then write. Revise and edit your ballad to make it entertaining. Use the following guidelines to write your ballad. Purpose of writing the ballad: to entertain and interest To whom I am writing: decide for whom you are writing How should I structure features?: Tell a simple narrative - A few major characters A strong rhythm and rhyme May have a refrain (single