town, said Valli, still standing outside the bus, and here s my money. She showed him some coins. Okay, okay, but first you must get on the bus, said the conductor, and he stretched out a hand to = help her up. Never mind, she said, I can get on by myself. B You don t have to help me. =~ The conductor was a jolly sort, fond of joking. Oh, = please don t be angry with me, my fine madam, he = said. Here, have a seat right up there in front. . Everybody move aside please make way for madam. = It was the slack time of day, and there were slack time only six or seven passengers on the bus. They were 2 time when there is all looking at Valli and laughing with the conductor. "t much work Valli was overcome with shyness. Avoiding everyone s eyes, she walked quickly to an empty seat and sat down. Reprint 2025-26 First Flight May we start now, madam? the conductor asked, smiling. Then he blew his whistle twice, and the bus moved forward with a roar. It was a new bus, its outside painted a gleaming white with some green stripes along the sides. Inside, the overhead bars shone like silver. Directly in front of Valli, above the windshield, there was a beautiful clock. The seats were soft and luxurious. Valli devoured everything with her eyes. But when she _ started to look outside, she found her view cut off by a canvas blind that covered the lower part of her window. So she stood up on the seat and peered over the blind. The bus was now going along the bank of a canal. The road was very narrow. On one side there was the canal and, beyond it, palm trees, grassland, distant mountains, and the blue, blue sky. On the other side was a deep ditch and then acres and acres of green fields green, green, green, as far as the eye could see. Oh, it was all so wonderful! Suddenly she was startled by a voice. Listen, child, said the voice, you shouldn't stand like that. Sit down. Reprint 2025-26 Sitting down, she looked to see who had spoken. It was an elderly man who had honestly been concerned for her, but she was annoyed by his attention. There s nobody here who s a child, she said haughtily. I ve paid my thirty paise like everyone else. The conductor chimed in. Oh, sir, but this is a very grown-up madam. Do you think a mere girl could pay her own fare and travel to the city all alone? Valli shot an angry glance at the conductor and said, I am not a madam. Please remember that. And you've not yet given me my ticket. Tll remember, the conductor said, mimicking her tone. Everyone laughed, and gradually Valli too joined in the laughter. The conductor punched a ticket and handed it to her. Just