at the street corner. Their faces would kindle in her longings, dreams, and hopes. If one of her friends happened to ride the bus and tried to describe the sights of the town to her, Valli would be too jealous to listen and would shout, in English: Proud! proud! Neither she nor her friends really understood the meaning of the word, but they used it often as a slang expression of disapproval. Over many days and months Valli listened carefully to conversations between her neighbours and people who regularly used the bus, and she also asked a few discreet questions here and there. This way she picked up various small details about the bus journey. The town was six miles from her village. The fare was thirty paise one way which is almost nothing at all, she heard one well-dressed man say, but to Valli, who scarcely saw that much money from one month to the next, it seemed a fortune. The trip to the town took forty-five minutes. On reaching town, if she stayed in her seat and paid another thirty paise, she could return home on the same bus. This meant that she could take the one-o clock afternoon bus, reach the town at one forty-five, and be back home by about two forty-five... On and on went her thoughts as she calculated and recalculated, planned and replanned. Reprint 2025-26 wistfully longingly kindle set alight (a fire), here, feelings a slang expression informal words, often used within a close group discreet questions careful questions \li Oral Comprehension Check rd 1. What was Valli s favourite pastime? 2. What was a source of unending joy for Valli? What was her strongest desire? 3. What did Valli find out about the bus journey? How did she find out these details? 4. What do you think Valli was planning to do? II Well, one fine spring day the afternoon bus was just on the point of leaving the village and turning into the main highway when a small voice was heard shouting: Stop the bus! Stop the bus! And a tiny hand was raised commandingly. The bus slowed down to a crawl, and the conductor, sticking his head out the door, said, Hurry then! Tell whoever it is to come quickly. It's me, shouted Valli. 'm the one who has to get on. By now the bus had come to a stop, and the 97 conductor said, Oh, really! You don t say so! Yes, I simply have to go to town, said Valli, still standing outside the bus, and here s my money. She showed him some coins. Okay, okay, but first you must get on the bus, said the conductor, and he stretched out a hand to = help her up. Never mind, she said, I can get on by myself. B You don t have to help me. =~ The conductor was a jolly sort, fond of joking. Oh, = please don t be angry with me, my