information is not available. (iii) Compute and find the answer (and check how close your guess was). Would the number of coins be in hundreds, thousands, lakhs, crores, or even more? Make an instinctive guess. (?) Find the answer by making necessary and reasonable assumptions and approximations for | How about measuring the unknowns. Remember, we are not looking for an exact answer but a reasonably close estimate. to find out the weight of a 1-rupee coin? Initially, your guesses may be very far off from the answer and it is perfectly fine! You will get better at it like as you do it often and in different situations. Guessing and estimating can build intuition about numbers and various quantities. Estu asks, What if we use 5-rupee coins or 10-rupee notes instead? How much money could it be? (?) Make an instinctive guess first. Then find out (make necessary and reasonable assumptions about the unknown details and find the answers). Estu says, When I become an adult, I would like to donate notebooks worth my weight every year . Roxie says, When I grow up, I would like to do annadana (offering grains or meals) worth my weight every year . 2 How many people might benefit from each of these offerings in a ( ati year? Again, guess first before finding out. Talk Roxie and Estu overheard someone saying We did padaydatra for about 400 km to reach this place! We arrived early this morning. 2 How long ago would they have started their journey? Find answers by making necessary assumptions and approximations. Do guess first before calculating to check how close your guess was! Note to the Teacher: Assumptions can vary greatly at times, and as a result the answers computed using these you can also vary. This is perfectly alright. Modelling the situation properly is crucial, which can also be done in different ways sometimes. The accuracy of the assumed numbers or quantities can get better with exposure and practice. 2 What do you think? Make Power Play . Padayatra, is the traditional practice of walking long distances as part of a religious or spiritual pursuit. People across religions in our country observe similar forms of pilgrimage or spiritual walking, although they may have different names or purposes. Some of the pilgrimages are Ajmer Sharif Dargah Ziyarat, Pandharpur Wari, Kanwar Yatra, Sabarimala Yatra, Sammed Shikharji Yatra, Lumbini to Sarnath Yatra. Before the rise of modern transport, people moved from one place to another by walking sometimes merchants, sages, and scholars walked thousands of kilometres to different parts of the world across deserts, mountains, and rivers. How many times can a person circumnavigate (go around the world) the Earth in their lifetime if they walk non-stop? Consider the distance around the Earth as 40,000 km. Linear Growth vs. Exponential Growth Roxie tells Estu about a science-fiction novel she is reading where they build a ladder to reach the moon, ... I wonder if we actually had a ladder