is determined basically by its amplitude. The amplitude of the sound wave depends upon the force with which an object is made to vibrate. If we strike a table lightly, we hear a soft sound because we produce a sound wave Wave disturbance Time Soft sound Wave disturbance Louder sound Fig. 11.8: Soft sound has small amplitude and louder sound has large amplitude. Reprint 2025-26 of less energy (amplitude). If we hit the table hard we hear a louder sound. Can you tell why? A sound wave spreads out from its source. As it moves away from the source its amplitude as well as its loudness decreases. Louder sound can travel a larger distance as it is associated with higher energy. Fig. 11.8 shows the wave shapes of a loud and a soft sound of the same frequency. The quality or timber of sound is that characteristic which enables us to distinguish one sound from another having the same pitch and loudness. The sound which is more pleasant is said to be of a rich quality. Asound of single frequency is called a tone. The sound which is produced due to a mixture of several frequencies is called a note and is pleasant to listen to. Noise is unpleasant to the ear! Music is pleasant to hear and is of rich quality. uestions 1. Which wave property determines (a) loudness, (b) pitch? 2. Guess which sound has a higher pitch: guitar or car horn? The speed of sound is defined as the distance which a point on a wave, such asa compression or a rarefaction, travels per unit time. We know, speed, v= distance / time T Here A is the wavelength of the sound wave. It is the distance travelled by the sound wave in one time period (7) of the wave. Thus, =z Gea vehv (ea or v=Av That is, speed = wavelength x frequency. The speed of sound remains almost the same for all frequencies in a given medium under the same physical conditions. Example 11.1 A sound wave has a frequency of 2 kHz and wave length 35 cm. How long will it take to travel 1.5 km? Solution: Given, Frequency, v= 2 kHz = 2000 Hz Wavelength, 1 = 35 cm = 0.35 m We know that speed, vof the wave = wavelength x frequency V=iAv =0.35m 2000 Hz=700 m/s The time taken by the wave to travel a distance, dof 1.5 km is d _1.5x1000m _ 15 Vv 700m s1 7 Thus sound will take 2.1 s to travela distance of 1.5 km. t= s=2.1s. uestions 1. What are wavelength, frequency, time period and amplitude of a sound wave? 2. How are the wavelength and frequency of a sound wave related to its speed? 3. Calculate the wavelength of a sound wave whose frequency is 220 Hz and speed is 440 m/s in a given medium. 4. A person is listening to a tone of 500 Hz sitting at a distance of 450 m