compression starts to move away from the vibrating object. When the vibrating object moves backwards, it creates a region of low pressure called rarefaction (R), as shown in Fig. 11.4. As the object moves back and forth rapidly, a series of compressions and rarefactions is created in the air. These make the sound wave that Fig. 11.4: A vibrating object creating a series of compressions (C) and rarefactions (R) in the medium. SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 propagates through the medium. Compression is the region of high pressure and rarefaction is the region of low pressure. Pressure is related to the number of particles of a medium in a given volume. More density of the particles in the medium gives more pressure and vice versa. Thus, propagation of sound can be visualised as propagation of density variations or pressure variations in the medium. uestion 1. Howdoes the sound produced by a vibrating object in a medium reach your ear? 2. Explain how sound is produced by your school bell. 3. Why are sound waves called mechanical waves? 4. Suppose you and your friend are on the moon. Will you be able to hear any sound produced by your friend? 11.2.1 SOUND WAVES ARE LONGITUDINAL WAVES Activity 11.4 e Take a slinky. Ask your friend to hold one end. You hold the other end. Now stretch the slinky as shown in Fig. 11.5(a). Then give ita sharp push towards your friend. e What do you notice? If you move your hand pushing and pulling the slinky alternatively, what will you observe? e If you mark a dot on the slinky, you will observe that the dot on the slinky will move back and forth parallel to the direction of the propagation of the disturbance. R C R C R C R C (b) Fig. 11.5: Longitudinal wave in a slinky. SOUND The regions where the coils become closer are called compressions (C) and the regions where the coils are further apart are called rarefactions (R). As we already know, sound propagates in the medium as a series of compressions and rarefactions. Now, we can compare the propagation of disturbance ina slinky with the sound propagation in the medium. These waves are called longitudinal waves. In these waves the individual particles of the medium move in a direction parallel to the direction of propagation of the disturbance. The particles do not move from one place to another but they simply oscillate back and forth about their position of rest. This is exactly how a sound wave propagates, hence sound waves are longitudinal waves. There is also another type of wave, called a transverse wave. In a transverse wave particles do not oscillate along the direction of wave propagation but oscillate up and down about their mean position as the wave travels. Thus, a transverse wave is the one in which the individual particles of the medium move about their mean positions in a direction perpendicular to the direction of wave propagation. When we drop