it is reduced to a value where it is no longer audible. The repeated reflection that results in this persistence of sound is called reverberation. In an auditorium or big hall excessive reverberation is highly undesirable. To reduce reverberation, the roof and walls of the auditorium are generally covered with sound-absorbent materials like compressed fibreboard, rough plaster or draperies. The seat materials are also selected on the basis of their sound absorbing properties. Example 11.2 A person clapped his hands near a cliff and heard the echo after 2 s. What is the distance of the cliff from the person if the speed of the sound, vis taken as 346 m s'!? Solution: Given, Speed of sound, v= 346m s" Time taken for hearing the echo, t=2s Distance travelled by the sound =vx t=346ms'x2s=692m In 2 s sound has to travel twice the distance between the cliff and the person. Hence, the distance between the cliff and the person = 692 m/2 = 346 m. uestion 1. An echo is heard in 3s. What is the distance of the reflecting surface from the source, given that the speed of sound is 342m s'? 11.3.3 USES OF MULTIPLE REFLECTION OF SOUND 1. Megaphones or loudhailers, horns, musical instruments such as trumpets and shehanais, are all designed to send sound in a particular direction without spreading it in all directions, as shown in Fig 11.10. Megaphone Horn Fig 11.10: A megaphone and a horn. SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 In these instruments, a tube followed by a conical opening reflects sound successively to guide most of the sound waves from the source in the forward direction towards the audience. Stethoscope is a medical instrument used for listening to sounds produced within the body, mainly in the heart or lungs. In stethoscopes the sound of the patient s heartbeat reaches the doctor s ears by multiple reflection of sound, as shown in Fig.11.11. Fig. 11.11: Stethoscope Generally the ceilings of concert halls, conference halls and cinema halls are curved so that sound after reflection reaches all corners of the hall, as shown in Fig 11.12. Sometimes a curved soundboard may be placed behind the stage so that the sound, after reflecting from the sound board, spreads evenly across the width of the hall (Fig 11.13). Fig. 11.12: Curved ceiling of a conference hall. SOUND sproccecccse Sound board Source of sound Fig. 11.13: Sound board used in a big hall. uestion 1. Why are the ceilings of concert halls curved? 11.4 Range of Hearing The audible range of sound for human beings extends from about 20 Hz to 20000 Hz (one Hz = one cycle/s). Children under the age of five and some animals, such as dogs can hear up to 25 kHz (1 kHz = 1000 Hz). As people grow older their ears become less sensitive to higher frequencies. Sounds of frequencies below 20 Hz are called infrasonic sound or infrasound. If we could hear infrasound we would hear the vibrations of a pendulum just