in which the sound is incident and is reflected make equal angles with the normal to the reflecting surface at the point of incidence, and the three are in the same plane. An obstacle of large size which may be polished or rough is needed for the reflection of sound waves. 11.5 Take two identical pipes, as shown in Fig. 11.9. You can make the pipes using chart paper. The length of the pipes should be sufficiently long as shown. e Arrange them on a table near a wall. e Keep a clock near the open end of one of the pipes and try to hear the sound of the clock through the other pipe. e Adjust the position of the pipes so that you can best hear the sound of the clock. e Now, measure the angles of incidence and reflection and _see_ the Activity relationship between the angles. e Lift the pipe on the right vertically to a small height and observe what happens. (In place of a clock, a mobile phone on vibrating mode may also be used.) Fig. 11.9: Reflection of sound Reprint 2025-26 11.3.1 EcHo If we shout or clap near a suitable reflecting object such as a tall building or a mountain,we will hear the same sound again a little later. This sound which we hear is called an echo. The sensation of sound persists in our brain for about 0.1 s. To hear a distinct echo the time interval between the original sound and the reflected one must be at least 0.1s. If we take the speed of sound to be 344 m/sata given temperature, say at 22 C in air, the sound must go to the obstacle and reach back the ear of the listener on reflection after O.1s. Hence, the total distance covered by the sound from the point of generation to the reflecting surface and back should be at least (344 m/s) x 0.1 s = 34.4 m. Thus, for hearing distinct echoes, the minimum distance of the obstacle from the source of sound must be half of this distance, that is, 17.2 m. This distance will change with the temperature of air. Echoes may be heard more than once due to successive or multiple reflections. The rolling of thunder is due to the successive reflections of the sound from a number of reflecting surfaces, such as the clouds and the land. 11.3.2 REVERBERATION A sound created in a big hall will persist by repeated reflection from the walls until it is reduced to a value where it is no longer audible. The repeated reflection that results in this persistence of sound is called reverberation. In an auditorium or big hall excessive reverberation is highly undesirable. To reduce reverberation, the roof and walls of the auditorium are generally covered with sound-absorbent materials like compressed fibreboard, rough plaster or draperies. The seat materials are also selected on the basis of their sound absorbing properties. Example 11.2 A person clapped his hands