one maximum value to the minimum value and again to the maximum value makes one complete oscillation. e The distance between two consecutive compressions or two consecutive rarefactions is called the wavelength, 2. The time taken by the wave for one complete oscillation of the density or pressure of the medium is called the time period, T. e The number of complete oscillations per unit time is called 1] the frequency (v), V=7. T The speed v, frequency v, and wavelength i, of sound are related by the equation, v = Av. e The speed of sound depends primarily on the nature and the temperature of the transmitting medium. The law of reflection of sound states that the directions in which the sound is incident and reflected make equal angles with the normal to the reflecting surface at the point of incidence and the three lie in the same plane. For hearing a distinct sound, the time interval between the original sound and the reflected one must be at least 0.1 s. e The persistence of sound in an auditorium is the result of repeated reflections of sound and is called reverberation. SOUND 137 Reprint 2025-26 Sound properties such as pitch, loudness and quality are determined by the corresponding wave properties. Loudness is a physiological response of the ear to the intensity of sound. The amount of sound energy passing each second through unit area is called the intensity of sound. The audible range of hearing for average human beings is in the frequency range of 20 Hz - 20 kHz. Sound waves with frequencies below the audible range are termed infrasonic and those above the audible range are termed ultrasonic . Ultrasound has many medical and industrial applications. Exercises 1. What is sound and how is it produced? 2. Describe with the help of a diagram, how compressions and rarefactions are produced in air near a source of sound. 3. Why is sound wave called a longitudinal wave? 4. Which characteristic of the sound helps you to identify your friend by his voice while sitting with others in a dark room? 5. Flash and thunder are produced simultaneously. But thunder is heard a few seconds after the flash is seen, why? 6. A person has a hearing range from 20 Hz to 20 kHz. What are the typical wavelengths of sound waves in air corresponding to these two frequencies? Take the speed of sound in air as 344m st. 7. Two children are at opposite ends of an aluminium rod. One strikes the end of the rod with a stone. Find the ratio of times taken by the sound wave in air and in aluminium to reach the second child. 8. The frequency of a source of sound is 100 Hz. How many times does it vibrate in a minute? 9. Does sound follow the same laws of reflection as light does? Explain. 10. When a sound is reflected from a distant object, an echo is produced. Let the