sound wave propagates, hence sound waves are longitudinal waves. There is also another type of wave, called a transverse wave. In a transverse wave particles do not oscillate along the direction of wave propagation but oscillate up and down about their mean position as the wave travels. Thus, a transverse wave is the one in which the individual particles of the medium move about their mean positions in a direction perpendicular to the direction of wave propagation. When we drop a pebble in a pond, the waves you see on the water surface is an example of transverse wave. Light is a transverse wave but for light, the oscillations are not of the medium particles or their pressure or density it is not a mechanical wave. You will come to know more about transverse waves in higher classes. 11.2.2 CHARACTERISTICS OF A SOUND WAVE We can describe a sound wave by its e frequency e amplitude and e speed. Asound wave in graphic form is shown in Fig. 11.6(c), which represents how density and pressure change when the sound wave moves in the medium. The density as well as the pressure of the medium at a given time varies with distance, above and below the average value of density and pressure. Fig. 11.6(a) and Reprint 2025-26 Fig. 11.6(b) represent the density and pressure variations, respectively, as a sound wave propagates in the medium. Compressions are the regions where particles are crowded together and represented by the upper portion of the curve in Fig. 11.6(c). The peak represents the region of maximum compression. Thus, compressions are regions where density as well as pressure is high. Rarefactions are the regions of low pressure where particles are spread apart and are represented by the valley, that is, the lower portion of the curve in Fig. 11.6(c). A peak is called the crest anda valley is called the trough of a wave. The distance between two consecutive compressions (C) or two consecutive rarefactions (R) is called the wavelength, as shown in Fig. 11.6(c), The wavelength is usually represented by A (Greek letter lambda). Its SI unit is metre (m). Frequency tells us how frequently an event occurs. Suppose you are beating a drum. How many times you are beating the drum in unit time is called the frequency of your beating the drum. We know that when sound is propagated through a medium, the Density variations (Source Speaker of sound) (Source Speaker of sound) Density or Pressure Average density or pressure Distance (c) Fig. 11.6: Sound propagates as density or pressure variations as shown in (a) and (b), (c) represents graphically the density and pressure variations. SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 density of the medium oscillates between a maximum value and a minimum value. The change in density from the maximum value to the minimum value, then again to the maximum value, makes one complete oscillation. The number of such oscillations per unit time is the frequency of the sound wave. If we can count the