and ultrasonic waves are sent into the solution. Due to the high frequency, the particles of dust, grease and dirt get detached and drop out. The objects thus get thoroughly cleaned. e Ultrasounds can be used to detect cracks and flaws in metal blocks. Ultrasound in construction of big structures like buildings, bridges, machines and also scientific equipment. The cracks or holes inside the metal blocks, which are invisible from outside reduces the strength of the structure. Ultrasonic waves are allowed to pass through the metal block and detectors are used to detect the transmitted waves. If there is even a small defect, the ultrasound gets reflected back indicating the presence of the flaw or defect, as shown in Fig. 11.14. Defect or flaw Detectors Metal Block Fig 11.14: Ultrasound is reflected back from the defective locations inside a metal block. Ordinary sound of longer wavelengths cannot be used for such purpose as it will bend around the corners of the defective location and enter the detector. Ultrasonic waves are made to reflect from various parts of the heart and form the image of the heart. This technique is called echocardiography . Ultrasound scanner is an instrument which uses ultrasonic waves for getting images of internal organs of the human body. A doctor may image the patient s organs, such as the liver, gall bladder, uterus, kidney, etc. It helps the doctor to detect abnormalities, such as stones in the gall bladder and kidney or tumours in different organs. In this technique the ultrasonic waves travel through the tissues of the body and get reflected from a region where there is a change of tissue density. SCIENCE Metallic components are generally used Reprint 2025-26 These waves are then converted into electrical signals that are used to generate images of the organ. These images are then displayed on a monitor or printed on a film. This technique is called ultrasonography . Ultrasonography is also used for examination of the foetus during pregnancy to detect congenial defects and growth abnormalities. Ultrasound may be employed to break small stones formed in the kidneys into fine grains. These grains later get flushed out with urine. What you have learnt e Sound is produced due to vibration of different objects. Sound travels as a longitudinal wave through a material medium. e Sound travels as successive compressions and rarefactions in the medium. In sound propagation, it is the energy of the sound that travels and not the particles of the medium. The change in density from one maximum value to the minimum value and again to the maximum value makes one complete oscillation. e The distance between two consecutive compressions or two consecutive rarefactions is called the wavelength, 2. The time taken by the wave for one complete oscillation of the density or pressure of the medium is called the time period, T. e The number of complete oscillations per unit time is called 1] the frequency (v), V=7. T The speed v, frequency v, and