take 2.1 s to travela distance of 1.5 km. t= s=2.1s. uestions 1. What are wavelength, frequency, time period and amplitude of a sound wave? 2. How are the wavelength and frequency of a sound wave related to its speed? 3. Calculate the wavelength of a sound wave whose frequency is 220 Hz and speed is 440 m/s in a given medium. 4. A person is listening to a tone of 500 Hz sitting at a distance of 450 m from the source of the sound. What is the time interval between successive compressions from the source? The amount of sound energy passing each second through unit area is called the intensity of sound. We sometimes use the terms loudness and intensity interchangeably, but they are not the same. Loudness is a measure of the response of the ear to the sound. Even when two sounds are of equal intensity, we may hear one as louder than the other simply because our ear detects it better. SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 uestion 1. Distinguish between loudness and intensity of sound. 11.2.3 SPEED OF SOUND IN DIFFERENT MEDIA Sound propagates through a medium at a finite speed. The sound of a thunder is heard a little later than the flash of light is seen. So, we can make out that sound travels with a speed which is much less than the speed of light. The speed of sound depends on the properties of the medium through which it travels. You will learn about this dependence in higher classes. The speed of sound in a medium depends on temperature of the medium. The speed of sound decreases when we go from solid to gaseous state. In any medium as we increase the temperature, the speed of sound increases. For example, the speed of sound in air is 331 ms at0O C and 344m s" at 22 C. The speeds of sound at a particular temperature in various media are listed in Table 11.1. You need not memorise the values. Table 11.1: Speed of sound in different media at 25 C Substance Speed in m/s uestion 1. In which of the three media, air, water or iron, does sound travel the fastest at a particular temperature? 11.3 Reflection of Sound Sound bounces off a solid or a liquid like a rubber ball bounces off a wall. Like light, sound gets reflected at the surface of a solid or liquid and follows the same laws of reflection as you have studied in earlier classes. The directions in which the sound is incident and is reflected make equal angles with the normal to the reflecting surface at the point of incidence, and the three are in the same plane. An obstacle of large size which may be polished or rough is needed for the reflection of sound waves. 11.5 Take two identical pipes, as shown in Fig. 11.9. You can make the pipes using chart paper. The length of the pipes should be sufficiently long as shown.