C hapter 1 1 Everyday we hear sounds from various sources like humans, birds, bells, machines, vehicles, televisions, radios etc. Sound is a form of energy which produces a sensation of hearing in our ears. There are also other forms of energy like mechanical energy, light energy, etc. We have talked about mechanical energy in the previous chapters. You have been taught about conservation of energy, which states that we can neither create nor destroy energy. We can just change it from one form to another. When you clap, a sound is produced. Can you produce sound without utilising your energy? Which form of energy did you use to produce sound? In this chapter we are going to learn how sound is produced and how it is transmitted through a medium and received by our ears. 11.1 Production of Sound Activity 11.1 e Take a tuning fork and set it vibrating by striking its prong on a rubber pad. Bring it near your ear. e Do you hear any sound? e Touch one of the prongs of the vibrating tuning fork with your finger and share your experience with your friends. e Now, suspend a table tennis ball or a small plastic ball by a thread from a support [Take a big needle and a thread, put a knot at one end of the thread, and then with the help of the needle pass the thread through the ball]. Touch the ball gently with the prong of a vibrating tuning fork (Fig. 11.1). Observe what happens and discuss with your friends. 0964CH12 SouND ereccoasasenceccasaaaenceccaaaases Thread prorreeracenernarecercarean Table tennis ball %..... 3 Vibrating tuning fork Fig. 11.1: Vibrating tuning fork just touching the suspended table tennis bail. Activity 11.2 e Fill water in a beaker or a glass up to the brim. Gently touch the water surface with one of the prongs of the vibrating tuning fork, as shown in Fig. 11.2. e Next dip the prongs of the vibrating tuning fork in water, as shown in Fig. 11.3. Observe what happens in both the cases. e Discuss with your friends why this happens. Vibrating tuning fork Fig. 11.2: One of the prongs of the vibrating tuning fork touching the water surface. Reprint 2025-26 Fig. 11.3: Both the prongs of the vibrating tuning fork dipped in water From the above activities what do you conclude? Can you produce sound without a vibrating object? In the above activities we have produced sound by striking the tuning fork. We can also produce sound by plucking, scratching, rubbing, blowing or shaking different objects. As per the above activities what do we do to the objects? We set the objects vibrating and produce sound. Vibration means a kind of rapid to and fro motion of an object. The sound of the human voice is produced due to vibrations in the vocal cords. When a bird flaps its wings, do you hear any sound? Think how the buzzing sound accompanying a bee is produced. A stretched