is a guarantee of economic development. But we can expect democracy not to lag behind dictatorships in this respect. When we find such significant difference in the rates of economic growth between countries under dictatorship and democracy, it is better to prefer democracy as it has several other positive outcomes. Reprint 2025-26 Cartoon on this page and next three pages tell us about the disparities between the rich and poor. Should the gains of economic growth be evenly distributed? How can the poor get a voice for a better share in a nation? What can the poor countries do to receive a greater share in the world s wealth? < MIDDLE < POOR 08-04-2022 > J) _ J) (e) = 0) @) Outcomes o F conomic outcomes of democracy Arguments about democracy tend to be very passionate. This is how it should be, for democracy appeals to some of our deep values. These debates cannot be resolved in a simple manner. But some debates about democracy can and should be resolved by referring to some facts and figures. The debate about the economic outcomes of democracy is one such debate. Over the years, many students of democracy have gathered careful evidence to see what the relationship of democracy with economic ; growth and economic inequalities is. a WAR eur The tables and the cartoon here present some of the evidences: Poor Kids Jimmy Margulies - Cagle Cartoons Inc. @ Table 1 shows that on an average dictatorial regimes have had a slightly better record of economic growth. But when we compare their record only in poor countries, there is virtually no difference. @ Table 2 shows that within democracies there can be very high degree of inequalities. In democratic countries like South Africa and Brazil, the top 20 per cent people take away more than 60 per cent of the national income, leaving less than 3 per cent for the bottom 20 per cent population. Countries like Denmark and Hungary are much better in this respect. @ You can see in the cartoon, there is often inequality of opportunities available to the poorer sections. What would be your verdict on democracy if you had to base it purely on economic performance of democratic regimes in terms of growth and equal distribution? Table 2 Inequality of income in selected countries Table 1 ew ; ; ; Name of the % share of national vi nes i cconomic growth for different countries, | Countries income + Top 20 % | Bottom 20 % = Type of regimes and countries | Growth Rate South Africa 64.8 2.9 A All democratic regimes 3.95 Brazil 63.0 26 = All dictatorial regimes 4.42 Russia 537 44 < Poor countries under dictatorship | 4.34 USA 50.0 40 = Poor countries under democracy | 4.28 United Kingdom | 45.0 6.0 Source: A Przeworski, M E Alvarez, J A Cheibub and F Limongi, D d E Development: Political institutions and Well-Being in the World, 1 950.1990. a Denmark 34.5