who wants to know if a decision was taken through the correct procedures can find this out. She has the right and the means to examine the process of decision making. This is known as transparency. This factor is often missing from a non-democratic government. Therefore, when we are trying to find out the outcomes of democracy, it is right to expect democracy to produce a government that follows procedures and is accountable to the people. We can also expect that the democratic government develops mechanisms for citizens to hold the government accountable and mechanisms for citizens to take part in decision making whenever they think fit. If you wanted to measure democracies on the basis of this expected outcome, you would look for the following practices and institutions: regular, free and fair elections; open public debate on Reprint 2025-26 Can you think of what and how the government knows about you and your family (for example ration cards and Mike Keefe - Cagle Cartoons Inc. voter identity cards) ? What are the sources of information for you about the government? 08-04-2022 > J) _ J) (e) = 0) @) Outcomes o a) s) w [o) ae s) w o z) [o) ) (am) r5.indd 66 So, the best outcome of democracy is that itis a democracy! That is what we have discovered after all this mental gymnastics? | Democracy is preferable major policies and legislations; and citizens right to information about the government and its functioning. The actual performance of democracies shows a mixed record on this. Democracies have had greater success in setting up regular and free elections and in setting up conditions for open public debate. But most democracies fall short of elections that provide a fair chance to everyone and in subjecting every decision to public debate. Democratic governments do not have a very good record when it comes to sharing information with citizens. All one can say in favour of democratic regimes is that they are much better than any non-democratic regime in these respects. In substantive terms, it may be reasonable to expect from democracy a government that is attentive to the needs and demands of the people and is largely free of corruption. The record of democracies is not impressive on these two counts. Democracies often frustrate the needs of the people and often ignore Democracy is preferred over dictatorship everywhere except th Asi SS die Pakistan Those who agree with one of the statements Bangladesh India Nepal Pakistan Sri Lanka 69 70 =62 37 71 Sometimes dictatorship is better 6 9 10 14 11 Doesn't matter to me 25 21 28 49 18 the demands of a majority of its population. The routine tales of corruption are enough to convince us that democracy is not free of this evil. At the same time, there is nothing to show that non-democracies are less corrupt or more sensitive to the people. There is one respect in which democratic government is certainly better than its