=62 37 71 Sometimes dictatorship is better 6 9 10 14 11 Doesn't matter to me 25 21 28 49 18 the demands of a majority of its population. The routine tales of corruption are enough to convince us that democracy is not free of this evil. At the same time, there is nothing to show that non-democracies are less corrupt or more sensitive to the people. There is one respect in which democratic government is certainly better than its alternatives: democratic government is legitimate government. It may be slow, less efficient, not always very responsive or clean. But a democratic government is people s own government. That is why, there is an overwhelming support for the idea of democracy all over the world. As the accompanying evidence from South Asia shows, the support exists in countries with democratic regimes as well as countries without democratic regimes. People wish to be ruled by representatives elected by them. They also believe that democracy is suitable for their country. Democracy s ability to generate its own support is itself an outcome that cannot be ignored. Very few doubt the suitability of democracy for their own country How suitable is democracy for your country? ig Very suitable Suitable South Asia Bangladesh Sri Lanka India Pakistan Nepal 0 , 50 100 Overwhelming support for democracy Those who agree with the rule of leaders elected by the people @ Strongly agree Agree South Asia Sri Lanka Bangladesh India Nepal Pakistan Source: SDSA Team, State of Democracy in South Asia, Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2007 Reprint 2025-26 08-04-2022 12:36:53 Chapter 5.indd 67 RJ Matson - Cagle Cartoons Inc. Economic growth and development If democracies are expected to produce good governments, then is it not fair to expect that they would also produce development? Evidence shows that in practice, many democracies did not fulfil this expectation. If you consider all democracies and all dictatorships for the fifty years between 1950 and 2000, dictatorships have slightly higher rate of economic growth. The inability of democracy to achieve higher economic development worries us. But this alone cannot be reason to reject democracy. As you have already studied in economics, economic development depends on several factors: country s population The Rich Get Buff INCOME DISTRIBUTION GAINS 2000-2006 MAG Alor ansrosromr caglecartoons,com size, global situation, cooperation from other countries, economic priorities adopted by the country, etc. However, the difference in the rates of economic development between less developed countries with dictatorships and democracies is negligible. Overall, we cannot say that democracy is a guarantee of economic development. But we can expect democracy not to lag behind dictatorships in this respect. When we find such significant difference in the rates of economic growth between countries under dictatorship and democracy, it is better to prefer democracy as it has several other positive outcomes. Reprint 2025-26 Cartoon on this page and next three pages tell us about the disparities between the rich and poor. Should the gains of economic growth be evenly distributed? How