is itself a testimony to the success of democracy: it shows that people have developed awareness and the ability to expect and to look critically at power holders and the high and the mighty. A public expression of dissatisfaction with democracy shows the success of the democratic project: it transforms people from the status of a subject into that of a citizen. Most individuals today believe that their vote makes a difference to the way the government is run and to their own self-interest. Belief in the efficacy of vote is placed above the calculus of utility Those who say that their vote makes a difference... India 67 Nepal 15 Bangladesh Pakistan Sri Lanka 65 0 80 Source: SDSA Team, State of Democracy in South Asia, Delhi: Oxford University Press, 2007. 08-04-2022 12:37:01 1. How does democracy produce an accountable, responsive and legitimate government? 2. What are the conditions under which democracies accommodate social diversities? 3. Give arguments to support or oppose the following assertions: @ Industrialised countries can afford democracy but the poor need dictatorship to become rich. @ Democracy can t reduce inequality of incomes between different citizens. @ Government in poor countries should spend less on poverty reduction, health, education and spend more on industries and infrastructure. @ In democracy all citizens have one vote, which means that there is absence of any domination and conflict. 4. Identify the challenges to democracy in the following descriptions. Also suggest policy/institutional mechanism to deepen democracy in the given situations: @ Following a High Court directive, a temple in Orissa that had separate entry doors for dalits and non-dalits allowed entry for all from the same door. e@ A large number of farmers are committing suicide in different states of India. @ Following an allegation of killing of three civilians in Gandwara in a fake encounter by Jammu and Kashmir police, an enquiry has been ordered. 5. In the context of democracies, which of the following ideas is correctdemocracies have successfully eliminated: A. conflicts among people B. economic inequalities among people C. differences of opinion about how marginalised sections are to be treated D. the idea of political inequality 6. In the context of assessing democracy, which among the following is the odd one out. Democracies need to ensure: A. free and fair elections B. dignity of the individual C. majority rule D. equal treatment before law > J) _ J) eo) = J) @) 7. Studies on political and social inequalities in democracy show that: A. democracy and development go together. B. inequalities exist in democracies. C. inequalities do not exist under dictatorship. D. dictatorship is better than democracy. , Exercises Outcomes o Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 5.indd 73 08-04-2022 IS es zs ~ uy x a a) YU w [o) (au [S) ce - & w YU [o) cB) (am) | Chapter 5.indd 74 Read the passage below: Nannu is a daily wage earner. He lives in Welcome Mazdoor Colony, a slum habitation in East Delhi. He lost his