CHAPTER 1 2 Magnetic Effects of Electric Current hole n the previous Chapter on Electricity we learnt about the heating effects of electric current. What could be the other effects of electric current? We know that an electric current-carrying wire behaves like a magnet. Let us perform the following Activity to reinforce it. Long straight = Take a straight thick copper wire and place it conduct between the points X and Y in an electric circuit, as shown in Fig. 12.1. The wire XY is kept DP perpendicular to the plane of paper. = Horizontally place a small compass near to this copper wire. See the position of its needle. = Pass the current through the circuit by K inserting the key into the plug. Figure 12.1 = Observe the change in the position of the Compass needle is deflected on passing an electric compass needle. current through a metallic conductor We see that the needle is deflected. What does it mean? It means that the electric current through the copper wire has produced a magnetic effect. Thus we can say that electricity and magnetism are linked to each other. Then, what about the reverse possibility of an electric effect of moving magnets? In this Chapter we will study magnetic fields and such electromagnetic effects. We shall also study about electromagnets which involve the magnetic effect of electric current. Hans Christian Oersted (1777-1851) Reprint 2025-26 12.1 MAGNETIC FIELD AND FIELD LINES We are familiar with the fact that a compass needle gets deflected when brought near a bar magnet. A compass needle is, in fact, a small bar magnet. The ends of the compass needle point approximately towards north and south directions. The end pointing towards north is called north seeking or north pole. The other end that points towards south is called south seeking or south pole. Through various activities we have observed that like poles repel, while unlike poles of magnets attract each other. Q U ES TION Why does a compass needle get deflected when brought near a bar magnet? Fix a sheet of white paper on a drawing board using some adhesive material. Place a bar magnet in the centre of it. Sprinkle some iron filings uniformly around the bar magnet (Fig. 12.2). A salt-sprinkler may be used for this purpose. Now tap the board gently. What do you observe? Figure 12.2 Iron filings near the bar magnet align themselves along the field lines. The iron filings arrange themselves in a pattern as shown Fig. 12.2. Why do the iron filings arrange in such a pattern? What does this pattern demonstrate? The magnet exerts its influence in the region surrounding it. Therefore the iron filings experience a force. The force thus exerted makes iron filings to arrange in a pattern. The region surrounding a magnet, in which the force of the magnet can be detected, is said to have a magnetic field. The lines along which the iron filings align themselves represent magnetic field lines. Are