experiences now towards the right. a force perpendicular to its length and Why does the rod get displaced? the magnetic field. Support for the magnet is not shown here, for simplicity. The displacement of the rod in the above activity suggests that a force is exerted on the current-carrying aluminium rod when it is placed in a magnetic field. It also suggests that the direction of force is also reversed when the direction of current through the conductor is reversed. Now change the direction of field to vertically downwards by interchanging the two poles of the magnet. It is once again observed that 202 Science Reprint 2025-26 the direction of force acting on the current-carrying rod gets reversed. It shows that the direction of the force on the conductor depends upon the direction of current and the direction of the magnetic field. Experiments have shown that the displacement of the rod is largest (or the magnitude of the force is the highest) when the direction of current is at right angles to the direction of the magnetic field. In such a condition we can use a simple rule to find the direction of the force on the conductor. In Activity 12.7, we considered the direction of the current and that of the magnetic field perpendicular to each other and found that the force is perpendicular to both of them. The three directions can be illustrated through a simple rule, called Fleming s left-hand rule. According to this rule, stretch the thumb, forefinger and middle finger of your left hand such that they are mutually perpendicular (Fig. 12.13). If the first finger points in the direction of magnetic field and the second finger in the direction of current, then the thumb will point in the direction of motion or Figure 12.13 the force acting on the conductor. Fleming's left-hand rule Devices that use current-carrying conductors and magnetic fields include electric motor, electric generator, loudspeakers, microphones and measuring instruments. Field Thumb - Motion Current Force Current Example 12.2 An electron enters a magnetic field at right angles to it, as shown in Fig. 12.14. The direction of force acting on the electron will be (a) tothe right. Magnetic field (b) to the left. (c) out of the page. Electron (d) into the page. Figure 12.14 Solution Answer is option (d). The direction of force is perpendicular to the direction of magnetic field and current as given by Fleming s left hand rule. Recall that the direction of current is taken opposite to the direction of motion of electrons. The force is therefore directed into the page. Q U ES TION S 1. Which of the following property of a proton can change while it moves freely in a magnetic field? (There may be more than one correct answer.) (a) mass (b) speed (c) velocity (d) momentum Magnetic Effects of Electric Current 203 Reprint 2025-26 2. In Activity 12.7, how do we think the displacement of rod AB will be affected if (i)