magnetic field is greater. A metallic wire carrying an electric current has associated with it a magnetic field. The field lines about the wire consist of a series of concentric circles whose direction is given by the right-hand rule. The pattern of the magnetic field around a conductor due to an electric current flowing through it depends on the shape of the conductor. The magnetic field of a solenoid carrying a current is similar to that of a bar magnet. An electromagnet consists of a core of soft iron wrapped around with a coil of insulated copper wire. A current-carrying conductor when placed in a magnetic field experiences a force. If the direction of the field and that of the current are mutually perpendicular to each other, then the force acting on the conductor will be perpendicular to both and will be given by Fleming s left-hand rule. In our houses we receive AC electric power of 220 V with a frequency of 50 Hz. One of the wires in this supply is with red insulation, called live wire. The other one is of black insulation, which is a neutral wire. The potential difference between the two is 220 V. The third is the earth wire that has green insulation and this is connected to a metallic body deep inside earth. It is used as a safety measure to ensure that any leakage of current to a metallic body does not give any severe shock to a user. Fuse is the most important safety device, used for protecting the circuits due to short-circuiting or overloading of the circuits. 206 Science Reprint 2025-26 . Which of the following correctly describes the magnetic field near a long straight wire? (a) The field consists of straight lines perpendicular to the wire. (b) The field consists of straight lines parallel to the wire. (c) The field consists of radial lines originating from the wire. (d) The field consists of concentric circles centred on the wire. . At the time of short circuit, the current in the circuit (a) reduces substantially. (b) does not change. (c) increases heavily. (d) vary continuously. State whether the following statements are true or false. (a) The field at the centre of a long circular coil carrying current will be parallel straight lines. (b) Awire with a green insulation is usually the live wire of an electric supply. List two methods of producing magnetic fields. . When is the force experienced by a current-carrying conductor placed in a magnetic field largest? Imagine that you are sitting in a chamber with your back to one wall. An electron beam, moving horizontally from back wall towards the front wall, is deflected by a strong magnetic field to your right side. What is the direction of magnetic field? State the rule to determine the direction of a (i) magnetic field produced around a straight conductor-carrying current, (ii) force experienced by a current-carrying straight conductor placed in a magnetic field which is perpendicular to