0968CHO2 PHYSICAL FEATURES OF INDIA \ "ie have already learnt earlier that India is a vast country with varied land forms. What kind of terrain do you live in? If you live in the plains, you are familiar with the vast stretches of plain land. In contrast, if you live in hilly region, the rugged terrain with mountains and valleys are common features. In fact, our country has practically all major physical features of the earth, i.e., mountains, plains, deserts, plateaus and islands. The land of India displays great physical variation. Geologically, the Peninsular Plateau constitutes one of the ancient landmasses on the earth s surface. It was supposed to be one of the most stable land blocks. The Himalayas and the Northern Plains are the most recent landforms. From the view point of geology, Himalayan mountains form an unstable zone. The whole mountain system of Himalaya represents a very youthful topography with high peaks, deep valleys and fast flowing rivers. The northern plains are formed of alluvial deposits. The peninsular plateau is composed of igneous and metamorphic rocks with gently rising hills and wide valleys. MaJor PHySIOGRAPHIC DIVISIONS The physical features of India can be grouped under the following physiographic divisions (Figure 2.2): (1) The Himalayan Mountains (2) The Northern Plains (3) The Peninsular Plateau (4) The Indian Desert (5) The Coastal Plains (6) The Islands The Himalayan Mountains The Himalayas, geologically young and structurally fold mountains stretch over the northern borders of India. These mountain ranges run in a west-east direction from the Indus to the Brahmaputra. The Himalayas represent the loftiest and one of the most rugged mountain barriers of the world. They form an arc, which covers a distance of about 2,400 Km. Their width varies from 400 Km in Kashmir to 150 Km in Arunachal Pradesh. The altitudinal variations are greater in the eastern half than those in the western half. The Himalaya consists of three parallel ranges in its longitudinal extent. A number of valleys lie between these ranges. The northern-most range is known as the Great or Inner Himalayas or the Himadri. It is the most continuous range consisting of the loftiest peaks with an average height of 6,000 metres. It contains all prominent Himalayan peaks. Reprint 2025-26 3 omar Lake THE HIMALAYAS 0 200 400 600 km CHINA (TIBET) andhata NAMCHA BARWA 7756 _g Tsangpo R. ge Bum La m4 Figure 2.1 : Himalayas Some Highest Peaks of the Himalayas Peak Country Height in metres Mt. Everest Nepal 8848 Kanchenjunga India - 8598 Makalu Nepal - 8481) iri Nepal | 8172 Fah ty Nanga Parbat India 8126 Bae Annapurna Nepal 8078 Nanda Devi Indias ag. 4 7S oe : India (7756 cha Barwa India 7156 ~~) st /Gurla Mandhata Nepal 728 Pyicte The folds of the Great Himalayas are asymmetrical in nature. The core of this part of Himalayas is composed of granite. It is perennially snow bound, and a number of glaciers descend from this range. Find)out e The names of