island group has great diversity of flora and fauna. The Pitti island, which is uninhabited, has a bird sanctuary. i organisms, which live in colonies. They flo in shallow, mud-fi free and warm. _ They _ ee secrete calcium carbonate...The coral s Secrenorr ltl Aaa Corals Coral polyps are short-lived micro opie _and thei eletons from cofal deposits in the ~form of reefs: - re mainly.of thr e kinds: barrier reef. fringing oe The Great Barrier Reef of Australiais as . Now you see the elongated chain of islands located in the Bay of Bengal extending from north to south. These are Andaman and Nicobar islands. They are bigger in size and are more numerous and scattered. The entire group of islands is divided into two broad categories The Andaman in the north and the Nicobar in the south. It is believed that these islands are an elevated portion of submarine mountains. These island groups are of great strategic importance for the country. There is great diversity of flora and fauna in this group of islands too. These islands lie close to equator and experience equatorial climate and has thick forest cover. Do You Know? ; ; ; India s only active volcano is found on Barren island in Andaman and Nicobar group of Islands. A detailed account of the different physiographic units highlights the unique features of each region. It would, however, be clear that each region complements the other and makes the country richer in its natural resources. The mountains are the major sources of water and forest wealth. The northern plains are the granaries of the country. They provide the base for early civilisations. The plateau is a storehouse of minerals, which has played a crucial role in the industrialisation of the country. The coastal region and island groups provide sites for fishing and port activities. Thus, the diverse physical features of the land have immense future possibilities of development. CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I Reprint 2025-26 EXERCISE 1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below. (i) A landmass bounded by sea on three sides is referred to as (a) Coast (c) Peninsula (b) Island (d) None of the above (ii) Mountain ranges in the eastern part of India forming its boundary with Myanmar are collectively called (a) Himachal (c) Purvachal (b) Uttarakhand (d) None of the above (iii) The western coastal strip, south of Goa is referred to as (a) Coromandel (c) Kannad (b) Konkan (d) Northern Circar (iv) The highest peak in the Eastern Ghats is (a) Anai Mudi (c) Mahendragiri (b) Kanchenjunga (d) Khasi 2 Answer the following questions briefly. (i) What is the bhabar? (ii) Name the three major divisions of the Himalayas from north to south. (iii) Which plateau lies between the Aravali and the Vindhyan ranges? (iv) Name the island group of India having coral origin. 3. Distinguish between (i) Bhangar and Khadar (ii) Western Ghats and Eastern Ghats 4. Which are the major physiographic divisions of India? Contrast the relief