The Aravali Hills lie on the western and northwestern margins of the Peninsular plateau. These are highly eroded hills and are found as broken hills. They extend from Gujarat to Delhi in a southwest-northeast direction. The Indian Desert The Indian desert lies towards the western margins of the Aravali Hills. It is an undulating sandy plain covered with sand dunes. This region receives very low rainfall below 150 mm per year. It has arid climate with low vegetation cover. Streams appear during the rainy season. Soon after they disappear into the sand as they do not have enough water to reach the sea. Luni is the only large river in this region. Figure 2.7 : The Indian Desert Barchans (crescent-shaped dunes) cover larger areas but longitudinal dunes become PHYSICAL FEATURES OF INDIA more prominent near the Indo-Pakistan boundary. If you visit Jaisalmer, you may go to see a group of barchans. The Coastal Plains The Peninsular plateau is flanked by stretch of narrow coastal strips, running along the Arabian Sea on the west and the Bay of Bengal on the east. The western coast, sandwiched between the Western Ghats and the Arabian Sea, is a narrow plain. It consists of three sections. The northern part of the coast is called the Konkan (Mumbai - Goa), the central stretch is called the Kannad Plain, while the southern stretch is referred to as the Malabar coast. Figure 2.8 : The Coastal Plains The plains along the Bay of Bengal are wide and level. In the northern part, it is referred to as the Northern Circar, while the southern part is known as the Coromandel Coast. Large rivers, such as the Mahanadi, the Godavari, the Krishna and the Kaveri have formed extensive delta on this coast. Lake Chilika is an important feature along the eastern coast. Do You Kno ? The Chilika Lake is the largest salt water lake in India. It lies in the state of Odisha, to the south of the Mahanadi delta. Reprint 2025-26 The Islands You have already seen that India has a vast mainland. Besides this, the country has two groups of islands. Can you identify these island groups? Figure 2.9: AnIsland Locate the Lakshadweep Islands group lying close to the Malabar coast of Kerala. This group of islands is composed of small coral isalnds. Earlier they were known as Laccadive, Minicoy and Amindive. In 1973, these were named as Lakshadweep. It covers small area of 32 sq km. Kavaratti island is the administrative headquarters of Lakshadweep. This island group has great diversity of flora and fauna. The Pitti island, which is uninhabited, has a bird sanctuary. i organisms, which live in colonies. They flo in shallow, mud-fi free and warm. _ They _ ee secrete calcium carbonate...The coral s Secrenorr ltl Aaa Corals Coral polyps are short-lived micro opie _and thei eletons from cofal deposits in the ~form of reefs: - re mainly.of thr e kinds: barrier reef. fringing oe The Great Barrier Reef of Australiais as