Unity in Diversity, or Many in the One Oh, grant me my prayer, that I may never lose the bliss of the touch of the one in the play of the many. Rabindranath Tagore ... The principle of unity in diversity which has always been normal to [India] and its fulfilment the fundamental course of her being and its very nature, the Many in the One, would place her on the sure foundation of her Swabhava and Swadharma. Sri Aurobindo Reprint 2025-26 | chapter8.indd 125 Co 03502:2025 cents Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions Exploring Society: India and Beyond S| chapter8.indd 126 A Rich Diversity If you travel through India by train, you will notice not only changing landscapes but also many different types of dresses and food; you will hear different languages, familiar and unfamiliar, and see different scripts on the way. Even within your own region, you will often come across people from other parts of India with different customs and traditions. This is India s rich diversity, and it is usually the first thing that strikes visitors to our country. With over 1.4 billion inhabitants (about 18 percent of the world s population), such diversity is not surprising! In the late 20" century, the Anthropological Survey of India, a national organisation, conducted a massive survey called People of India project of 4,635 communities across all States of the country. It counted 325 languages using 25 scripts; it also observed that many Indians may be called migrants, in the sense of people not living near their birthplace or with their original community. LET'S EXPLORE As a class activity, make lists of (1) the birthplaces of at least 5 classmates and the birthplaces of their parents; (2) the students mother tongues and other languages known to them. Discuss the results in terms of diversity. While diversity is indeed beautiful, making sense of it is not so easy. Over a century ago, the British historian Vincent Smith wondered, How, in the face of such bewildering diversity, can a C C history of India be written? ... The answer to the query is found in the fact that India offers unity in diversity. What is meant by unity in diversity ? How shall we perceive and express this unity, or the Many in the One ? To answer this question, we will explore a few dimensions of Indian life. Reprint 2025-26 & 03-02-2025 05:04:12 | | chapter8.indd 127 Food for All Some of you will have eaten food from different regions of India. The number of different dishes and preparations you can taste in India must be in their thousands, if not lakhs! Yet certain food grains are common to almost every part of the country cereals such as rice, barley and wheat; millets such as pearl millet (bajra), sorghum (jowar), finger millet (ragi); and pulses such as various kinds of dals and & rajma rajma ate, white lobia 0) basmati ww moong dal masoor dal ww rice : ~ chana