many Reprint 2025-26 8 - Unity in Diversity, or Many in the One @ 03-02-2025 05:04:29 | parts of India on or around January 14. The map shows the different names of similar festivals across India about the same date. Shishur Saenkraat Makar Sankraat Uttarayan Fig. 8.5. Different names of similar festivals across India about the same date LET'S EXPLORE > What is your favourite festival and how is it celebrated in your region? Do you know whether it is celebrated in any other part of India, maybe under a different name? | Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions Exploring Society: India and Beyond Reprint 2025-26 | chapter8.indd 132 & 03-02-2025 05:04:22 | chapter8.indd 133 > During October-November, many major festivals take place in India. Make a list of the few main ones and their various names in different parts of the country. An Epic Spread Literature offers us another fine illustration of unity in diversity. Indian literatures are extremely diverse (and among the most abundant in the world). Over centuries, despite differences in language, technique, etc., they have shared important themes and concerns. Who has not heard of the Pafichatantra, for example? This collection of delightful stories, with animals as the main characters, teaches us important life skills. The original Sanskrit text is at least 2,200 years old, but its stories have been adapted in almost every Indian language. In fact, they have travelled well beyond India, all the way to Southeast Asia, the Arab world and Europe, inspiring new collections of stories on the way it is estimated that about 200 adaptations of the Pafichatantra exist in more than 50 languages! This illustrates how one collection of stories has become many . The most striking case, however, is that of India s two epics the Ramayana and the Mahabharata. These two long Sanskrit poems, which together might fill some 7,000 pages in their original versions, narrate the stories of heroes who fight to re-establish dharma. In the Mahabharata, the Pandavas, with Krishna s help, fight their own cousins, the Kauravas, to recover their kingdom. In the Ramayana, Rama, with the help of his brother Lakshmana and of Hanuman, defeats the demon Ravana, who had kidnapped his wife Sita. These stories contain many shorter ones that focus on values, and constantly ask questions about what is right and what is wrong. Reprint 2025-26 Epic: Along poem generally narrating the adventures of heroes and other great figures of the past. 8 - Unity in Diversity, or Many in the One 03-02-2025 05:04:32 | Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions Exploring Society: India and Beyond chapter8.indd 134 Fig. 8.6. A painting depicting a major episode from the Ramayana (18 century, Himachal Pradesh) LET'S EXPLORE In a class discussion, try to identify the episode depicted in the painting shown in Fig. 8.6 above and important details associated with it. For more than two millenniums, these two epics have been translated or adapted into regional literatures in India and beyond. In addition, there