of India. The number of different dishes and preparations you can taste in India must be in their thousands, if not lakhs! Yet certain food grains are common to almost every part of the country cereals such as rice, barley and wheat; millets such as pearl millet (bajra), sorghum (jowar), finger millet (ragi); and pulses such as various kinds of dals and & rajma rajma ate, white lobia 0) basmati ww moong dal masoor dal ww rice : ~ chana dal @ hs @ mnitet @ chickpea wfaize @ arhardal arhar dal jawar ww & millet kollam rice Fig. 8.1. A few examples of cereals and pulses from different regions of India Reprint 2025-26 (2 &) yeon pea 8 - Unity in Diversity, or Many in the One 03-02-2025 05:04:20 | Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions Exploring Society: India and Beyond SS chapter8.indd 128 grams. All these are called staple grains because they are the basic food for most Indians (Fig. 8.1 on page 127). Similarly, some common spices such as turmeric, cumin, cardamom and ginger, are also used throughout the country. We could continue this list with some common vegetables, common oils etc. So we see how the same ingredients (unity) can be used in a number of combinations (diversity) to prepare an endless variety of dishes! LET'S EXPLORE > Asaclass activity, make a list of ingredients (grains, spices, etc.) that are used in your home. > Take any one vegetable and think of the number of different dishes you can prepare with it. Textiles and Clothing Every region and community in India has developed its own styles of clothing and dresses. Yet, we notice a commonality in some traditional Indian dresses, irrespective of the material used. An obvious example is the plain length of cloth called the sari, a type of clothing worn in most parts of India and made from different fabrics mostly cotton or silk, but nowadays synthetic fabrics too. Banarasi, Kanjivaram, Paithani, Patan Patola, Muga or Mysore are some of the famous types of silk saris. There Fig. 8.2. Stone relief of a are many more kinds of cotton saris. woman ina sari from Altogether, this unstitched piece of cloth Vaishali (today in Bihar) . . oo. comes in hundreds of varieties. They are Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:04:20 | chapter8.indd 129 produced by different methods of weaving (Fig. 8.3 on the right) and designing. Some designs are part of the cloth, while others are printed after the cloth is woven. Finally, there are endless variations in the colours, which are produced from many kinds of pigments. The sari has a long history. This stone relief (Fig. 8.2 on page 128) from Vaishali (today in Bihar) goes back a few centuries BCE. LET'S EXPLORE Explain how the example of the sari reflects both unity and diversity (in 100-150 words). < DON'T MISS OUT Indian textiles. For a very long time, India produced the finest cotton in the world and Indian textiles were exported as far