03-02-2025 05:04:32 | Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions Exploring Society: India and Beyond chapter8.indd 134 Fig. 8.6. A painting depicting a major episode from the Ramayana (18 century, Himachal Pradesh) LET'S EXPLORE In a class discussion, try to identify the episode depicted in the painting shown in Fig. 8.6 above and important details associated with it. For more than two millenniums, these two epics have been translated or adapted into regional literatures in India and beyond. In addition, there are countless folk versions of them. A few years ago, a scholar conducted a survey in Tamil Nadu alone and counted about a hundred versions [of the Mahabharata] that have come down to us in folklore forms. Imagine what the number might be for the whole of India! In fact, many communities have their own versions of the Ramayana and the Mahabharata. They have also preserved legends connecting their own history with these epics. This is especially true of tribal communities in many parts of Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:04:32 | India, such as the Bhils, the Gonds, the Mundas and many more. Most tribes of India s northeast and Himalayan regions, including Kashmir, have had their own version of one or the other of the two epics, or both. These tribal adaptations are transmitted orally, along with legends on how the heroes of the Ramayana and the Mahabharata (generally any or all of the five Pandavas, their wife Draupadl, but also sometimes their cousin and adversary Duryodhana) visited the Fig. 8.7, Paftcha Pandavar tribes respective regions. a carved stone in a forest of the . . . Nilgiris, Tamil Nadu, depicting the The anthropologist K.S. Singh directed five Pandava brothers. The shrine the People of India project we referred Sr rUle(EMe commemorate to earlier (see page 126). In the case of the Pandavas passing through the Mahabharata, he observed, There the area. is hardly a place in the country which the epic heroes such as the Pandavas, did not visit according to folklores. And the same may be said of the Ramayana. Over the centuries, perhaps more than any other texts, these two epics created a dense web of cultural interactions across India and many parts of Asia. Another example of unity in diversity. To further illustrate the theme of this chapter, we could have continued our journey and turned to more facets of Indian culture. For instance, in India s classical arts, including classical architecture, both diversity and unity are easily noticeable. (You will study these fields through the Art Curricular Area.) In the end, we should remember that Indian culture celebrates diversity as an enrichment, but never loses sight of the underlying unity which nourishes that diversity. 8 - Unity in Diversity, or Many in the One Reprint 2025-26 chapter8.indd 135 & 03-02-2025 05:04:22 | wn c = To = Ee oO [=] xo} a) = (o) Cc < To Cc oO [o)) tC) xr . aa P=) =} oO S fo) Exploring Society: India and Beyond chapter8.indd