as one of the raw materials. NaCl + H,O + CO, + NH, NH,Cl + NaHCO, (Ammonium (Sodium chloride) hydrogencarbonate) Did you check the pH of sodium hydrogencarbonate in Activity 2.14? Can you correlate why it can be used to neutralise an acid? It is a mild non-corrosive basic salt. The following reaction takes place when it is heated during cooking 2NaHco,, Heat_, Na, co, +H,0+CO, (Sodium (Sodium hydrogencarbonate) carbonate) Sodium hydrogencarbonate has got various uses in the household. Uses of Baking soda (i) For making baking powder, which is a mixture of baking soda (sodium hydrogencarbonate) and a mild edible acid such as tartaric acid. When baking powder is heated or mixed in water, the following reaction takes place NaHCO,+H* CO; +H,O + Sodium salt of acid (From any acid) Carbon dioxide produced during the reaction can cause bread or cake to rise making them soft and spongy. (ii) Sodium hydrogencarbonate is also an ingredient in antacids. Being alkaline, it neutralises excess acid in the stomach and provides relief. (iii) It is also used in soda-acid fire extinguishers. Washing soda Another chemical that can be obtained from sodium chloride is Na,CO,.10H,O (washing soda). You have seen above that sodium carbonate can be obtained by heating baking soda; recrystallisation of sodium carbonate gives washing soda. It is also a basic salt. Na,CO, + 10H,O- Na,CO3.10H,O (Sodium carbonate) Acids, Bases and Salts Reprint 2025-26 Figure 2.9 Removing water of crystallisation What does 10H,0 signify? Does it make Na,CO, wet? We will address this question in the next section. Sodium carbonate and sodium hydrogencarbonate are useful chemicals for many industrial processes as well. Uses of washing soda (i) Sodium carbonate (washing soda) is used in glass, soap and paper industries. (ii) Itis used in the manufacture of sodium compounds such as borax. (iii) Sodium carbonate can be used as a cleaning agent for domestic purposes. (iv) It is used for removing permanent hardness of water. 2.4.4 Are the Crystals of Salts really Dry? = Heat a few crystals of copper sulphate in a dry boiling tube. = What is the colour of the copper sulphate after heating? Copper sulphate cystals = Do you notice water droplets in the boiling tube? Where have these come from? = Add 2-3 drops of water on the sample of copper sulphate obtained after heating. = What do you observe? Is the blue colour of copper sulphate restored? A pair of tongs Boiling tube Water droplets Burner Copper sulphate crystals which seem to be dry contain water of crystallisation. When we heat the crystals, this water is removed and the salt turns white. If you moisten the crystals again with water, you will find that blue colour of the crystals reappears. Water of crystallisation is the fixed number of water molecules present in one formula unit of a salt. Five water molecules are present in one formula unit of copper sulphate. Chemical formula for hydrated copper sulphate is Cu SO,. 5H,O. Now you would be able to