+ Water 2.1.4 How do Acids and Bases React with each other? = Take about 2 mL of dilute NaOH solution in a test tube and add two drops of phenolphthalein solution. What is the colour of the solution? Add dilute HCl solution to the above solution drop by drop. Is there any colour change for the reaction mixture? Why did the colour of phenolphthalein change after the addition of an acid? Now add a few drops of NaOH to the above mixture. Does the pink colour of phenolphthalein reappear? = Why do you think this has happened? In the above Activity, we have observed that the effect of a base is nullified by an acid and vice-versa. The reaction taking place is written as NaOH{(aq) + HCl(aq) NaCl(aq) + H,O()) The reaction between an acid and a base to give a salt and water is known as a neutralisation reaction. In general, a neutralisation reaction can be written as Base + Acid > Salt + Water 2.1.5 Reaction of Metallic Oxides with Acids = Take a small amount of copper oxide in a beaker and add dilute hydrochloric acid slowly while stirring. = Note the colour of the solution. What has happened to the copper oxide? You will notice that the colour of the solution becomes blue-green and the copper oxide dissolves. The blue-green colour of the solution is due to the formation of copper(II) chloride in the reaction. The general reaction between a metal oxide and an acid can be written as Metal oxide + Acid > Salt + Water Acids, Bases and Salts Reprint 2025-26 Now write and balance the equation for the above reaction. Since metallic oxides react with acids to give salts and water, similar to the reaction of a base with an acid, metallic oxides are said to be basic oxides. 2.1.6 Reaction of a Non-metallic Oxide with Base You saw the reaction between carbon dioxide and calcium hydroxide (lime water) in Activity 2.5. Calcium hydroxide, which is a base, reacts with carbon dioxide to produce a salt and water. Since this is similar to the reaction between a base and an acid, we can conclude that nonmetallic oxides are acidic in nature. Q U ES TION S Why should curd and sour substances not be kept in brass and copper vessels? Which gas is usually liberated when an acid reacts with a metal? Illustrate with an example. How will you test for the presence of this gas? Metal compound A reacts with dilute hydrochloric acid to produce effervescence. The gas evolved extinguishes a burning candle., Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction,if one of the compounds formed is calcium chloride. 2.2 WHAT DO ALL ACIDS AND ALL BASES HAVE IN COMMON? In Section 2.1 we have seen that all acids have similar chemical properties. What leads to this similarity in properties? We saw in Activity 2.3 that all acids generate hydrogen gas on reacting with metals, so hydrogen seems to be common