of crystallisation. When we heat the crystals, this water is removed and the salt turns white. If you moisten the crystals again with water, you will find that blue colour of the crystals reappears. Water of crystallisation is the fixed number of water molecules present in one formula unit of a salt. Five water molecules are present in one formula unit of copper sulphate. Chemical formula for hydrated copper sulphate is Cu SO,. 5H,O. Now you would be able to answer the question whether the molecule of Na,CO,. 10H,0O is wet. One other salt, which possesses water of crystallisation is gypsum. It has two water molecules as water of cyrstallisation. It has the chemical formula CaSO,.2H,O. Let us look into the use of this salt. Plaster of Paris On heating gypsum at 373 K, it loses water molecules and becomes calcium sulphate hemihydrate (CaSO, 3 H,O). This is called Plaster of Science Reprint 2025-26 Paris, the substance which doctors use as plaster for supporting fractured bones in the right position. Plaster of Paris is a white powder and on mixing with water, it changes to gypsum once again giving a hard solid mass. CaSO, 5 H,O + 15H,0 CaSO, .2H,O (Plaster of Paris) (Gypsum) Note that only half a water molecule is shown to be attached as water of crystallisation. How can you get half a water molecule? It is written in this form because two formula units of CaSO, share one molecule of water. Plaster of Paris is used for making toys, materials for decoration and for making surfaces smooth. Try to find out why is calcium sulphate hemihydrate called Plaster of Paris ? Q U ES TION S What is the common name of the compound _,Ca(ClO),? Name the substance which on treatment with chlorine yields bleaching powder. Name the sodium compound which,is used for softening, hard water. What will happen if a solution of sodium hydrocarbonate is heated? Give the equation of the reaction involved. Write an equation to show the reaction between Plaster of Paris and water. What you have learnt Acid-base indicators are dyes or mixtures of dyes which are used to indicate the presence of acids and bases. Acidic nature of a substance is due to the formation of H*(aq) ions in solution. Formation of OH (aq) ions in solution is responsible for the basic nature of a substance. When an acid reacts with a metal, hydrogen gas is evolved and a corresponding salt is formed. When a base reacts with a metal, along with the evolution of hydrogen gas a salt is formed which has a negative ion composed of the metal and oxygen. When an acid reacts with a metal carbonate or metal hydrogencarbonate, it gives the corresponding salt, carbon dioxide gas and water. Acidic and basic solutions in water conduct electricity because they produce hydrogen and hydroxide ions respectively. Acids, Bases and Salts 33 Reprint 2025-26 The strength of an acid or an alkali can be tested by using a scale