pH as 4,1,11,7 and 9, respectively. Which solution is neutral? strongly alkaline? strongly acidic? weakly acidic? weakly alkaline? Arrange the pH in increasing order of hydrogen-ion concentration. . Equal lengths of magnesium ribbons are taken in test tubes A and B. Hydrochloric acid (HCI) is added to test tube A, while acetic acid (CH,COOH) is added to test tube B. Amount and concentration taken for both the acids are same. In which test tube will the fizzing occur more vigorously and why? . Fresh milk has a pH of 6. How do you think the pH will change as it turns into curd? Explain your answer. . Amilkman adds a very small amount of baking soda to fresh milk. (a) Why does he shift the pH of the fresh milk from 6 to slightly alkaline? (b) Why does this milk take a long time to set as curd? . Plaster of Paris should be stored in a moisture-proof container. Explain why? . What is a neutralisation reaction? Give two examples. . Give two important uses of washing soda and baking soda. Group Activity (1) Prepare your own indicator = Crush beetroot in a mortar. Add sufficient water to obtain the extract. Filter the extract by the procedure learnt by you in earlier classes. Collect the filtrate to test the substances you may have tasted earlier. Arrange four test tubes in a test tube stand and label them as A,B,C and D. Pour 2 mL each of lemon juice solution, soda-water, vinegar and baking soda solution in them respectively. Put 2-3 drops of the beetroot extract in each test tube and note the colour change if any. Write your observation in a Table. You can prepare indicators by using other natural materials like extracts of red cabbage leaves, coloured petals of some flowers such as Petunia, Hydrangea and Geranium. Acids, Bases and Salts 35 Reprint 2025-26 (II) Preparing a soda-acid fire extinguisher The reaction of acids with metal hydrogencarbonates is used in the fire extinguishers which produce carbon dioxide. Take 20 mL of sodium hydrogencarbonate (NaHCO,) solution in a wash-bottle. Suspend an ignition tube containing dilute sulphuric acid in the wash-bottle (Fig. 2.10). Close the mouth of the wash-bottle. Tilt the wash-bottle so that the acid from the ignition tube mixes with the sodium hydrogencarbonate solution below. You will notice discharge coming out of the nozzle. Direct this discharge on a burning candle. What happens? coming out C A - Soa Discharge or, Thread Wash-bottle Ignition tube Dilute sulphuric acid Sodium hydrogencarbonate Figure 2.10 (a) Ignition tube containing dilute sulphuric acid suspended in a wash-bottle containing sodium hydrogencarbonate, (b) Discharge coming out of the nozzle 36 Science Reprint 2025-26