with the evolution of hydrogen gas a salt is formed which has a negative ion composed of the metal and oxygen. When an acid reacts with a metal carbonate or metal hydrogencarbonate, it gives the corresponding salt, carbon dioxide gas and water. Acidic and basic solutions in water conduct electricity because they produce hydrogen and hydroxide ions respectively. Acids, Bases and Salts 33 Reprint 2025-26 The strength of an acid or an alkali can be tested by using a scale called the pH scale (0-14) which gives the measure of hydrogen ion concentration in a solution. A neutral solution has a pH of exactly 7, while an acidic solution has a pH less than 7 and a basic solution a pH more than 7. Living beings carry out their metabolic activities within an optimal pH range. Mixing concentrated acids or bases with water is a highly exothermic process. Acids and bases neutralise each other to form corresponding salts and water. Water of crystallisation is the fixed number of water molecules present in one formula unit of a salt. Salts have various uses in everyday life and in industries. A solution turns red litmus blue, its pH is likely to be (a) 1 (b) 4 () 5 (d) 10 . Asolution reacts with crushed egg-shells to give a gas that turns lime-water milky. The solution contains (a) NaCl (b) HCl (c) LiCl (d) KCl 10 mL of a solution of NaOH is found to be completely neutralised by 8 mL ofa given solution of HCl. If we take 20 mL of the same solution of NaOH, the amount HCI solution (the same solution as before) required to neutralise it will be (a) 4mL (b) 8mL (c) 12mL (d) 16 mL . Which one of the following types of medicines is used for treating indigestion? (a) Antibiotic (b) Analgesic (c) Antacid (d) Antiseptic . Write word equations and then balanced equations for the reaction taking place when (a) dilute sulphuric acid reacts with zinc granules. (b) dilute hydrochloric acid reacts with magnesium ribbon. (c) dilute sulphuric acid reacts with aluminium powder. (d) dilute hydrochloric acid reacts with iron filings. . Compounds such as alcohols and glucose also contain hydrogen but are not categorised as acids. Describe an Activity to prove it. . Why does distilled water not conduct electricity, whereas rain water does? 34 Science Reprint 2025-26 . Why do acids not show acidic behaviour in the absence of water? . Five solutions A,B,C,D and E when tested with universal indicator showed pH as 4,1,11,7 and 9, respectively. Which solution is neutral? strongly alkaline? strongly acidic? weakly acidic? weakly alkaline? Arrange the pH in increasing order of hydrogen-ion concentration. . Equal lengths of magnesium ribbons are taken in test tubes A and B. Hydrochloric acid (HCI) is added to test tube A, while acetic acid (CH,COOH) is added to test tube B. Amount and concentration taken for both the acids are same. In which test tube will the fizzing occur more vigorously