the acidic or basic nature of a solution. Higher the hydronium ion concentration, lower is the pH value. The pH of a neutral solution is 7. Values less than 7 on the pH scale represent an acidic solution. As the pH value increases from 7 to 14, it represents an increase in OH ion concentration in the solution, that is, increase in the strength of alkali (Fig. 2.6). Generally paper impregnated with the universal indicator is used for measuring pH. Neutral Acidic nature increasing 7 Basic nature increasing . +. . . + . Increase in H ion concentration << _> Decrease in H ion concentration Figure 2.6 Variation of pH with the change in concentration of H*(aq) and OH(aq) ions Acids, Bases and Salts 25 Reprint 2025-26 Table 2.2 Nature of i substance = Test the pH values of solutions given in Table 2.2. = Record your observations. = What is the nature of each substance on the basis of your observations? f ot I I f Gastric Lemon juice Pure water, Milk of Sodium juice (about 2.2) blood magnesia hydroxide (about1.2) (7.4) (10) solution (about 14) Figure 2.7 pH of some common substances shown on a pH paper (colours are only a rough guide) The strength of acids and bases depends on the number of H* ions and OH ions produced, respectively. If we take hydrochloric acid and acetic acid of the same concentration, say one molar, then these produce different amounts of hydrogen ions. Acids that give rise to more H* ions are said to be strong acids, and acids that give less H* ions are said to be weak acids. Can you now say what weak and strong bases are? 2.3.1 Importance of pH in Everyday Life Are plants and animals pH sensitive? Our body works within the pH range of 7.0 to 7.8. Living organisms can survive only in a narrow range of pH change. When pH of rain water is less than 5.6, it is called acid rain. When acid rain flows into the rivers, it lowers the pH of the river water. The survival of aquatic life in such rivers becomes difficult. 26 Science Reprint 2025-26 Acids in other planets Do You Know? What is the pH of the soil in your backyard? Plants require a specific pH range for their healthy growth. To find out the pH required for the healthy growth of a plant, you can collect the soil from various places and check the pH in the manner described below in Activity 2.12. Also, you can note down which plants are growing in the region from which you have collected the soil. Activity 2.12 Put about 2 g soil in a test tube and add 5 mL water to it. Shake the contents of the test tube. Filter the contents and collect the filtrate in a test tube. Check the pH of this filtrate with the help of universal indicator paper. = What can you conclude about the ideal soil