CHAPTER 2 Acids, Bases and Salts = Yu have learnt in your previous classes that the sour and bitter tastes of food are due to acids and bases, respectively, present in them. If someone in the family is suffering from a problem of acidity after overeating, which of the following would you suggest as a remedy- lemon juice, vinegar or baking soda solution? = Which property did you think of while choosing the remedy? Surely you must have used your knowledge about the ability of acids and bases to nullify each other s effect. = Recall how we tested sour and bitter substances without tasting them. You already know that acids are sour in taste and change the colour of blue litmus to red, whereas, bases are bitter and change the colour of the red litmus to blue. Litmus is a natural indicator, turmeric is another such indicator. Have you noticed that a stain of curry on a white cloth becomes reddish-brown when soap, which is basic in nature, is scrubbed on it? It turns yellow again when the cloth is washed with plenty of water. You can also use synthetic indicators such as methyl orange and phenolphthalein to test for acids and bases. In this Chapter, we will study the reactions of acids and bases, how acids and bases cancel out each other s effects and many more interesting things that we use and see in our day-to-day life. DOD @ODOogo DBD DODD OQODOODO OOOO OGD GO GP OG OG OP ODO O DO O DO O Do You Know? Reprint 2025-26 Q U ES TION You have been provided with three test tubes. One of them contains distilled water and the other two contain an acidic solution and a basic solution, respectively. If you are given only red litmus paper, how will you identify the contents of each test tube? 2.1 UNDERSTANDING THE CHEMICAL PROPERTIES OF ACIDS AND BASES 2.1.1 Acids and Bases in the Laboratory = Collect the following solutions from the science laboratory- hydrochloric acid (HCl), sulphuric acid (H,SO,), nitric acid (HNO,), acetic acid (CH,COOH), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), calcium hydroxide [Ca(OH),], potassium hydroxide (KOH), magnesium hydroxide [Mg(OH),], and ammonium hydroxide (NH,OH). = Put a drop of each of the above solutions on a watch-glass one by one and test with a drop of the indicators shown in Table 2.1. = What change in colour did you observe with red litmus, blue litmus, phenolphthalein and methyl orange solutions for each of the solutions taken? = Tabulate your observations in Table 2.1. Table 2.1 Sample Red Blue Phenolph- Methyl solution litmus litmus -thalein orange solution solution solution solution These indicators tell us whether a substance is acidic or basic by change in colour. There are some substances whose odour changes in acidic or basic media. These are called olfactory indicators. Let us try out some of these indicators. = Take some finely chopped onions in a plastic bag along with some strips of clean cloth. Tie up the