observations in Table 2.1. Table 2.1 Sample Red Blue Phenolph- Methyl solution litmus litmus -thalein orange solution solution solution solution These indicators tell us whether a substance is acidic or basic by change in colour. There are some substances whose odour changes in acidic or basic media. These are called olfactory indicators. Let us try out some of these indicators. = Take some finely chopped onions in a plastic bag along with some strips of clean cloth. Tie up the bag tightly and leave overnight in the fridge. The cloth strips can now be used to test for acids and bases. = Take two of these cloth strips and check their odour. = Keep them on a clean surface and put a few drops of dilute HCl solution on one strip and a few drops of dilute NaOH solution on the other. 18 Science Reprint 2025-26 = Rinse both cloth strips with water and again check their odour. = Note your observations. = Now take some dilute vanilla essence and clove oil and check their odour. = Take some dilute HCl solution in one test tube and dilute NaOH solution in another. Add a few drops of dilute vanilla essence to both test tubes and shake well. Check the odour once again and record changes in odour, if any. = Similarly, test the change in the odour of clove oil with dilute HCl and dilute NaOH solutions and record your observations. Which of these - vanilla, onion and clove, can be used as olfactory indicators on the basis of your observations? Let us do some more activities to understand the chemical properties of acids and bases. 2.1.2 How do Acids and Bases React with Metals? CAUTION: This activity needs the teacher s assistance. = Set the apparatus as shown in Fig. 2.1. = Take about 5 mL of dilute sulphuric acid in a test tube and adda few pieces of zinc granules to it. What do you observe on the surface of zine granules? Pass the gas being evolved through the soap solution. Why are bubbles formed in the soap solution? Take a burning candle near a gas filled bubble. What do you observe? Repeat this Activity with some more acids like HCl, HNO, and CH,COOH. = Are the observations in all the cases the same or different? Delivery tube Stand Burning of hydrogen gas with a pop sound , Q _ candle Test tube te rogen Dilute Bel gas O sulphuric y bubbles \ | acid O m Soap bubble filled Zinc granules with hydrogen [eXe) [o) Soap solution Figure 2.1 Reaction of zinc granules with dilute sulphuric acid and testing hydrogen gas by burning Acids, Bases and Salts 19 Reprint 2025-26 Note that the metal in the above reactions displaces hydrogen atoms from the acids as hydrogen gas and forms a compound called a salt. Thus, the reaction of a metal with an acid can be summarised as Acid + Metal > Salt + Hydrogen gas Can you