of solid salt are also found in several parts of the world. These large crystals are often brown due to impurities. This is called rock salt. Beds of rock salt were formed when seas of bygone ages dried up. Rock salt is mined like coal. You must have heard about Mahatma Gandhi s Dandi March. Did you know that sodium chloride was such an important symbol in our struggle for freedom? Acids, Bases and Salts 29 Reprint 2025-26 Common salt A raw material for chemicals The common salt thus obtained is an important raw material for various materials of daily use, such as sodium hydroxide, baking soda, washing soda, bleaching powder and many more. Let us see how one substance is used for making all these different substances. Sodium hydroxide When electricity is passed through an aqueous solution of sodium chloride (called brine), it decomposes to form sodium hydroxide. The process is called the chlor-alkali process because of the products formedchlor for chlorine and alkali for sodium hydroxide. 2NaCl(aq) + 2H,O(l) > 2NaOH{aq) + Cl,(g) + H,(g) Chlorine gas is given off at the anode, and hydrogen gas at the cathode. Sodium hydroxide solution is formed near the cathode. The three products produced in this process are all useful. Figure 2.8 shows the different uses of these products. Clo (Water treatment, swimming pools, PVC, disinfectants, CFCs, pesticides) He | (Fuels, margarine, ammonia for fertilisers) Anode i) Ac) Cathode Le Brine containing > NaOH (De-greasing metals, soaps and detergents, paper making, > S artificial fibres) Membrane Figure 2.8 Important products from the chlor-alkali process Bleaching powder You have already come to know that chlorine is produced during the electrolysis of aqueous sodium chloride (brine). This chlorine gas is used for the manufacture of bleaching powder. Bleaching powder is produced by the action of chlorine on dry slaked lime [Ca(OH),]. Bleaching powder is represented as Ca(ClO),, though the actual composition is quite complex. 2Ca(OH), + 2Cl, > Ca(ClO), + CaCl, + 2H,O 30 Science Reprint 2025-26 Bleaching powder is used (i) for bleaching cotton and linen in the textile industry, for bleaching wood pulp in paper factories and for bleaching washed clothes in laundry; (ii) as an oxidising agent in many chemical industries; and (iii) to make drinking water free from germs. Baking soda The baking soda is commonly used in the kitchen for making tasty crispy pakoras, etc. Sometimes it is added for faster cooking. The chemical name of the compound is sodium hydrogencarbonate (NaHCO,). It is produced using sodium chloride as one of the raw materials. NaCl + H,O + CO, + NH, NH,Cl + NaHCO, (Ammonium (Sodium chloride) hydrogencarbonate) Did you check the pH of sodium hydrogencarbonate in Activity 2.14? Can you correlate why it can be used to neutralise an acid? It is a mild non-corrosive basic salt. The following reaction takes place when it is heated during cooking 2NaHco,, Heat_, Na, co, +H,0+CO, (Sodium (Sodium hydrogencarbonate) carbonate) Sodium hydrogencarbonate has got various uses in the household. Uses