hydrochloric acid to produce effervescence. The gas evolved extinguishes a burning candle., Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction,if one of the compounds formed is calcium chloride. 2.2 WHAT DO ALL ACIDS AND ALL BASES HAVE IN COMMON? In Section 2.1 we have seen that all acids have similar chemical properties. What leads to this similarity in properties? We saw in Activity 2.3 that all acids generate hydrogen gas on reacting with metals, so hydrogen seems to be common to all acids. Let us perform an Activity to investigate whether all compounds containing hydrogen are acidic. _. Bulb 6 volt battery H_ Or = Take solutions of glucose, alcohol, 7 Switch hydrochloric acid, sulphuric acid, etc. = Fix two nails on a cork, and place the cork in a 100 mL beaker. Beaker = Connect the nails to the two terminals of a 6 volt battery through a bulb and a switch, as shown in Fig. 2.3. Rail = Now pour some dilute HCl in the beaker and Dilute HCl switch on the current. solution = Repeat with dilute sulphuric acid. Rubber = What do you observe? k cor = Repeat the experiment separately with Figure 2.3 glucose and alcohol solutions. What do you Acid solution in water observe now? conducts electricity = Does the bulb glow in all cases? 22 Science Reprint 2025-26 The bulb will start glowing in the case of acids, as shown in Fig. 2.3. But you will observe that glucose and alcohol solutions do not conduct electricity. Glowing of the bulb indicates that there is a flow of electric current through the solution. The electric current is carried through the acidic solution by ions. Acids contain H* ion as cation and anion such as Cl in HCl, NO; in HNO,, SO% in H,SO,, CH,COO- in CH,COOH. Since the cation present in acids is H , this suggests that acids produce hydrogen ions, H*(aq), in solution, which are responsible for their acidic properties. Repeat the same Activity using alkalis such as sodium hydroxide, calctum hydroxide, etc. What can you conclude from the results of this Activity? 2.2.1 What Happens to an Acid or a Base in a Water Solution? Do acids produce ions only in aqueous solution? Let us test this. = Take about lg solid NaCl in a clean and Dropper dry test tube and set up the apparatus as containing concentrate shown in Fig. 2.4. H:SO, = Add some concentrated sulphuric acid to the test tube. A pair of tongs : = What do you observe? Is there a gas coming ee out of the delivery tube? , Delivery tube Cork \< Test Tube _ A pair of tongs a | | le = Test the gas evolved successively with dry _ Test Tube >. and wet blue litmus paper. Sodium te = In which case does the litmus paper change chloride colour? = On the basis of the above Activity, what do you infer about the acidic character of: (i) dry HCl