for control, the one with access to stronger military power and surplus resources would eventually become the overlord. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 S| Chapter 5.indd 90 08-04-2025 12:48:30 Chapter 5.indd 91 LET'S EXPLORE Warfare apart, what other methods do you think the rulers might have used to expand their empires? Pen your ideas and share them with your class. Trade, trade routes and guilds Conducting military campaigns, especially in distant lands, is not as simple as it might seem. Maintaining an army is a costly affair: soldiers need to be fed, clothed, equipped with weapons, and paid; elephants and horses need to be cared for; roads or ships have to be built, and so on. All this requires considerable economic power, control over the workforce, and access to resources. We can now understand that economic activity especially production and trade is one of the keys to maintaining an empire and ensuring people s welfare and quality of life, which a good ruler should be concerned with. Therefore, establishing and controlling trade routes all over the empire s territory and beyond is of great importance. That way, the goods traded will grow in quantity and variety, and more trade means more income for the producers and increased tax collections for the ruler. Returning to the case of ancient India, what would have been the traded goods? There is plenty of evidence on this, at least, both from the literature and archaeological excavations textiles, spices, agricultural produce, luxury items such as gems and handicraft products, and various animals were among the main items of trade. All this brisk trade was not limited to India; many Indian goods travelled towards distant countries by land or sea. More often than not, traders were not just isolated individuals carrying out their own business. They soon understood the benefits of joining forces and creating guilds (shrenis). Guilds were powerful associations of traders, craftsmen, moneylenders or agriculturists. As far as evidence shows, a guild had a head (who was usually elected) and executive 5 - The Rise of Empires Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 12:48:30 officers who were supposed to have all kinds of ethical qualities. Two things made traders guilds a remarkable institution. First, they brought together people who ended up being collaborators 70 E 80 E 90 E 30 N N.O apura 20 N N.0Z@ 10 N LEGEND N.OL @ Important Cities == Uttarapatha ve Dakshinapatha === Other Routes 70 E 80 E 90 E Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Fig. 5.5. Some important trade routes from about 500 BCE onward and major . cities marked on them. Notice the Uttarapatha and the Dakshinapatha routes. Chapter 5.indd 92 08-04-2025 12:48:31 Chapter 5.indd 93 rather than competitors, as they realised that sharing resources and information on markets, supply and demand, workforce, etc., was to everyone s benefit. Second, as an ancient text put it, Cultivators, traders, herdsmen, moneylenders, and artisans have authority to lay down