economics, administration, justice, urban planning, agriculture and people s welfare. One of his most important political concepts is the saptanga (see fig 5.15) or the seven parts that constitute a kingdom. According to Kautilya, the saptdanga together must create a settled, well-protected, and prosperous kingdom to be maintained both through warfare and through alliances for peace, as the case may be. He emphasised the importance of law and order in society, which necessitated a strong administration. He also detailed many laws to deal with corruption and specified punishments for any activities that went against the wellbeing of the people. Y THINK ABOUT IT Chapter 5.indd 103 Kautilya says, A king shall increase his power by promoting the welfare of his people, for power comes from the countryside which is the source of all economic activity. [The king] shall show special favours to those in the countryside who do things which benefit the people, such as building embankments or road bridges, beautifying villages, or helping to protect them. Why do you think it was important to take special care of the countryside? (Hint: Think back to what you have learnt at the beginning of this chapter) Kautilya s central philosophy of governance is in tune with Indian values: In the happiness of his subjects lies the king s happiness; in their welfare his welfare. He shall not consider as good only that which pleases him but treat as beneficial to him whatever pleases his subjects. In other words, however powerful a king may be, he must give first place to the people s interests. LET'S EXPLORE Organise a group discussion in your class and compare the features of Kautilya s idea of an empire with a modern nation. 5 - The Rise of Empires Tapestry of the Past e 08-04-2025 12:48:45 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 = Chapter 5.indd 104 Fig. 5.16. Ashoka visiting the Ramagrama stupa in Nepal (from a panel at the Sanchi stupa) Edict: An official declaration issued by authorities or, in our case, a king. Emissary: Someone sent on a special mission, often of a diplomatic nature. The King Who Chose Peace Another king of the Maurya dynasty was Ashoka (268232 BCE), Chandragupta s grandson, who came _ to be credited with major administrative and religious achievements. At the beginning of his reign, Ashoka was quite ambitious. He had inherited a vast empire but further expanded it to cover almost the entirety of the Indian subcontinent, except for the southernmost region, but including present-day Bangladesh and Pakistan and parts of present-day Afghanistan. One encounter, however, is said to have changed the path of his life. According to one of his edicts he once marched on Kalinga (modern-day Odisha), where he waged a ferocious war. Seeing the enormous amount of death and destruction on the battlefield, Ashoka chose to give up violence and, to the greatest extent possible, adopt the path of peace and non-violence that the Buddha taught. Y THINK ABOUT IT