men are never imprisoned or tortured without good reason. [...] And for this purpose, I shall send out on tour every five years, an officer who is not severe or harsh; who, having investigated this matter..., shall see that they carry out my instructions. 5 - The Rise of Empires Tapestry of the Past @ 08-04-2025 12:48:47 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 5.indd 108 . DON T MISS OUT The Sohagaura copper gs plate inscription, dating yan om ! EEK I The Maurya empire continued for half a century after Ashoka s death. However, his successors were unable to hold the empire together, and many of the smaller kingdoms broke off and became independent. Around 185 BCE, India started on another phase of her journey. Bhavisha and Dhruv will join us on this journey in the next chapter. Life in the Mauryan period Cities like Pataliputra were bustling centres of governance and commerce. They had palaces, public buildings, and well-planned streets. With a well-organised taxation system and brisk trade, the treasury remained strong, fuelling the empire s growth and prosperity. Officials of the administration of the empire, merchants and artisans played key roles in the city life. back to the 4th-3rd century BCE, is one of Aas India s earliest known : WAL PASE ten * administrative records. Erp da So Ere coy Discovered in Sohgaura, aren Pe! FORam een eens Uttar Pradesh, it is written Fig. 5.19 in Prakrit using the Brahmi script and is believed to have been issued during the reign of Chandragupta Maurya. The inscription mentions the establishment of a granary to store grain as a precaution against famines, highlighting the state s efforts to ensure food security and support its people during times of crisis. Megasthenes account also throws some light on the society of that time. A substantial proportion of the population was engaged in agriculture, which was an important source of revenue for the empire. Two crops were sown in a year, as rain fell in both summer and winter. This ensured that famines were 08-04-2025 12:48:47 Chapter 5.indd 109 rare and people had ample food. Granaries were well stocked for any eventualities. Even if war raged nearby, farmers were protected from it, and agriculture was not disturbed. Blacksmiths, potters, carpenters, jewellers and other artisans lived in the cities. The cities were well-planned and had signage on the streets. Communication happened through couriers who carried messages from place to place. The houses were made of wood and could be up to two storeys tall. The streets had vessels of water stored at regular intervals in case of fire. Later accounts describe the cotton dresses people wore a lower garment that reached below the knee halfway down to the ankles and an upper garment that they threw over their shoulders. Some wore leather shoes with designs and thick soles to make them look taller. LET'S EXPLORE Wear the hat of a historian. Look carefully at the artefacts presented