with traders from distant lands.) You must visit our main market before you leave! Our king welcomes travellers from all over, so you'll get silk from China, spices and gems from the south, fine clothes from different regions there s nothing you won t find in Pataliputra! What are those people over there doing? asked Dhruv. Oh, these are street acrobats; they build human pyramids, sing and dance, or act in short plays to entertain people. Sometimes, they perform in front of the king! Your king sounds very powerful, remarked Bhavisha. Does he rule the region around Pataliputra? Much more than that! answered Ira. He rules over a vast land, far, far beyond this city. His authority extends over many villages, towns and kingdoms. My uncle told me that it takes close to two months on horseback to reach the borders of the territory! That sounds bigger than just a kingdom... What do you call it? It is called an Empire, Ira stated with evident pride. What is an Empire? The word empire comes from the Latin imperium , which means supreme power . Simply put, an empire is a collection of smaller kingdoms or territories over which a powerful ruler or group of rulers exert power, often after waging war against the smaller kingdoms. The smaller territories still had their own rulers, but they were all tributaries to the emperor, who ruled the whole territory from a capital, usually a major centre of economic and administrative power. In ancient Sanskrit texts, words commonly used for emperor made this clear; they included samraj, meaning the lord of all or supreme ruler ; adhirdja or overlord ; and rajadhirdja or king of kings . Tributary: A tributary, in our case, is a ruler ora state that has submitted to an emperor and pays tribute that is, money, gold (or other precious metals), grain, livestock, elephants or other valuable goods produced in their kingdom and is given to the emperor as a sign of submission, loyalty or respect. A synonym for tributary is vassal , and another way to express this is to say that the tributary or vassal kingdoms accepted the emperor's overlordship. 5 - The Rise of Empires Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 12:48:26 Indian history is full of empires. They rose, expanded, lasted for a while, declined, and disappeared. In fact, the last empire that ruled the Subcontinent existed less than a century ago! But now is not the time to tell that story; we start at the other end of time, so we may understand how empires functioned in the distant past and how they deeply impacted India s evolution at all levels political, economic, social, and cultural. ee, Features of an empire Maintains an army to keep the tributary states under control, expand the empire or protect it from outside aggression Maintains communication networks (roads, river and sea navigation) and the territories, collect other infrastructure taxes, maintain law for administration, Emperor and order, etc. trade and people's