s national emblem, to which was added the Sanskrit motto satyameva jayate or truth alone triumphs (see the national emblem on the left). Besides, the dharmachakra is depicted at the centre of our national flag, as you may also have noticed. The motto comes from the Mundaka Upanishad; in full, it reads satyameva jayate nanritam, that is, truth alone triumphs, not falsehood . Notice the different symbols on the coins. Can you guess what any of the symbols in the coins below might mean? Fig. 5.29.1. A hoard of Mauryan punch-marked coins, Fig. 5.29.2. A punch-marked coin of Ashoka - DON T MISS OUT The big, round hemispherical structure in the centre of the stupa is called the anda. It represents the universe and is often built to house sacred relics. People walk around it in a circle as a form of worship (pradakshina). The Fragile Nature of Empires You will hear in higher grades about past mighty empires | elsewhere in the world, such as the Roman, the Persian, the Ottoman, the Spanish, the Russian, the British empires, and so on. All of them are long gone, but historians keep debating the causes of their decline. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 SS Chapter 5.indd 112 08-04-2025 12:48:51 Chapter 5.indd 113 One of those causes, as we saw, is the temptation for some of the empire s regions to try and become independent. This could happen if, for example, the emperor needed more resources for long military campaigns or in times of drought; local rulers would be burdened with increasing demands for tribute, leading to resentment. Or if a powerful emperor was followed by one perceived to be weak, local kings or chieftains might simply decide to take a chance and stop paying tribute. Also, the larger an empire, the more difficult it is to hold it together, as Alexander experienced; far-off territories are often the first to split away from the empire. Finally, economic crises caused by natural calamities (such as a long drought or floods) could also shake an empire s structure. Empires are, therefore, something of a paradox. On the one hand, they can bring about political unity, as the Mauryan empire did to almost the entire Subcontinent, and reduce or eliminate warfare among the smaller kingdoms indeed, a well-managed empire could lead to greater prosperity than smaller, warring kingdoms. On the other hand, empires have almost always been established through war and have maintained their existence Chandragupta Mahapadma Maurya Nanda Ajatashatru Ashoka _ _ >P> SS>E _ _ _ _ __ _ _ _ _ _ Mahajanapadas Nandas Mauryas Fig. 5.30 5 - The Rise of Empires Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 12:48:52 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 5.indd 114 through force and repression. This makes them fragile at their core and unstable over time. Before we move on... > An empire is a large territory made up of many smaller kingdoms or territories. Emperors