Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Fig. 5.5. Some important trade routes from about 500 BCE onward and major . cities marked on them. Notice the Uttarapatha and the Dakshinapatha routes. Chapter 5.indd 92 08-04-2025 12:48:31 Chapter 5.indd 93 rather than competitors, as they realised that sharing resources and information on markets, supply and demand, workforce, etc., was to everyone s benefit. Second, as an ancient text put it, Cultivators, traders, herdsmen, moneylenders, and artisans have authority to lay down rules for their respective classes ; in other words, guilds had the autonomy to create their own internal rules, and the king was not to interfere with them (and why should he, if trade flourished?). Guilds spread over large parts of India and endured for centuries. Even after they ceased to exist formally, their spirit continued to influence India s trade and business activities, sometimes even to this day. The institution of guilds provides an excellent example of the self-organising abilities of Indian society. The ancient village unit, with its various committees and councils, provides another. Indeed, an enlightened ruler would let people organise themselves and refrain from interfering if the local institutions worked satisfactorily. LET'S EXPLORE > Observe the map of the trade routes. Identify geographical features that helped the traders travel across the Subcontinent. > What modes oftransport on those roads do you think were available at the time? The Rise of Magadha The period between the 6th and the 4th century BCE was one of profound change in north India. We briefly visited the sixteen mahdjanapadas earlier those large kingdoms of north and central India with their assembly system. One of them, Magadha (modern-day south Bihar and some adjoining areas), rose in importance and set the stage for the fusion of many kingdoms into India s first empire. Powerful early kings, such as Ajatashatru, played a crucial role in establishing Magadha as a dominant centre of power. 5 - The Rise of Empires Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 12:48:31 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 5.indd 94 DON T MISS OUT Two of the most famed religious figures of the world Siddhartha Gautama, who became known as the Buddha, and Vardhamdanan, better known as Mahavira lived in the time of King Ajatashatru. Revisit their teachings in the Grade 6 textbook s India s Cultural Roots chapter. Magadha was located in the resource-rich Ganga plains, with fertile land, abundant forests for timber, and elephants. Also, remember how the use of iron transformed other technologies, such as agriculture and warfare. Iron ore and other minerals from the nearby hilly regions proved crucial for the expansion of the kingdom. The use of iron ploughs to till the land increased agricultural produce, and lighter and sharper iron weapons strengthened the capabilities of the army. LET'S EXPLORE > Take a close look at the panel given above. How many types of weapons can you identify? What different uses of iron can you make out? > In the