gy Tired and homesick, his soldiers lost the will to fight and refused ar to move deeper into India, towards the Ganga River. Alexander Fin and part of his army retreated to Persia, but through the coastal route in the south and Iran s harsh desert regions, resulting in heavy losses to his troops out of thirst, hunger and disease. Chapter 5.indd 97 08-04-2025 12:48:39 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 = Chapter 5.indd 98 Alexander s dialogue with the Gymnosophists Alexander heard of a group of Indian sages whom the Greeks called Gymnosophists or naked philosophers (probably because they wore very little clothing), who were renowned for their wisdom. Alexander challenged them with tricky questions in the form of riddles, warning that he would put those who gave wrong answers to death. However, the Gymnosophists responded to his questions calmly and intelligently. Alexander was impressed and, in the end, spared them all. Over the centuries, different versions of this story have been told, making it one of the most fascinating encounters in history! According to one account, Alexander asked, Which is stronger, life or death? One of the sages replied, Life, because it endures while death does not. Alexander then asked, How can a man be most loved? If he is most powerful and yet does not inspire fear, came the reply, perhaps as a hint to the mighty ruler! Fig. 5.11. A Greek coin . : . probably showing Historians view such exchanges as Alexander on horseback a meeting of two great traditions attacking Porus on his elephant. Greek and Indian philosophies. The Mighty Mauryas After that brief sojourn to the northwest, let us return to Magadha, where we witnessed the decline of the Nanda empire. Around 321 BCE, just a few years after Alexander left India with his army, a new dynasty and new empire emerged: the Maurya Empire founded by Chandragupta Maurya. It quickly absorbed the Nanda empire s territories and went on expanding beyond. As per many accounts, Chandragupta managed this feat with the help of an able mentor named Kautilya, who used his knowledge of politics, governance and economics to create an empire that remains one of the greatest in Indian history. 08-04-2025 12:48:39 Chapter 5.indd 99 The story of Kautilya According to Buddhist texts, Kautilya sometimes referred to as Chanakya or Vishnugupta was a teacher at the world-renowned Takshashila (modern-day Taxila) university. His legendary tale begins in the court of Dhana Nanda, who as we saw, had become highly unpopular. 7Q E 8Q E 9Q E LEGEND I) Nanpa Empire m CAPITAL 4 IMPORTANT CITIES RIVERS 70 E 80 E 90 E Fig. 5.12. Nanda Empire 5 - The Rise of Empires Tapestry of the Past 10-Apr-25 10:46:26 AM Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 | Chapter 5.indd 100 LEGEND MAURYA EMPIRE MAIN CAPITAL REGIONAL CAPITAI OTHER CITY 70 E 80 E 90 E Fig. 5.13. Maurya Empire Observing this, Kautilya advised Dhana Nanda to