Chapter S.indd 383) The Rise of Empires There cannot be a country without people and there is no kingdom without a country. Kautilya in Arthashastra Fig. 5.1. Rock-cut cave in Barabar Hills, Bihar + pons Pee ES Pe 8 Se) Oe O7BICHOS (0804-2025 42:43:24 TT Lele ee oe ee Fig. 5.2. An artistic representation of Pataliput located around modern-day Patna Landing on the outskirts of the great city, a little dizzy, they saw a girl talking to a person on horseback dressed in strange clothes. As he left, she turned to them, and they asked her for her name. My name is Ira, daughter of Kanhadas, the ironsmith. Welcome to Pataliputra! Glad to meet you, Ira. Our names are Bhavisha and Dhruv. Sshh! Keep your voices down! Do you see those soldiers marching past? They re heading to battle against a neighbouring kingdom that has been troubling us. Our king avoids war when he can, but he also protects his people when needed. My father helped forge many of the swords they carry, and my uncle is one of the soldiers in the group. I just came to see him off... I don t know when he'll return. (The group watches as an impressive procession of soldiers crosses a sturdy drawbridge leading out of the city, some on horseback and the army chiefs on elephant back. Then, the three children cross the same drawbridge to enter the city.) What kind of bridge is this? asked Bhavisha. And is it a river below? \ This bridge keeps us safe, Fig. 5.3 explained Ira. It s lifted whenever there is a danger of attack on the city. And no, it s not a river, it s a moat; once the drawbridge is lifted, it makes it more difficult to approach the fortifications. Can you see those hills and forests in the distance? They provide us with timber, herbs, and | many other valuable resources. Elephants for the army are also captured from the forest and trained for the army. What is the opening in that hill? asked Dhruv. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 It s a cave. Our king is getting it carved out for a community of monks. I hope we can visit it when it s finished! | Chapter 5.indd 86 08-04-2025 12:48:25 Chapter 5.indd 87 (As they move through Pataliputra, they take in_ its splendour towering wooden ramparts with watch towers, majestic palaces and buildings, lively streets. Ira gestures towards a bustling market filled with traders from distant lands.) You must visit our main market before you leave! Our king welcomes travellers from all over, so you'll get silk from China, spices and gems from the south, fine clothes from different regions there s nothing you won t find in Pataliputra! What are those people over there doing? asked Dhruv. Oh, these are street acrobats; they build human pyramids, sing and dance, or act in short plays to entertain people. Sometimes, they perform in