could be up to two storeys tall. The streets had vessels of water stored at regular intervals in case of fire. Later accounts describe the cotton dresses people wore a lower garment that reached below the knee halfway down to the ankles and an upper garment that they threw over their shoulders. Some wore leather shoes with designs and thick soles to make them look taller. LET'S EXPLORE Wear the hat of a historian. Look carefully at the artefacts presented on the spread on the next page. What conclusions can you draw about people and life during the Mauryan era? Fig. 5.20 has many messages for us, apart from the beauty and perfection of the sculpture, and is a fine example of Mauryan art. This capital (a word which, here, means top portion or head ) was the top of a pillar that Ashoka got erected at Sarnath, near Varanasi, where the Buddha gave his first teaching. The four lions symbolise the royal power; on the ring below, four powerful animals (an elephant, a bull, a horse and one more lion) are depicted, along with the dharmachakra or wheel Fig. 5.20. The Mauryas were of dharma, which symbolises the renowned for their highly Buddha s teachings. polished stone pillars, as can be seen in this capital of the Sarnath pillar. 5 - The Rise of Empires Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 12:48:47 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 5.indd 110 Life and people Fig. 5.21. Terracotta figurine of a Fig. 5.22. Terracotta figurine dancing girl (notice her elaborate of a female deity. headdress, hairstyle and jewellery). Fig. 5.24. Terracotta of Saptamatrikds or seven Fig. 5.25. Head of a terracotta mother goddesses (a continuing tradition). horse (notice the elaborate design of the bridle). 08-04-2025 12:48:49 Fig. 5.26. As one of India s oldest stone structures, the Great Stupa at Sanchi is among the finest examples of Indian architecture. Note that the original structure was made of bricks and was later enlarged using stone. Ashoka is said to have constructed many such stupas, chaityas, and viharas for worship, study, and meditation. wn ae ee So a: ee > : ) 2 Fig. 5.27. Rock sculpture of a life-size elephant at Dhauli (in present-day Odisha, @in near Bhubaneswar), which symbolises the Buddha intelligent, powerful, patient, and calm. An edict of Ashoka was engraved on a rock nearby. Chapter 5.indd 111 08-04-2025 12:48:51 This image may be familiar to some of you. Indeed, this capital was chosen as India s national emblem, to which was added the Sanskrit motto satyameva jayate or truth alone triumphs (see the national emblem on the left). Besides, the dharmachakra is depicted at the centre of our national flag, as you may also have noticed. The motto comes from the Mundaka Upanishad; in full, it reads satyameva jayate nanritam, that is, truth alone triumphs, not falsehood . Notice the different symbols on the coins. Can you guess what any of the symbols in the