technologies, such as agriculture and warfare. Iron ore and other minerals from the nearby hilly regions proved crucial for the expansion of the kingdom. The use of iron ploughs to till the land increased agricultural produce, and lighter and sharper iron weapons strengthened the capabilities of the army. LET'S EXPLORE > Take a close look at the panel given above. How many types of weapons can you identify? What different uses of iron can you make out? > In the left part of the panel, a parasol (chhattra) is kept over the casket containing the Buddha s relics. Why do you think this was done? Fig. 5.6. An elaborate panel from the Sanchi Stipa depicting soldiers riding elephants, horses, or on foot, waging battle and laying siege to Kusinara (today Kushinagar), a city of north India, to recover relics of the Buddha (seen carried away on an elephant in the left part of the panel). 08-04-2025 12:48:32 The production of surplus food grains allowed more people to focus on the arts and crafts, which were in demand inside and outside the empire s borders. The Ganga and Son rivers provided a geographical advantage for trade, as they could be used for Around the 5th century BCE, Mahapadma Nanda rose to prominence in Magadha and founded the Nanda dynasty. He successfully unified many smaller kingdoms and extended his empire across parts of eastern and northern India. As the economy thrived, he began issuing coins, demonstrating his economic power. We also learn from Greek accounts that the Nanda dynasty maintained a large army. From various accounts of the Nanda dynasty, it appears that its last emperor, Dhana Nanda, though very rich, became highly unpopular as he oppressed and exploited his people. This paved the way for the Nanda empire to be conquered and absorbed into what would become one of the largest empires India ever knew the Maurya empire. DON'T MISS OUT Chapter 5.indd 95 The famed Sanskrit grammarian 500 arforfy PANINI Panini lived around the 5th century BCE, during the time of the Nandas. He is known for composing the Ashtadhydyi, an ancient text that lists the rules of 20 Sanskrit grammar in 3,996 short _ Fig. 5.8. An India post stamp sutras. commemorating Panini Fig. 5.7. A punch-marked silver coin of transportation. The flourishing Mahdpadma Nanda trade boosted the empire s income and contributed to Magadha s rise. Sutras: Sutras are concise, carefully crafted phrases that capture knowledge and important ideas (from ancient Indian text) in a way that s easy to remember and pass on. 5 - The Rise of Empires Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 12:48:33 The Arrival of the Greeks While events unfolded in Magadha, located in the eastern part of the subcontinent, what was happening in the northwestern region? This area was home to smaller kingdoms along an ancient route connecting to the Mediterranean. Among them, according to Greek accounts, were the Pauravas, led by their king, Porus. LEGEND Stes == Alexander's Route . rs Granicus