including present-day Bangladesh and Pakistan and parts of present-day Afghanistan. One encounter, however, is said to have changed the path of his life. According to one of his edicts he once marched on Kalinga (modern-day Odisha), where he waged a ferocious war. Seeing the enormous amount of death and destruction on the battlefield, Ashoka chose to give up violence and, to the greatest extent possible, adopt the path of peace and non-violence that the Buddha taught. Y THINK ABOUT IT Ashoka, in his edicts, tells the story of the Kalinga war. He could have chosen not to mention it and maintain his image as a peaceful, benevolent king for future generations. Why do you think he admitted to this destructive war? Embracing Buddhist teachings, Ashoka sent emissaries to Sri Lanka, Thailand, Central Asia and beyond to spread the message of the Buddha far and wide. 08-04-2025 12:48:45 Chapter 5.indd 105 Historians have sometimes called Ashoka a great communicator since he issued in many parts of his empire edicts engraved on rocks or pillars that contained his messages for the people and encouraged them to follow dharma. Most of these edicts were inscribed in Prakrit, which was the popular language in many parts of India and written in the Brahmi script (Brahmi is the mother of all regional scripts of India). 70 E ee 80 E 40 N Peres z eo i] o We have referred to the Prakrit language written in Brahmi script. What does this mean? Very simply, a language is what we speak, while script is what we write a language in. Can you think of examples of this in our everyday life? LEGEND @ Major Rock Edicts 10 N A Minor Rock Edicts Pillar Edicts @ Minor Pillar Edicts 2& Cave Inscription Present International Boundary 70 E 80 E Fig. 5.17. A few of the many Ashokan edicts across the Subcontinent 5 - The Rise of Empires Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 12:48:46 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 S Chapter 5.indd 106 In his edicts, Ashoka called himself Devanampiya Piyadasi ; the first word means Beloved of the Gods ; the second, one who regards others with kindness . And indeed, the language of the edicts makes it clear that he was interested in depicting himself as a benevolent and compassionate ruler. Let us see a few examples of this. Although some southern kingdoms were not part of the Mauryan kingdom, Ashoka supported their overall wellbeing. He claimed to provide medical care for people and animals even beyond his Fig. 5.18. (Left) A reproduction of a part of Ashoka s rock edict at Girnar, Gujarat. (Right) Detail of the Topra Ashokan pillar at Feroz Shah Kotla, Delhi empire, prohibited hunting and cruelty to animals, and ordered medical treatment for them when necessary. If so, Ashoka was an early contributor to nature conservation and wildlife preservation. He said he had established rest houses and wells at regular intervals along the main roads of