for people and animals even beyond his Fig. 5.18. (Left) A reproduction of a part of Ashoka s rock edict at Girnar, Gujarat. (Right) Detail of the Topra Ashokan pillar at Feroz Shah Kotla, Delhi empire, prohibited hunting and cruelty to animals, and ordered medical treatment for them when necessary. If so, Ashoka was an early contributor to nature conservation and wildlife preservation. He said he had established rest houses and wells at regular intervals along the main roads of his empire and got fruit and shade trees planted. He also claimed to encourage all sects (the different schools of thought present in his time) to accept each other s best teachings and study them. Although we need not take all of Ashoka s claims literally, it is clear that in line with Kautilya s philosophy of governance, he paid attention to the welfare of his subjects and made efforts to reach out to them. 08-04-2025 12:48:47 c A) Chapter 5.indd 107 DON T MISS OUT You read about the word dharma (dhamma in Prakrit) in Grade 6. Its essence cannot be easily captured. In simple terms, dharma means moral law or someone s religious or ethical duties towards family, community or country. At a deeper level, however, dharma extends to living according to the order of the universe or ritam. This includes doing one s duty truthfully, following rules of righteous conduct and leading a life in harmony with the cosmic order. Dharma is, therefore, duty, law, truth, order and ethics all of it together! LET'S EXPLORE Ashoka details instructions on the conduct of his officials and mentions ways to ensure that they practised fairness in one of his edicts. Read the translation below and share your thoughts on whether those ways would have been successful in helping manage his empire and how. By order of the Beloved of the Gods the officers and city magistrates [...] are to be instructed thus: [...] You are in charge of many thousands of living beings. You should gain the affection of men. All men are my children, and just as I desire for my children that they should obtain welfare and happiness both in this world and the next, the same do I desire for all men. [...] You should strive to practice impartiality. [...] The root of all this is to be even-tempered and not rash in your work. [...] This inscription has been engraved here in order that the city magistrates should at all times see to it that men are never imprisoned or tortured without good reason. [...] And for this purpose, I shall send out on tour every five years, an officer who is not severe or harsh; who, having investigated this matter..., shall see that they carry out my instructions. 5 - The Rise of Empires Tapestry of the Past @ 08-04-2025 12:48:47 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 5.indd 108 . DON T MISS OUT The Sohagaura copper gs plate