end of time, so we may understand how empires functioned in the distant past and how they deeply impacted India s evolution at all levels political, economic, social, and cultural. ee, Features of an empire Maintains an army to keep the tributary states under control, expand the empire or protect it from outside aggression Maintains communication networks (roads, river and sea navigation) and the territories, collect other infrastructure taxes, maintain law for administration, Emperor and order, etc. trade and people's exerts central welfare authority over the empire's tributary territories and kings Designs and maintains an administration, with officials to manage Makes laws, issues currencies, weights and measures, regulates trade Encourages art, literature, religions, schools of thought, centres of learning Controls and regulates access to resources (mines, forest and agricultural produce, manpower) hej li Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 foe) foe) Chapter 5.indd 88 08-04-2025 12:48:26 LET'S EXPLORE > Empires extended over vast areas and had diverse people with differing languages, customs and cultures. How do you think the emperors made sure that they lived in harmony? Discuss in groups and share your thoughts with the class. > Looking at the many challenges involved in managing an empire, why should a king be so keen to expand his kingdom into an empire and become an emperor? Here are a few possible answers; see if you can think of a few more: An ambition to rule the entire world , a metaphor for controlling large territories and ensuring that l.. Posterity: The they would be remembered for posterity; generations to come. A wish to bring large areas under control and gain access to their resources to build economic and military strength; A desire for great wealth for himself and for the empire. In return for tribute and loyalty, emperors generally allowed regional kings or chiefs to continue to govern their areas. Fig. 5.4.1. Trained armies were deployed to conquer neighbouring kingdoms, maintain . g control over them and a & defend the empire s = rt borders. eo a Fin Chapter 5.indd 89 08-04-2025 12:48:27 Fig. 5.4.2. Fortified settlements would be built in strategic places, such as the empire s borders. Fig. 5.4.3. To expand into an empire, a kingdom might first wage war against neighbouring territories so as to conquer them. Fig. 5.4.4. Rulers endeavoured to control rivers and trade networks as that would give them control over precious resources, apart from tax revenue from the trade. a ee Fig. 5.4.5. With many smaller kingdoms warring for control, the one with access to stronger military power and surplus resources would eventually become the overlord. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 S| Chapter 5.indd 90 08-04-2025 12:48:30 Chapter 5.indd 91 LET'S EXPLORE Warfare apart, what other methods do you think the rulers might have used to expand their empires? Pen your ideas and share them with your class. Trade, trade routes and guilds Conducting military campaigns, especially in distant lands, is not as