Ashoka _ _ >P> SS>E _ _ _ _ __ _ _ _ _ _ Mahajanapadas Nandas Mauryas Fig. 5.30 5 - The Rise of Empires Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 12:48:52 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 5.indd 114 through force and repression. This makes them fragile at their core and unstable over time. Before we move on... > An empire is a large territory made up of many smaller kingdoms or territories. Emperors expanded their kingdoms mostly to gain fame, amass power, including military power, and control resources and economic life. The first empires of India emerged in regions blessed with abundant natural resources, rivers for irrigation and transport, and the production of a variety of goods for trade. Alexander s campaign in northwest India had a limited political impact but opened the door for Indo-Greek cultural contacts. The Mauryas created a vast empire with a legacy that lasted centuries. Their legacy includes strengthening trade routes and economic systems, extensive use of coins for trade, well-designed urban settlements, and an elaborate system of administration. They also promoted art and architecture. Ashoka was keen to advertise his achievements and project the image of a benevolent ruler who encouraged his subjects to follow dharma. Questions and activities 1. What are the features of an empire, and how is it different from a kingdom? Explain. What are some important factors for the transition from kingdoms to empires? . Alexander is considered an important king in the history of the world why do you think that is so? In early Indian history, the Mauryas are considered important. State your reasons. What were some of Kautilya s key ideas? Which ones of these can you observe even today in the world around us? 08-04-2025 12:48:52 Chapter 5.indd 115 6. What were the unusual things about Ashoka and his empire? What of that has continued to influence India and why? Write your opinion in about 250 words. . Thus speaks the Beloved of the Gods, the king Piyadasi: My officers of Dhamma are busy in many matters of public benefit, they are busy among members of all sects, both ascetics and householders. I have appointed some to concern themselves with the Buddhist Order, with brahmans and Ajivika..., with the Jains..., and with various sects. There are many categories of officers with a variety of duties, but my officers of Dhamma are busy with the affairs of these and other sects. After reading the above edict of Ashoka, do you think he was tolerant towards other religious beliefs and schools of thought? Share your opinion in the classroom. . The Brahmi script was a writing system that was widely used in ancient India. Try to learn more about this script, taking help from your teacher wherever required. Create a small project and include what you have learnt about Brahmi. . Suppose you had to travel from Kaushambi to Kaveripattanam in the 3rd century BCE. How would you undertake this journey,