easy to remember and pass on. 5 - The Rise of Empires Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 12:48:33 The Arrival of the Greeks While events unfolded in Magadha, located in the eastern part of the subcontinent, what was happening in the northwestern region? This area was home to smaller kingdoms along an ancient route connecting to the Mediterranean. Among them, according to Greek accounts, were the Pauravas, led by their king, Porus. LEGEND Stes == Alexander's Route . rs Granicus Guagamela ia f= LEGEND ALEXANDER'S EMPIRE ALEXANDER'S ROUTE X BATTLE Alexander, a young and powerful Greek king from Macedonia, campaigned against the Persian Empire to avenge earlier Persian invasions of Greece (during which some Indian soldiers from the Persian-ruled northwest of India fought against Greeks!). Alexander conquered the Persian Empire; the influence of Greek culture spread. His empire now spread over three continents, Fig. 5.10 one of the largest in world history. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 5.indd 96 08-04-2025 12:48:38 - DON'T MISS OUT The satraps were governors of provinces of Persian and Greek empires who were left behind by the overlord (like Alexander) to manage the far-off territories. These satraps had significant power and freedom despite being mere officials of the rulers. Can you guess how it was possible for them to exercise such power? THINK ABOUT IT Why do you think Alexander wanted to rule over the entire world? What would he have gained from it? LET'S EXPLORE When, after the battle, Alexander asked Porus how he wished to be treated, Porus answered, Like a King. Alexander then left Porus at the head of his kingdom, as satrap. With the help of your teachers, find more details on the battle between Porus and Alexander. Enact a play of this battle scene using your imagination in addition to what you have discovered. Back in Persia, Alexander faced rebellions and political turmoil. After he fell ill and died in Babylon at the age of 32, his immense empire was soon divided between his generals and the satraps, who created their own kingdoms. wn Eager to reach the end of the world , Alexander pushed on : = further east and brought his campaign to India, defeated Porus in &E Punjab and, encountering fierce resistance from local tribes and y rs rulers, massacred the population of several cities. Greek records fo mention that in a few battles, women fought side by side with ea their men. Alexander himself was seriously wounded in a battle. gy Tired and homesick, his soldiers lost the will to fight and refused ar to move deeper into India, towards the Ganga River. Alexander Fin and part of his army retreated to Persia, but through the coastal route in the south and Iran s harsh desert regions, resulting in heavy losses to his troops out of thirst, hunger and disease. Chapter 5.indd 97 08-04-2025 12:48:39 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 = Chapter 5.indd 98 Alexander