Introduction Why Social Science? Timeline and Sources of History Landforms and Life THEME A Oceans and Continents India, That Is Bharat India and the ; THEME B Locating World - Land Tapestry Places on the Earth ele of the Past The Beginnings of P Ss Indian Civilisation The Value India s conomic ur Cultura Roots Life Around Heritage and Us Knowledge Traditions Theme D Governance and Democracy Unity in Diversity, or Many in the One Economic Activities Around Us Local Government Family in Urban Areas and Community Local Government in Rural Areas Governance Reprint 2025-26 Exploring Society: India and Beyond chapter0_310125.indd 2 > Observe the picture above. What do you notice? = Where does the water in the lake come from? = Who made the road and why? = What could be the activities of people living in the small house? What could be their history? Their future? > Write down your answers and discuss them with your classmates. > Now, looking at the picture on the facing page, what questions come to your mind? Write them down. > How do you propose to find answers to the questions related to these two images? How are our questions above relevant to Social Science? Welivein the 21% century (ifyou do not know what this figure really means, you will soon learn about it). Everyone agrees that it is a particularly challenging time for humanity. On Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 04:56:21 | the one hand, there is rapid progress in technology, which is changing our lives in many ways. On the other hand, the world is witnessing multiple wars, armed conflicts and rising social tensions, and our planet s natural environment is under great stress. We live in an age of great possibilities but also great challenges. The world over, more and more people wonder, How do we solve the problems facing humanity? How can our societies learn to live in peace and harmony? How can we protect this beautiful Earth which we all share and protect it not only for ourselves but also for all the species that live on it? These fundamental questions are simple, but the answers are not. They cannot be simple, because human societies are very diverse and complex. If we wish to find answers to such questions and help build a better future, we first need to understand our world, and human societies in particular. That is what Social Science is all about. Introduction - Why Social Science? You may wonder whether this is a science like, say, physics or chemistry. It is not. The discipline does use scientific Reprint 2025-26 chapter0_310125.indd 3 & 03-02-2025 04:56:21 | Exploring Society: India and Beyond chapter0_310125.indd 4 methods wherever possible (you will see a few examples in this textbook), but its focus human society is, again, too diverse to allow the kind of set procedures and fixed results the sciences come up with. Social Science has many subdisciplines: geography, history, political science, economics, sociology, anthropology, archaeology, psychology and a few