map is using. LET'S EXPLORE India and the World: Land and the People Exploring Society: India and Beyond chapter1_310125.indd 10 > Draw a simple map of a school s playground. Let us assume it is a rectangle, 40 m in length and 30 m in width. Draw it precisely with your ruler on a scale of 1 cm = 10 m. > Now measure the diagonal of the rectangle. How many centimetres do you get? Using the scale, calculate the real length of the playground s diagonal, in metres. Let us return to the four arrows at the top right of the small city s map. They point to four directions, which are north, at the top, and, moving clockwise, east, south and west. These are called the cardinal directions, also cardinal points. Other than these, intermediate directions are also used northeast (NE), southeast (SE), southwest (SW) and northwest (NW). Most maps simply have an arrow marked with the letter N , which points to the north direction. Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 04:58:04 | LET'S EXPLORE > Consider the map of the small city again. Identify the correct and incorrect statements in the list below: 1. The market is north of the hospital. 2. The museum is southeast of the bank. 3. The railway station is northwest of the hospital. 4. The lake is northwest of the apartment blocks. > Taking your school as the starting point, do you know approximately in which cardinal direction your home is located? Discuss with your teacher and your parents. Symbols are another important component of maps. Our map has small drawings of actual buildings and a few other elements, but there would not be enough space on the map of a large city or a country to draw them all. Instead, a symbol is used to represent these features symbols for different kinds of buildings (for instance a railway station, & a school, a post office), for roads and railway lines, and for natural elements such as a river, a pond or a forest. In that way, numerous details can be shown in the limited space available on a map. To make maps more easily understood by a variety of users, map makers use specific symbols. Different countries use different sets of symbols. The Survey of India, a government body, has fixed a set of symbols for maps of India (or parts of India). A small selection of them is shown in Fig. 1.2 on page 12. LET'S EXPLORE Draw a rough map of your locality or your village, including your home, school and a few other important landmarks. Show the cardinal directions and use a few of the symbols shown in Fig. 1.2 on page 12 to mark some important features. 1 - Locating Places on the Earth Reprint 2025-26 chapter1_310125.indd 11 & 03-02-2025 04:58:08 | Railway Line: broad gauge, tlle ae en metre gauge, railway station RS Roads: metalled, unmetalled ee Boundary: international, ome 0 mmremmo mm ee ee state, district River,