is farther away from the railway station the school, the Nagar Panchayat or the public garden? > Asaclass activity, form groups of three or four students each. Let each group try to draw a map of your school and some of the streets or roads that lead to it, and a few neighbouring buildings. At the end, compare all the maps and discuss. A Map and Its Components From this simple example, we understand that a map is a representation, or a drawing, of some area it may be a small area (a village, a town, etc.), a bigger area (say, your district or state), or a very large area like India or even the whole world. In a map, you look at the surface as if you are viewing it from the top. An atlas is a book or collection of maps. As you will discover, there are several kinds of maps = physical maps, which mainly show some natural features such as mountains, oceans and rivers (see an example in Fig. 5.2 in this textbook) = political maps, which show details of countries or states, boundaries, cities, etc. (for instance, a map of India with all its States, Union Territories and their capitals) = thematic maps, with a specific kind of information (examples include Fig. 6.3 and Fig. 8.1 in this textbook). In addition, there are three important components of maps distance, direction and symbols. You have already Reprint 2025-26 chapter1_310125.indd 9 & 1 - Locating Places on the Earth 03-02-2025 04:58:03 | experienced the first two while navigating the map in Fig. 1.1. Let us now define them more precisely. Have you ever wondered how a huge place can fit on asmall piece of paper? It is all thanks to the map s scale. Let us go back to our map of a small city (Fig. 1.1). Each centimetre on the map, as printed here, represents a certain distance on the ground let us suppose it is 500 metres; we say that the scale is 1 cm = 500 m. Now, turn to the map of India in Fig. 5.2 in Chapter 5 of this textbook. The scale is represented in the bottom left corner by a ruler with 500 written above its length and km on the side. It simply means that this ruler, which measures 2.5 cm in the printed map, corresponds to 500 kilometres on the ground. So, the actual distance between two points represented on the map depends on the scale that the map is using. LET'S EXPLORE India and the World: Land and the People Exploring Society: India and Beyond chapter1_310125.indd 10 > Draw a simple map of a school s playground. Let us assume it is a rectangle, 40 m in length and 30 m in width. Draw it precisely with your ruler on a scale of 1 cm = 10 m. > Now measure the diagonal of the rectangle. How many centimetres do you get? Using the scale, calculate the