later that this is called multidisciplinarity ). This enriches our perspective. Indeed, life constantly mixes numerous elements together, so why should we not? By now, it should be clear that although Social Science makes constant use of the past, it seeks to make sense of the present so as to help us prepare a better future. It is an exploration and an adventure. Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 04:56:22 | Locating Places on the Earth ~ Lu o. <x U The globe of the Earth stands in space, made up of water, earth, fire and air and is spherical. ... It is surrounded by all creatures, terrestrial as well as aquatic. Aryabhata (about 500 CE) DE INTEGRO MULT _ i Eunopa : oS a ext + \. ) \ Mextcana e\ | D What is a map and how do we use it? What are its main components? What are coordinates? How can latitude and longitude be used to vsaicHo! mark any location on the Earth? How are local time and standard time related to longitude? India and the World: Land and the People Exploring Society: India and Beyond chapter1_310125.indd 8 Imagine that you are visiting a city for the first time. How would you find the places you want to visit? You might ask a local person for help, or you might look at a map of the city. In previous grades, you learnt a little about maps, and in this chapter, we will study them in more detail. Let us play a game. Examine the map of this small city (Fig. 1.1). Imagine that you just got off a train at the railway station, and you want to visit the bank marked on the map. Which way would you go? Are there other possible ways? Can you locate the public garden, the school and the museum? If you want to proceed from the bank to the market, which way will you go? This is where a map comes in handy! Fig. 1.1. A map of an imaginary small city. A map is like a treasure guide; it shows you where things are and how to get to them. Notice the four arrows in the top right corner of the map; we will soon see how they point to some specific directions and make maps even more helpful. Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 04:58:02 | LET'S EXPLORE > On the map in Fig. 1.1 given on page 8 1. Mark the hospital. 2. What is the meaning of the blue-coloured areas? 3. Which is farther away from the railway station the school, the Nagar Panchayat or the public garden? > Asaclass activity, form groups of three or four students each. Let each group try to draw a map of your school and some of the streets or roads that lead to it, and a few neighbouring buildings. At the end, compare all the maps and discuss. A Map and Its Components From this simple example, we understand that a map is a representation,