say, physics or chemistry. It is not. The discipline does use scientific Reprint 2025-26 chapter0_310125.indd 3 & 03-02-2025 04:56:21 | Exploring Society: India and Beyond chapter0_310125.indd 4 methods wherever possible (you will see a few examples in this textbook), but its focus human society is, again, too diverse to allow the kind of set procedures and fixed results the sciences come up with. Social Science has many subdisciplines: geography, history, political science, economics, sociology, anthropology, archaeology, psychology and a few more. You need not feel intimidated by all these terms! While you will study some of these subdisciplines in the Secondary Stage, in the Middle Stage we have avoided this classification. Instead, we have opted for five broad themes. Let us briefly look at them. Theme A - India and the World: Land and the People This first theme includes the basics of the geographical world around us some of the main features of our planet and the way to represent them on a map. Why is this theme important, when today we can get excellent maps on a mobile phone? Because it deals with much more than maps. It also asks how geographical features oceans, mountains, rivers, etc. have shaped entire civilisations throughout their histories. It is also, in India s case, about how its natural setting has contributed to giving this ancient civilisation a unique identity. Theme B - Tapestry of the Past A tapestry is a large piece of canvas-like cloth usually kept as a wall hanging, with pictures and designs on it sometimes a historical narrative. Our tapestry is where we will be painting scenes from the past, beginning with India s past. But why should we be at all concerned with the past? Because it is the key to understanding the present, and the chapters in this theme will often make this connection clear. The past is a major source for our identities it helps us understand who we are and where we come from. Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 04:56:21 | The past is still with us, in other words. And since history is unfortunately not all about happy developments, it is useful to understand where people, governments or rulers went wrong, and why. Only then can we hope to avoid repeating those errors. Theme C - Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions It has often been said that India has a rich and ancient culture. True, but what are its main characteristics? Its guiding principles? How has it manifested itself in India s history? And how can it help us to deal with issues of our times? These are some of the questions that this theme is exploring, with the objective that every student should understand some of the cultural foundations of our civilisation and learn to appreciate their value. Theme D - Governance and Democracy Citizens of any country should know how their political system functions. India, as the world s largest democracy, has an elaborate system working at different levels. What are its