how can it help us to deal with issues of our times? These are some of the questions that this theme is exploring, with the objective that every student should understand some of the cultural foundations of our civilisation and learn to appreciate their value. Theme D - Governance and Democracy Citizens of any country should know how their political system functions. India, as the world s largest democracy, has an elaborate system working at different levels. What are its chief characteristics and components? How do the citizens participate in the overall governance? What are their rights and also their duties or dharma? Are there different systems in other countries, and, if so, of what type? How are different countries supposed to interact? By studying this theme, we can become more responsible citizens, understand how the organs of the government function, and learn to have a say in the policies that affect us all, whether locally or nationally. Theme E - Economic Life Around Us No family can be happy without the essentials of daily living at least food, clothing, shelter, access to water in a first stage; in a second, livelihood for adults and access to education for the younger ones. Similarly, no country can Introduction - Why Social Science? Reprint 2025-26 chapter0_310125.indd 5 & 03-02-2025 04:56:22 | Exploring Society: India and Beyond chapter0_310125.indd 6 develop harmoniously without a sound economy. But how does an economy work, especially in a huge country like India? What exactly is money? Where does it come from? How can it be increased? What economic activities can people engage themselves in? How are natural and human resources best managed? This theme will lay down some of the important concepts and practices that will enable us to answer these questions. wm & You will notice that there are many questions in the preceding paragraphs. This is as it should be Social Science is also about the art of asking the right questions. Only then can we start looking for the right answers. This also explains the presence of Big Questions at the start of each chapter in this book. You may also be intrigued to find a game of chess and some ancient Tamil poetry in chapters that apparently deal with geography; a discussion on the uses of the sari in a chapter on cultural heritage; the concept of seva and the mention of festivals in chapters focusing on economics. This is deliberate. We believe in bringing elements from diverse fields together (you will learn later that this is called multidisciplinarity ). This enriches our perspective. Indeed, life constantly mixes numerous elements together, so why should we not? By now, it should be clear that although Social Science makes constant use of the past, it seeks to make sense of the present so as to help us prepare a better future. It is an exploration and an adventure. Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 04:56:22 | Locating Places on the Earth ~ Lu o. <x U The globe