calculate the local time of any place on the Earth. But it would not be convenient for a country to use many local times! That is why most countries adopt a standard time based on a meridian passing through them. Indian Standard Time (IST) is 5 hours 30 minutes (also noted 5.5 hours) ahead of the local time at Greenwich (called Greenwich Mean Time or GMT). LET'S EXPLORE Return to the two friends sitting in Gujarat and Assam. Use this example to explain the difference between local time and standard time. All these standard times are organised in time zones, which broadly follow the zones of 15 in the graph (Fig. 1.7). But let us consider the world map below (Fig. 1.8). We can see that the lines dividing the time zones are not fully straight. This is because they have to respect each country s standard time and, therefore, tend to follow international borders. The numbers written inside some countries are the numbers of hours to be added to GMT to get their standard times if they have a positive sign, or subtracted from GMT if they havea negative sign. 1 - Locating Places on the Earth Reprint 2025-26 chapter1_310125.indd 21 & 03-02-2025 045807 | Fig. 1.8. A world map of the time zones, showing the standard times (with respect to GMT) for a few countries. (Note that international borders are approximate, not exact.) ) DON'T MISS OUT From the above explanation, it may seem as if every country has one standard time. That is not always the case. Some countries, like Russia, Canada or the USA, are too large to have a single time zone. The USA has six time zones and Russia has 11 which means that travelling across Russia from east to west, you will need to readjust your watch 10 times to align with the local time! Similarly, the globe in Fig. 1.9, centred on India, shows standard times with respect to GMT for a few countries. | Finally, while the Prime Meridian was fixed at Greenwich, the opposite line at approximately 180 longitude is called the International Date Line. As you can see on the map, the +12 and the -12 time zones touch each other at this line. If you cross it by ship or plane, you need to change the date in your watch. If you cross it India and the World: Land and the People Exploring Society: India and Beyond Reprint 2025-26 chapter1_310125.indd 22 & 03-02-2025 04:58:08 | Fig. 1.9 A few time zones (with respect to GMT) in Africa and Eurasia. travelling eastward, you subtract a day (say, from Monday to Sunday); if you cross it travelling westward, you add a day (from Sunday to Monday). We said that the International Date Line is approximately at 180 longitude, as it deviates in places to avoid dividing some countries into two different days! Before we move on... > Mapsareavery useful tool to represent an area of the Earth, whether small or