your locality or your village, including your home, school and a few other important landmarks. Show the cardinal directions and use a few of the symbols shown in Fig. 1.2 on page 12 to mark some important features. 1 - Locating Places on the Earth Reprint 2025-26 chapter1_310125.indd 11 & 03-02-2025 04:58:08 | Railway Line: broad gauge, tlle ae en metre gauge, railway station RS Roads: metalled, unmetalled ee Boundary: international, ome 0 mmremmo mm ee ee state, district River, well, tank, canal, ay O CO _ bridge Temple, church, mosque, a ; aj vay chhatri Post Office, Post & Telegraph PO PTO PS Office, Police Station Settlement, graveyard as on Trees, grass India and the World: Land and the People Exploring Society: India and Beyond chapter1_310125.indd 12 oO shihaininh Fig. 1.2. A selection of symbols commonly used in maps. Mapping the Earth Mapping the Earth is a little more difficult because our planet is not a flat surface. It nearly has the shape of a sphere. (We say nearly because it is not a perfect sphere, but is slightly flattened at the poles. However, in practice, we will consider it to be spherical.) Representing a sphere accurately on a flat sheet of paper is not possible. To understand why, peel an orange in such a way that you have just three or four large pieces of the skin; then try and flatten them on a table you will see that you cannot do it without tearing them at the edges. Now, consider a globe, which is a sphere on which a map is drawn. This may be a map of the Earth, the Moon, the planet Mars, the stars and constellations in the sky, etc. The physical object, like the one shown in the drawing on the next page, is a sphere that is generally made of metal, plastic or cardboard. Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 04:58:05 | Here we will study the globe representing the Earth s geography. Because the globe and the Earth have the same spherical shape, a globe will better represent the geography of the Earth than a flat map. Let us now explore some of its features. a) Understanding coordinates Imagine a big market in a city or town, with neat rows of shops, all the same size. You want to meet a friend at a stationery shop inside the market. But your friend does not know where the shop is. So you would give directions | like, Meet me at 6 pm at the 7 shop in the 5" row from the entrance. This will allow your friend to precisely determine your location. Now, consider a chessboard. To record moves by advanced players, letters are placed alongside the main pieces (from a to h , see the image) and numbers (from 1 to 8) in between the two sides. This simple system allows players to mark each square and record every move. Here, the white side has just opened the game by moving the queen