this. : time. Thank you, From: Anas Jamil El-Banna, 9 years Old. 7112/2005 > DeEmMocraATIC RIGHTS Reprint 2025-26 were quite central to the Constitution because ... Chapter 3: Every adult citizen of India has the right to ... and to be... Chapter 4: If a law is against the Constitution, every citizen has the right to approach ... Let us now begin with three examples of what it means to live in the absence of rights. Prison in Guantanamo Bay About 600 people were secretly picked up by the US forces from all over the world and put in a prison in Guantanamo Bay, an area near Cuba controlled by Amercian Navy. Anas s father, Jamil El-Banna, was among them. The American government said that they were enemies of the US and linked to the attack on New York on 11 September 2001. In most cases the governments of their countries were not asked or even informed about their imprisonment. Like other prisoners, El-Banna s family got to know that he was in that prison only through the media. Families of prisoners, media or even UN representatives were not allowed to meet them. The US army arrested them, interrogated them and decided whether to keep them there or not. There was no trial before any magistrate in the US. Nor could these prisoners approach courts in their own country. Amnesty International, an international human _ rights organisation, collected information on the condition of the prisoners in Guantanamo Bay and reported that the prisoners were being tortured in ways that violated the US laws. They were being denied the treatment that even prisoners of war must get as per international treaties. Many prisoners had tried protesting against these conditions by going on a hunger strike. Prisoners were not released even after they were officially declared not guilty. An independent inquiry by the UN supported these findings. The UN Secretary General said the prison in Guantanamo Bay should be closed down. The US government refused to accept these pleas. Citizens Rights in Saudi Arabia The case of Guantanamo Bay looks like an exception, for it involves the government of one country denying rights to citizens of another country. Let us therefore look at the case of Saudi Arabia and the position of the citizens with regard to their government. Consider these facts: aThe country is ruled by a hereditary king and the people have no role in electing or changing their rulers. a The king selects the legislature as well as the executive. He appoints the judges and can change any of their decisions. = Citizens cannot form political parties or any political organisations. Media cannot report anything that the monarch does not like. = There is no freedom of religion. Every citizen is required to be Muslim. Non-Muslim residents can follow their religion in private, but not in public. = Women are subjected to many public restrictions. The testimony of one man is considered equal to that of two women. This