in the name of religion. For example, one cannot sacrifice animals or human beings as offerings to supernatural forces or gods. Religious practices which treat women as inferior or those that infringe women s freedom are not allowed. For example, one cannot force a widow to shave head or wear white clothes. Asecular state is one that does not confer any privilege or favour on any particular religion. Nor does it punish or discriminate against people on the basis of religion they follow. Thus the government cannot compel any person to pay any taxes for the promotion or maintenance of any particular religion or religious institution. There shall be no religious instruction in the government educational institutions. In educational institutions managed by private bodies no person shall be compelled to take part in any religious instruction or to attend any religious worship. Cultural and Educational Rights You might wonder why the Constitution makers were so particular in providing written guarantees of the rights of the minorities. Why are there no special guarantees for the majority? Well, for the simple reason that the working of democracy gives power to the majority. It is the language, culture and religion of minorities that needs special protection. Otherwise, they may get neglected or undermined under the impact of the language, religion and culture of the majority. That is why the Constitution specifies the cultural and educational rights of the minorities: a Any section of citizens with a distinct language or culture have a right to conserve it. DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 The Constitution does not give people their religion. Then how can it give people the right to practise their religion? CHECK YOUR PROGRESS Can the President of India stop you from approaching the Supreme Court to secure your fundamental rights? s Admission to any educational institution maintained by government or receiving government aid cannot be denied to any citizen on the ground of religion or language. = All minorities have the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their choice. Here minority does not mean only religious minority at the national level. In some places people speaking a particular language are in majority; people speaking a different language are in a minority. For example, Telugu speaking people form a majority in Andhra Pradesh. But they are a minority in the neighbouring State of Karnataka. Sikhs constitute a majority in Punjab. But they are a minority in Rajasthan, Haryana and Delhi. Read these news reports and identify the right that is being debated in each of these cases: = An emergency session of the Shiromani Gurdwara Parbandhak Committee (SGPC) rejected the proposal to form a Separate body to manage the affairs of Sikh shrines in Haryana. It warned the government that the Sikh community would not tolerate any interference in their religious affairs. (June 2005) = The Allahabad High Court quashed the Central law, which gave Aligarh Muslim University its minority status, and held illegal the reservation of seats for Muslims in its