expansion of rights. Thus the scope of rights has been expanding and new rights are evolving over time. They are result of struggle of the people. New rights emerge as societies develop or as new constitutions are made. The Constitution of South Africa guarantees its citizens several kinds of new rights: = Right to privacy, so that citizens or their home cannot be searched, their phones cannot be tapped, their communication cannot be opened. = Right to an environment that is not harmful to their health or wellbeing; = Right to have access to adequate housing. = Right to have access to health care services, sufficient food and water; no one may be refused emergency medical treatment. International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights This international covenant recognises many rights that are not directly a part of the Fundamental Rights in the Indian Constitution. This has not yet become an international treaty. But human right activists all over the world see this as a standard of human rights. These include: = right to work: opportunity to everyone to earn livelihood by working = right to safe and healthy working conditions, fair wages that can provide decent standard of living for the workers and their families = right to adequate standard of living including adequate food, clothing and housing = right to social security and insurance = right to health: medical care during illness, special care for women during childbirth and prevention of epidemics = rightto education: free and compulsory primary education, equal access to higher education. Many people think that the right to work, right to health, right to minimum livelihood and right to privacy should be made fundamental rights in India as well. What do you think? Amnesty International: An international organisation of volunteers who campaign for human rights. This organisation brings out independent reports on the violation of human rights all over the world. Claim: Demand for legal or moral entitlements a person makes on fellow citizens, society or the government. Covenant: Promise made by individuals, groups or countries to uphold a rule or principle. It is legally binding on the signatories to the agreement or statement. Dalit: A person who belongs to the castes which were considered low and not touchable by others. Dalits are also known by other names such as the Scheduled Castes, Depressed Classes etc. Ethnic group: An ethnic group is a human population whose members usually identify with each other on the basis of acommon ancestry. People of an ethnic group are united by cultural practices, religious beliefs and historical memories. Traffic: Selling and buying of men, women or children for immoral purposes. Summon: An order issued by a court asking a person to appear before it. Writ: A formal document containing an order of the court to the government issued only by High Court or the Supreme Court. DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 Which of the following is not an instance of an exercise of a fundamental right? a Workers from Bihar