catching the culprits. Someone had to intervene on behalf of the victims. This is where the National Human Rights Commission stepped in. This is an independent commission set up by law in 1993. Like judiciary, the Commission is independent of the government. The Commission is appointed by the President and includes retired judges, officers and eminent citizens. Yet it does not have the burden of deciding court cases. So it can focus on helping the victims secure their human rights. These include all the rights granted to the citizens by the Constitution. For NHRC human rights also include the rights mentioned in the UN sponsored international treaties that India has signed. The NHRC cannot by itself punish the guilty. That is the responsibility of courts. The NHRC is there to make independent and credible inquiry victims and punishment to the violators. We have already seen in Chapter 4 that the judiciary in our country is independent of the government and the parliament. We also noted that our judiciary is very powerful and can do whatever is needed to protect the rights of the citizens. In case of any violation of a Fundamental Right the aggrieved person can go to acourt for remedy. But now, any person can go to court against the violation of the Fundamental Right, if it is of social or public interest. It is called Public Interest Litigation (PIL). Under the into any case of violation ot human rights. It also inquires into any case of abetment of such violation or negligence in controlling it by any government officer and takes other general steps to promote human rights in the country. The Commission presents its findings and recommendations to the government or intervene in the court on behalf of the victims. It has wide ranging powers to carry out its inquiry. Like any court it can summon witnesses, question any government official, demand any official paper, visit any prison for inspection or send its own team for on-the-spot inquiry. Any citizen of India can write a letter to this address to complain against the violation of human rights: National Human Rights Commission, G.PO. Complex, INA, New Delhi 110023. There is no fee or anyformal procedure to approach the NHRC. Like NHRC, there are State Human Rights Commissions in all the 28 states of the country. For more details, visit http:/ /www.nhre.nic.in PIL any citizen or group of citizens can approach the Supreme Court or a High Court for the protection of public interest against a particular law or action of the government. One can write to the judges even on a postcard. The court will take up the matter if the judges find it in public interest. ACTIVITY Is there a State Human Rights Commission in your state? Find out about its activities. Write a petition to the NHRC if you know any instances of human rights violation in your area. DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 Are these rights only for adults? Which of these rights are available