on any track. Why are the competitors in the outer lane placed ahead of those in the inner lane at the starting point of the race? What would happen if all the ~ competitors he race from the same line? Which of wo would be an equal and fair practice which looks down upon people on account of their birth with certain caste labels. Such practice denies them interaction with others or access to public places as equal citizens. So the Constitution made untouchability a punishable offence. DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 Should the freedom of expression be extended to those who are spreading wrong and narrowminded ideas? Should they be allowed to confuse the public? Many Forms of Untouchability In 1999, P. Sainath wrote a series of newsreports in The Hindu describing untouchability and caste discrimination that was still being practiced against Dalits or persons belonging to Scheduled Castes. He travelled to various parts of the coun try and found that in many places: = Tea stalls kept two kinds of cups, one for Dalits one for others; = Barbers refused to serve dalit clients; = Dalit students were made to sit separately in the classroom or drink water from separate picher; = Dalit grooms were not allowed to ride a horse in the wedding procession; and = Dalits were not allowed to use common handpump or if they did, the handpump was washed to purify it. All these fall under the definition of untouchability. Can you think of some examples from your own area? Right to Freedom Freedom means absence of constraints. In practical life it means absence of interference in our affairs by others be it other individuals or the government. We want to live in society, but we want to be free. We want to do things in the way we want to do them. Others should not dictate us what we should do. So, under the Indian Constitution all citizens have the right to = Freedom of speech and expression = Assembly in a peaceful manner = Form associations and unions Move freely throughout the country = Reside in any part of the country, and = Practice any profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or business. You should remember that every citizen has the right to all these freedoms. That means you cannot exercise your freedom in such a DeEmMocraATIC RIGHTS Reprint 2025-26 manner that violates others right to freedom. Your freedoms should not cause public nuisance or disorder. You are free to do everything which injures no one else. Freedom is not unlimited licence to do what one wants. Accordingly, the government can impose certain reasonable restrictions on our freedoms in the larger interests of the society. Freedom of speech and expression is one of the essential features of any democracy. Our ideas and personality develop only when we are able to freely communicate with others. You may think differently from others. Even if a hundred people think in one way, you should