in a letter from Manoj to the district collector. DeEmMocraATIC RIGHTS 89 Reprint 2025-26 8 When Madhurima went to the property registration office, the Registrar told her, You can t write your name as Madhurima Banerjee d/oA. K. Banerjee. You are married, so you must give your husband s name. Your husband s surname is Rao. So your name should be changed to Madhurima Rao. She did not agree. She said If my husband s name has not changed after marriage, why should mine? In your opinion who is right in this dispute? And why? 9 Thousands of tribals and other forest dwellers gathered at Piparia in Hoshangabad district in Madhya Pradesh to protest against their proposed displacement from the Satpura National Park, Bori Wildlife Sanctuary and Panchmarhi Wildlife Sanctuary. They argue that such a displacement is an attack on their livelihood and beliefs. Government claims that their displacement is essential for the development of the area and for protection of wildlife. Write a petition on behalf of the forest dwellers to the NHRC, a response from the government and a report of the NHRC on this matter. 10 Drawaweb interconnecting different rights discussed in this chapter. For example right to freedom of movement is connected to the freedom of occupation. One reason for this is that freedom of movement enables a person to go to place of work within one s village or city or to another village, city or state. Similarly this right can be used for pilgrimage, connected with freedom to follow one s religion. Draw a circle for each right and mark arrows that show connection between or among different rights. For each arrow, give an example that shows the linkage. In every chapter we have done an exercise on reading the newspaper. Let us now try to write for the newspaper. Take any example from the reports discussed in this chapter or any other local example that you are familiar with and write the following: a Letter to the editor highlighting a case of human rights violation. = Press release by a human rights organisation. aA headline and a news item concerning a Supreme Court order related to Fundamental Rights. = Editorial on growing incidents of custodial violence. Put these together and make a newspaper for your school notice board. 90 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 exercises