you to do or not to do a certain job. Women cannot be told that some kinds of occupations are not for them. People from deprived castes cannot be kept to their traditional occupations. The Constitution says that no person can be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to Irfan Khan procedure established by law. It means that no person can be killed unless the court has ordered a death sentence. It also means that a government or police officer cannot arrest or detain any citizen unless he has proper legal justification. Even when they do, they have to follow some procedures: a A person who is arrested and detained in custody will have to be informed of the reasons for such arrest and detention. = A person who is arrested and detained shall be produced before the nearest magistrate within a period of 24 hours of arrest. = Such a person has the right to consult a lawyer or engage a lawyer for his defence. Irfan Khan DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 CHECK YOUR PROGRESS CHECK YOUR PROGRESS Let us recall the cases of threat to the most basic of all Guantanamo Bay and Kosovo. The victims in both these cases faced a liberties, the protection of individual life and personal liberty. Are these cases instances of violation of right to freedom? If yes, which constitutional provision does each of these violate? = The government of India banned Salman Rushdie s book Satanic Verses on the ground that it was disrespectful to Prophet Mohammed and was likely to hurt the feelings of Muslim community. = Every film has to be approved by the Censor Board of the government before it can be shown to the public. But there is no such restriction if the same story is published in a book or a magazine. = The government is considering a proposal that there will be industrial zones or sectors of economy where workers will not be allowed to form unions or go on strike. = City administration has imposed a ban on use of public microphones after 10 p.m. in view of the approaching secondary school examinations. Right against Exploitation Once the right to liberty and equality is granted, it follows that every citizen has a right not to be exploited. Yet the Constitution makers thought is was necessary to write down certain clear provisions to prevent exploitation of the weaker sections of the society. The Constitution mentions three specific evils and declares these illegal. First, the Constitution prohibits traffic in human beings . Traffic here means selling and buying of human beings, usually women, for immoral purposes. Second, our Constitution also prohibits forced labour or begar in cae On the basis of these DeEmMocraATIC RIGHTS Reprint 2025-26 write a letter to the editor or a petition to a court highlighting the any form. Begar is a practice where the worker is forced to render service to the master free of charge or ata nominal remuneration. When