0972CHOS CHAPTER 5 DEMOCRATIC RIGHTS OVERVIEW In the previous two chapters we have looked at two major elements of a democratic government. In Chapter 3 we saw how a democratic government has to be periodically elected by the people in a free and fair manner. In Chapter 4 we learnt that a democracy must be based on institutions that follow certain rules and procedures. These elements are necessary but not sufficient for a democracy. Elections and institutions need to be combined with a third element - enjoyment of rights - to make a government democratic. Even the most properly elected rulers working through the established institutional process must learn not to cross some limits. Citizens democratic rights set those limits in a democracy. This is what we take up in this final chapter of the book. We begin by discussing some real life cases to imagine what it means to live without rights. This leads to a discussion on what we mean by rights and why do we need them. As in the previous chapters, the general discussion is followed by a focus on India. We discuss one by one the Fundamental Rights in the Indian Constitution. Then we turn to how these rights can be used by ordinary citizens. Who will protect and enforce them? Finally we take a look at how the scope of rights has been expanding. Reprint 2025-26 5.1 LIFE witHoUT RIGHTS In this book we have mentioned rights again and again. If you remember, we have discussed rights in each of the four preceding chapters. Can you fill in the blanks by recalling the rights dimension in each chapter? Chapter 1: A comprehensive definition of democracy includes ... Chapter 2: Our Constitution makers believed that fundamental rights a we a i ' ear. Mr Tony Blair, Firstly, how are you?:].sent a>: letter two years ago, why didn t you.reply?!? J Was waiting for a Tong time but you did not reply.> Please Can you give me an answer to my question? Why is my dad in prison? Why is he far away in that Guantanamo Bay?! J miss my dad so MUCH. I have notseen my dad for three years:.] Know my dad has not done anything, because he.is_a good man. J hear everybody speak about my dad in a nice way. Your Children spend Christmas With you, but me_and my brothers, and sisters have Spent Eid alone without our dad for 3 years. What do you think about that? ; Lhope you,will answer me this. : time. Thank you, From: Anas Jamil El-Banna, 9 years Old. 7112/2005 > DeEmMocraATIC RIGHTS Reprint 2025-26 were quite central to the Constitution because ... Chapter 3: Every adult citizen of India has the right to ... and to be... Chapter 4: If a law is against the Constitution, every citizen has the right to approach ... Let us now begin with three examples of what it means to live in the absence of rights. Prison in Guantanamo Bay