power through democratic elections. This was one of the worst instances of killings based on ethnic prejudices in recent times. Finally several other countries intervened to stop this massacre. Milosevic lost power and was tried by the International Court of Justice for crimes against humanity. ACTIVITY = Write a letter to Anas Jamil in UK, describing your reactions after reading his letter to Tony For each of the three cases of life without rights, mention an example from India. These could include the following: = Newspaper reports on custodial violence. = Newspaper reports on force-feeding of prisoners who go on hunger strike. = Ethnic massacre in any part of our country. = Reports regarding unequal treatment of women. List the similarities and differences between the earlier case and the Indian example. Itis not necessary that for each of these cases you must find an exact Indian parallel. 5.2 RIGHTS IN A DEMOGRAGY Think of all the examples that we have discussed so far. Think of the victims in each example: the prisoners in Guantanamo Bay, women in Saudi Arabia, Albanians in Kosovo. If you were in their position, what would you have wished? If you could, what would you do to ensure that such things do not happen to anyone? You would perhaps desire a system where security, dignity and fair play are assured to everyone. You might want, for example, that no one should be arrested without proper reason and information. And if someone is arrested, he or she should have a fair chance to defend themselves. You might agree that such assurance cannot apply to DeEmMocraATIC RIGHTS Reprint 2025-26 everything. One has to be reasonable in what one expects and demands of everyone else, for one has to grant the same to everyone. But you might insist that the assurance does not remain on paper, that there is someone to enforce these assurances, that those who violate these are punished. In other words, you might want a system where at least a minimum is guaranteed to everyone powerful or weak, rich or poor, majority or minority. This is the spirit behind thinking about rights. What are rights? Rights are claims of a person over other fellow beings, over the society and over the government. All of us want to live happily, without fear and without being subjected to degraded treatment. For this we expect others to behave in such a way that does not harm us or hurt us. Equally, our actions should not also harm or hurt others. So a right is possible when you make a claim that is equally possible for others. You cannot have a right that harms or hurts others. You cannot have a right to play a game in such a way that it breaks the neighbour s window. The Serbs in Yugoslavia could not have claimed the whole country for themselves. The claims we make should be reasonable. They should be such that can be made available to others in an