united by cultural practices, religious beliefs and historical memories. Traffic: Selling and buying of men, women or children for immoral purposes. Summon: An order issued by a court asking a person to appear before it. Writ: A formal document containing an order of the court to the government issued only by High Court or the Supreme Court. DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 Which of the following is not an instance of an exercise of a fundamental right? a Workers from Bihar go to the Punjab to work on the farms b Christian missions set up a chain of missionary schools c Men and women government employees get the same salary d Parents property is inherited by their children Which of the following freedoms is not available to an Indian citizen? a Freedom to criticise the government b Freedom to participate in armed revolution c Freedom to start a movement to change the government d Freedom to oppose the central values of the Constitution Which of the following rights is available under the Indian Constitution? a Right to work b Right to adequate livelihood c Right to protect one s culture d Right to privacy Name the Fundamental Right under which each of the following rights falls: a Freedom to propagate one s religion b Right to life c Abolition of untouchability d Ban on bonded labour Which of these statements about the relationship between democracy and rights is more valid? Give reasons for your preference. a Every country that is a democracy gives rights to its citizens. b Every country that gives rights to its citizens is a democracy. c Giving rights is good, but it is not necessary for a democracy. Are these restrictions on the right to freedom justified? Give reasons for your answer. a Indian citizens need permission to visit some border areas of the country for reasons of security. b Outsiders are not allowed to buy property in some areas to protect the interest of the local population. c The government bans the publication of a book that can go against the ruling party in the next elections. Manoj went to a college to apply for admission into an MBA course. The clerk refused to take his application and said You, the son of a sweeper, wish to be a manager! Has anyone done this job in your community? Go to the municipality office and apply for a sweeper s position . Which of Manoj s fundamental rights are being violated in this instance? Spell these out in a letter from Manoj to the district collector. DeEmMocraATIC RIGHTS 89 Reprint 2025-26 8 When Madhurima went to the property registration office, the Registrar told her, You can t write your name as Madhurima Banerjee d/oA. K. Banerjee. You are married, so you must give your husband s name. Your husband s surname is Rao. So your name should be changed to Madhurima Rao. She did not agree. She said If my husband s name has not changed after