the district, from agriculture, housing, maintenance of roads, management of water resources, education, health care and social welfare to cultural activities. Gram Panchayat Let us begin with the base of Fig. 11.1 on page 164 the Gram Panchayat, which is closest to the people in rural areas. Its members are elected directly by the Gram Sabha, whichis | a group of adults from a village (or group of neighbouring villages) who are enrolled as voters. In the Gram Sabha, women and men discuss all matters related to their area and take decisions. Each Gram Panchayat elects a head or president called the Sarpanch or Pradhan . In recent years, more and more women have become Sarpanchs. 11 Grassroots Democracy - Part 2 Reprint 2025-26 chapter11_310125.indd 165 & 03-02-2025 05:03:18 | Exemplary Sarpanchs Dnyaneshwar Kamble is a transgender person who was elected Sarpanch of Tarangfal village in the Solapur district of Maharashtra in 2017. Kamble s motto is lok seva, gram seva, that is, Service to the village is service to the public. Kamble defeated six other 4 candidates to become the Sarpanch. fe S Vandana Bahadur Maida, re , 7 a member of the Bhil \ community from the village of Khankhandvi in Madhya Pradesh, defied patriarchal norms to become the first female Sarpanch of her village. She convinced women in the village to attend the Sabha meetings and addressed critical issues like education and sanitation, @ earning recognition far and_ wide. Vandana s journey shows how women can play a leading role in transforming & rural India. Hiware Bazar, a village in Ahmednagar district of Maharashtra, used to be affected by frequent droughts and poor agricultural yield. After Popatrao Baguji Pawar became its Sarpanch, he started applying Anna Hazare s model of rainwater harvesting, watershed conservation and massive tree planting of lakhs of trees, all of which contributed to the recharge of groundwater. With the collaboration of the villagers, Hiware Bazar became a green and prosperous village in a few years. Shri Popatrao Pawar was awarded the Padma Shri in 2020. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy Reprint 2025-26 chapter11_310125.indd 166 & 03-02-2025 05:02:19 | The Gram Panchayat is assisted by a | Panchayat Secretary who performs , administrative functions such as calling meetings and maintaining records. Most Gram Panchayats are also assisted by an officer called Patwari in many parts of India, who maintains the villagers land records. In some cases, the Patwari keeps maps that are generations old! vy THINK ABOUT IT How do you think can these old maps be helpful for us? | Can they tell us something about the past and the present? Child-Friendly Panchayat Initiative Panchayats are supposed to listen to everyone s voice including the voice of children. The Child-Friendly Panchayat Initiative creates opportunities for children to express their ideas and opinions on matters that concern their wellbeing. Steps are being taken in several States to encourage the participation of children in Bal Sabhas and Bal Panchayats on a regular