think can these old maps be helpful for us? | Can they tell us something about the past and the present? Child-Friendly Panchayat Initiative Panchayats are supposed to listen to everyone s voice including the voice of children. The Child-Friendly Panchayat Initiative creates opportunities for children to express their ideas and opinions on matters that concern their wellbeing. Steps are being taken in several States to encourage the participation of children in Bal Sabhas and Bal Panchayats on a regular basis, while village elders try to find solutions to their concerns. In Maharashtra, for example, a few Bal Panchayats have worked to eliminate child labour and child marriage. They have brought many children back to school. The Bal Panchayat members get together to convince parents and other adults to send their wards back to school, and not to arrange marriages for girls who should be studying. Several Gram Panchayats have won awards for taking child-friendly initiatives. Here s an example from Sikkim: 11 Grassroots Democracy - Part 2 Sangkhu Radhu Khandu Gram Panchayat, in west Sikkim, has given a lot of importance to children s needs and rights. e Reprint 2025-26 chapter11_310125.indd 167 & 03-02-2025 05:09:19 | Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy chapter11_310125.indd 168 The Panchayat has built compound walls for schools to make them safer for children. To ensure that students get hygienically cooked midday meals, the Gram Panchayat has constructed kitchens in the schools. It is for these efforts that Sangkhu Radhu Khandu has been declared a childfriendly Gram Panchayat. Let us also look at another example from Rajasthan: The Children s Parliament , an offshoot of Bunker Roy s Barefoot College initiative a few decades ago, empowered underprivileged children in Rajasthan s rural areas through education and democratic participation. Children aged 8 to 14 are engaged in governance processes, learning about democracy and social responsibility through night schools and parliament-like elections. The Parliament followed formal procedures, including voter ID cards and campaigning. Elected representatives formed a Cabinet , overseeing school management and advocating for community needs. The initiative fostered leadership skills and social awareness, enabling children to challenge societal norms and advocate for change. Children actively addressed issues such as access to education, sanitation and Ep w . Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:03:20 | social equality, contributing to community development.The Children s Parliament initiative received many accolades, including the World s Children s Honorary Award in 2001. LET'S EXPLORE As aclass activity, let four or five students form a Bal Panchayat and the rest of the class imagine they are the villagers. What issues will the Gram Sabha discuss? What challenges could it encounter? What solutions will it propose? Panchayat Samiti and Zila Parishad Similar institutions exist at the block level and the district level, which are above the village level. Their names are listed in the pyramidal diagram we saw in Fig. 11.1 on page 164. The Panchayat Samiti at the block level is the link between the Gram Panchayat and the Zila Parishad