the class imagine they are the villagers. What issues will the Gram Sabha discuss? What challenges could it encounter? What solutions will it propose? Panchayat Samiti and Zila Parishad Similar institutions exist at the block level and the district level, which are above the village level. Their names are listed in the pyramidal diagram we saw in Fig. 11.1 on page 164. The Panchayat Samiti at the block level is the link between the Gram Panchayat and the Zila Parishad at the district level. The members of these institutions are elected by the local people, but they may have other members like Sarpanchs of the villages in the area and local members of the State Legislative Assembly. The composition of the Panchayat Samitis differs from State to State, but their role in strengthening the participation of local people remains the same. They coordinate matters across Gram Panchayats, for instance, by collecting development plans from all Gram Panchayats and putting them together to present them at the District or State levels respectively. This facilitates the allotment of funds for such development projects and for government schemes such as the Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana, which promotes the construction of all-weather roads in rural areas. At all the three levels, special rules have been made so that disadvantaged sections of the population can make their needs and problems heard. These institutions also have a provision for reserving one-third of the seats for women. 11 Grassroots Democracy - Part 2 Reprint 2025-26 chapter11_310125.indd 169 & 03-02-2025 05:09:20 | Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy chapter11_310125.indd 170 IS vv THINK ABOUT IT Why do you think it is important for the government to pay more attention to the needs and problems of the disadvantaged sections of society? LET'S EXPLORE > Whatsimilarities and differences do you notice between the governance system at the Central level and at the Panchayat level? (Hint: refer back to Chapter 10 if required.) > Ifyou get an opportunity to meet a few Panchayat members, what questions would you like to ask them? Discuss in small groups to create a questionnaire. Meet some Gram Panchayat members or invite them to your school. Ask them the questions in your questionnaire and write a short report. Let us remember that the structure and functions of the Panchayati Raj institutions differ a little across States. This is because the States have authority over those institutions. But their objectives are the same it is to enable villagers to take an active part in the management and development of their villages and the local area. ears ago. Bes be structured and run, figw the economy can be _ made prosperous, what the duties of the ruler are and | Ne how to conduct war. Be autilya, an expert in statecraft, also wie Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:03:21 | ed The king shall establish a sangrahana (a sub-district head quarters) for every 10 villages; a kdrvatika (district headquarters) for every 100 villages; a dronamukha for every