Grassroots Democracy - Part 2 Local Government in Rural Areas The real India lives in its villages. M.K. Gandhi Let us now see how the government functions at the local level. In this chapter, our focus will be on local government in rural areas; we will move to urban areas in the next chapter. India is a country of enormous size and diversity. We have about 600,000 villages, 8,000 towns and over 4,000 cities. Our population has crossed 1.4 billion, almost two-thirds of which live in rural areas. How do we govern ourselves in this complex society? Let us take a trip to Lakshmanpur, a small village in the foothills of the Himalayas. It has 200 houses and a population of about 700, most of whom are farmers. People cultivate VILLAG Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy | chapter11_310125.indd 164 their lands and rear cows or goats. Some have relatives serving in the armed forces; a few younger villagers have migrated to the city in search of jobs. What are the needs of this village maybe water for the fields, repairing the main road if it got damaged by heavy rains, or maintaining the village s primary school? How will the villagers take decisions about such matters that affect their daily lives? And where will they get the resources to meet those needs? What will happen if there is a dispute about land or if some of the crop is stolen? Many such questions can arise in a village. Can people run to the State or the national capital for every such issue? Panchayati Raj System Like every village in India, the Lakshmanpur people have a system of local government called Panchayat , which refers to a village council. Panchayats bring governance closer to the people, making it possible for them to actively participate in decision-making processes. That is why the Panchayat system, also known as Panchayati Raj, is a form of self-government. Panchayats play a vital role in addressing local issues, promoting development and ensuring that the benefits of government schemes reach the grassroots level. DISTRICT PANCHAYAT/ DISTRICT LEVEL ZILA PARISHAD BLOCK PANCHAYAT / BLOCK LEVEL PANCHAYAT SAMITI / MANDAL PARISHAD VILLAGE PARISHAD / GRAM PANCHAYAT E LEVEL Fig. 11.1 Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:03:16 | As is clear from the diagram, the Panchayati Raj system works at three levels from bottom up the village, the block and the district. This is called a three-tier system . Together, these institutions responsibilities cover almost all aspects of life in the district, from agriculture, housing, maintenance of roads, management of water resources, education, health care and social welfare to cultural activities. Gram Panchayat Let us begin with the base of Fig. 11.1 on page 164 the Gram Panchayat, which is closest to the people in rural areas. Its members are elected directly by the Gram Sabha, whichis | a group of adults from a village (or group of neighbouring villages) who are enrolled as voters. In the Gram Sabha, women