spared the house of Mohandas Parekh, a charitable man. He sacked Surat again after a few years. These events became so famous that they appeared in the London Gazette, an English newspaper of the time, which conveyed how Shivaji wrote to all European diplomatic agents in Surat, demanding immediate presents of money , failing which he would return and ruin that city . The sacking of Surat was a great insult to the might and prestige of the Mughal Empire. Therefore, Aurangzeb sent Jai Singh, a distinguished Rajput general, to defeat Shivaji. Against him, Shivaji had to concede defeat at Purandar Fort (near Pune) and enter into a treaty. He had to give up a sizeable part of his kingdom, and his son Sambhaji had to enter Mughal service. Chapter 3.indd 67 Shivaji was persuaded by Jai Singh to visit the Mughal court at Agra, where he was made to stand before Aurangzeb, and a Mughal general whom he had defeated earlier. Incensed at this insult, Shivaji stormed out of the court, following which Aurangzeb put him under house arrest. To escape this, Shivaji devised a strategy he started distributing gifts to holy men and Mughal generals. The gifts often contained fruits and sweets, packed in big baskets. The guards initially checked them, but soon stopped doing so; expecting this, Shivaji and his son Sambhaji hid themselves in the baskets and made their escape. Aurangzeb could never capture Shivaji again. (panel in Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj Park, Mumbai) A few years later, in 1674, Shivaji was coronated with full Vedic rites at the strong mountain fortress of Raigad. His formal title after the coronation was Shri Raja Shiva Chhatrapati , and like some past rulers, he started his own era, the Rajyabhisheka shaka. After this, Shivaji embarked upon a conquest of the South, also referred to as the dakshina-digvijaya, which included the important and then ill-defended region of present-day northern Tamil Nadu and parts of Karnataka (see map in Fig. 3.9). This southern extension later gave the Marathas great strategic depth against the Mughal invasion. 3 - The Rise of the Marathas Tapestry of the Past 05-07-2025 17:26:05 = Fig. 3.9. Shivaji s Kingdom about 1680 (Ekoji s role is explained later in Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 the chapter). DON T MISS OUT While in the South, Shivaji forbade the Dutch from trading slaves. At the time, most Europeans were capturing and selling Indians as slaves and encountered no opposition from Indian powers, until Shivaji intervened. His stance on this abuse showed his deep concern for his subjects. 72 E 76 E 80 E 20 N Sindhudurg 16 N Goa ARABIAN J BAY OF SEA . ooo BENGAL LEGEND m Territory under Shivaji Maharaj m Territory under Ekojji m= Foreign power * Hill fort * Coastal fort # Land fort @ City A Port River 12 N 0 100 200 km a | 8 N 72 E 76 E 80 E N 002 N o9L