a price; any ship without a pass was confiscated. The Marathas challenged this practice and started demanding passes from the Europeans themselves who showed their frustration by labelling Kanhoji Angre a pirate ! : Fig. 3.16. Some of the weapons explains, used by the Marathas. Tapestry of the Past 3 - The Rise of the Marathas 05-07-2025 17:26:09 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 MAHRATPA GRABS AND GALLIVATS ATTACKING AN ENGLISIL SUTP, [Prontispicce. (From @ picture in the possession of Sir Ernest Robinson.) Fig. 3.17. Maratha ships attacking English ships DON T MISS OUT In 1665, four ships from Shivaji s fleet reached Muscat, the capital of Oman. The ruler there captured them and arrested the men onboard. He also prepared a few ships to attack Shivaji s coastal possessions. But, on hearing that Shivaji s Navy contained more than a hundred ships, he retreated inside the harbour with his ships. Judicial system The Marathas had an efficient judicial system, remarkable for its moderation in using capital punishment (the death penalty). The panchayat (not to be confused with the currentday Panchayat, a governmental body) was a local gathering of officials and prominent men, and the main body that delivered justice. An appeal could be made to a Maratha chief in case of an unsatisfactory verdict. Additionally, in various prominent Chapter 3.indd 77 towns such as Pune, Indore, etc., the kotwal or the police was also deployed to ensure law and order within the city. Trade networks Shivaji encouraged trade and actively participated in maritime foreign trade himself. He and his officials had their own ships, which they regularly sent to ports as far away as Mocha in Yemen, Muscat in Oman, and Malacca in Malaysia. Some of these ships carried cargo like gold, textiles, etc. Roads were constructed and maintained. In places such as Odisha in the 18" century, a network of ferries was maintained for riverine transport. Bridges were built over rivers and small streams. CULTURAL REVIVAL The Marathas contributed substantially to India s cultural developments. Shivaji s vision of Swarajya is evident in his seal, which carried a Sanskrit inscription, a notable departure from the prevalent Persian seals This seal (i.e. authority) of Shivaji, the son of Shahji, waxing like the new moon, revered by the world, reigns for the welfare (of the people). Fig. 3.18. Shivaji s seal Shivaji also commissioned a treatise called Rdjya-VyavaharaKosha with the aim of promoting the Marathi language; it provided Sanskrit equivalents for the prevalent Persian words used in diplomatic exchanges, as a result of which, the percentage of foreign loanwords in Maratha diplomacy decreased considerably. Shivaji was a devout Hindu who respected other religions while upholding his own. His saffron-coloured flag was adopted by all Marathas. He rebuilt desecrated temples, promoted Sanskrit and Marathi literature, religious institutions, and traditional arts. But perhaps he contributed most to the revival of ancient Indian culture and values by giving people a demonstration that mighty kingdoms and empires could be defeated,