the resources of coastal regions, he felt the need to establish a navy. This was a truly revolutionary step at the time. By comparison, the Bijapur Sultanate (ruled by the Adil Shahi dynasty), maintained merchant ships but did not possess a fulltime naval force which could protect the coast; even the Mughal Empire s use of a navy was very limited. Thus, the Maratha Navy was born, whose exploits became legendary. To protect his people from powerful enemies, Shivaji had recourse to the tactic of guerrilla warfare, which uses small groups of people in a focused way, with speed, surprise, and knowledge of the terrain to defeat bigger armies. His successes soon invited the wrath of the Bijapur Sultanate, which sent the veteran general Afzal Khan to confront him. Shivaji and his advisers managed to convince Afzal Khan to meet him for a one-on-one meeting at the foot of the Pratapgad fort amid thick forests. There, Shivaji killed Afzal Khan, and the Marathas, hidden in the mountains, routed the Khan s army with guerrilla attacks. VY THINK ABOUT IT If you could time-travel and meet Shivaji, what three questions would you ask him and why? 2) <= ~ = = o <= ~ o 4 o = isa] Tapestry of the Past Surgical strike: A military attack intended to damage only a specific target, with no or minimal damage to other people or infrastructure. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 5 | DON'T MISS OUT The wagh nakh is a small weapon shaped like a tiger s claw, which Shivaji used to kill Afzal Khan in close combat. Fig. 3.7. Wagh nakh or the tiger s claw . Try to find out more about guerrilla warfare. Which other countries in the world adopted this method? What geographical advantages did they utilise for this? Discuss your findings in groups. Soon afterwards, the Mughal nobleman Shaista Khan invaded Shivaji s territories with a big army for three years. Finally, with only a few soldiers, Shivaji raided Shaista Khan s camp at night. The Khan barely escaped from the raid, losing a few fingers, and promptly left Maharashtra. This daring raid resembles the modern-day surgical strike. As a retaliatory action for the three-year-long wave of attacks, Shivaji sacked Surat, a wealthy port city of the Mughal Empire (in present-day Gujarat). There, he obtained enormous treasure worth almost one crore of rupees, an extremely large sum for the time. However, he was careful not to attack religious places and even spared the house of Mohandas Parekh, a charitable man. He sacked Surat again after a few years. These events became so famous that they appeared in the London Gazette, an English newspaper of the time, which conveyed how Shivaji wrote to all European diplomatic agents in Surat, demanding immediate presents of money , failing which he would return and ruin that city . The sacking of Surat was a great insult to the might and prestige of the Mughal Empire.