Maratha rule challenged Mughal dominance and established the largest Indian empire before the British took over the Subcontinent, controlling much of central and northern India. They set up a new way of governing with an efficient administration, and also revived the local Hindu traditions without religious discrimination. Their brave fight against oppressive rule and foreign power was driven by the fiery ideal of Swarajya. Later it inspired many Indians to believe they could govern themselves, planting the early seeds for India s freedom movement. Before we move on... > Chhatrapati Shivaji Maharaj founded the Maratha kingdom in the 17" century. Its decades-long resistance to Mughal power, and the experience gained from this, helped in its pan-Indian expansion in the 18" century. > The British captured India effectively from the Marathas more than from any other Indian power. +> Forts werethecore of Maratha state; the Marathas controlled hundreds of forts, thus strategically strengthening their control over the region. > Their formidable navy resisted European naval supremacy for quite some time despite lack of access to the latest technology of the time. > The Marathas inspired a new cultural confidence amongst Indians in various regions, thus contributing to the cultural revival and innovation. 3 - The Rise of the Marathas Tapestry of the Past Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Se Chapter 3.indd 82 Questions and activities 1. Analyse how geography (particularly mountains and coastlines) guided Maratha military strategy and state formation. Imagine you are creating a short biography of a Maratha leader for younger students. Choose one personality (Kanhoji Angre, Bajirao I, Mahadji Shinde, Ahilyabai Holkar or Tarabai) and write 3-4 paragraphs highlighting what makes them inspirational. Include at least one challenge they overcame. If you could visit one Maratha fort today (such as Raigad, Sindhudurg, Gingee, or Pratapgad), which would you choose and why? Research its history, architecture, and strategic importance. Present your findings as a digital presentation or a poster in class. The chapter states, The British took India from the Marathas more than from the Mughals or any other power. What do you think this means? What evidence from the chapter supports this idea? Compare how Shivaji and later Marathas treated religious places and people of different faiths. What evidence from the chapter shows their approach to religious diversity? The chapter describes how forts were the core of the state for Marathas. Why were they so important? How did they help the Marathas survive against larger enemies? You have been appointed as the chief designer for Maratha coins. Design a coin that represents Maratha achievements and values. Explain the symbols you chose. After this introduction to the Maratha period, what do you think was their most important contribution to Indian history? Write a paragraph supporting your opinion with examples from the chapter. Then share and discuss your ideas with classmates. 05-07-2025 17:26:12