intervened. His stance on this abuse showed his deep concern for his subjects. 72 E 76 E 80 E 20 N Sindhudurg 16 N Goa ARABIAN J BAY OF SEA . ooo BENGAL LEGEND m Territory under Shivaji Maharaj m Territory under Ekojji m= Foreign power * Hill fort * Coastal fort # Land fort @ City A Port River 12 N 0 100 200 km a | 8 N 72 E 76 E 80 E N 002 N o9L N o&L N 08 A fever claimed Shivaji s life when he was fifty. He was a master strategist anda true visionary, and within his lifetime, his exploits had become legendary across India and beyond. The Europeans compared him with ancient generals like Alexander, and the Bundela prince Chhatrasal was so inspired by Shivaji s struggle against the Mughals that he managed to create an independent kingdom of Bundelkhand (divided between present-day Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh). The famous Hindi poet Bhushan specifically came to Maharashtra to meet Shivaji and composed poems in his praise, some of which remain famous to this day. LET'S EXPLORE Pick an event from Shivaji s life and, with your classmates, stage it as a play. THE MARATHAS AFTER SHIVAJI Shivaji had two sons Sambhaji and Rajaram. After Shivaji s death, Sambhaji became the Chhatrapati. The Marathas were then the only obstacle to total Mughal control of the Deccan. Aurangzeb invaded the Deccan and conquered the Bijapur (or Adil Shahi) and Golconda (or Qutb Shahi) Sultanates. He then captured Sambhaji and, after torturing him brutally, executed him. After this, he captured Raigad, the Maratha capital. After Sambhaji, Rajaram became the Chhatrapati and fled to Gingee (in present-day Tamil Nadu). The Mughal-Maratha conflict thus spread to south India. The Marathas staunchly defended their fortresses and often had the upper hand over the Mughals in battles and skirmishes. Aurangzeb was thus unable to leave the Deccan and died without having succeeded in subduing the Marathas, who emerged as a strong contender to the Mughals. No longer on the defensive, the Marathas led by Tarabai, Rajaram s queen, made large-scale inroads into Mughal territories, eventually conquering large parts of India. During this rapid expansion, the Marathas themselves underwent a structural transformation. The centralised state from Shivaji s time gave way to a more decentralised structure, Tapestry of the Past 3 - The Rise of the Marathas Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Chapter 3.indd 70 still nominally centred around the Chhatrapati, but with the chiefs wielding more power. In particular, the Peshwa (a Persian term for prime minister ) wielded great influence, even over the Chhatrapati himself. In particular, Peshwa Bajirao I and his son Nanasaheb Peshwa were instrumental in the _ pan-Indian expansion of the Marathas. The Marathas brought large parts of India (Fig. 3.11) under their control and generally ruled them well. But with the regional chiefs acquiring more power and autonomy, this also resulted in occasional indiscipline and abuse, in stark