his successors. For instance, the Bhonsles of Nagpur emerged as the enthusiastic supporters of local culture and tradition, and the worship of the deity Jagannath at Puri (in Odisha), which was often interrupted during the Mughal rule, was revived with the support of the | Marathas. But perhaps the most impressive contribution came from a few remarkable Maratha women. Let us hear about two of them (see facing page). In focus: Thanjavur Let us turn southward to witness another example of cultural contribution. Ekojji, the half-brother of Shivaji, conquered the Thanjavur region (in present-day Tamil Nadu) in the late 17" century, marking the beginning of Maratha rule in the area. The Thanjavur Marathas 3 2 especially helped ciisate gold foil work that lends ita rich radiant appearance; 2 create a syncretic this style flourished under the patronage of the Marathas oa culture that was rich Eo and full of innovation. They were great patrons of the arts, and Ea many of the rulers themselves were poets and dramatists. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 U LETS EXPLORE Have you heard of the dance form Bharatnatyam ? Did you know that this dance form has a deep connection with the Marathas? Can you find out what this connection was? Of all the Thanjavur Maratha rulers, the contributions of Serfoji II are the most notable. He was well-versed in many Indian and European languages and wrote a Marathi play named Devendra Kuravani, where he describes world geography in detail as was known at the time. Serfoji patronised many talented musicians, and it was during his time that modern Carnatic music took shape, as did the early stages of the famous classical dance form of Bharatanatyam. Fig. 3.23. Marathi inscription on a wall of the Brihadishwara temple wall recording the history of the Bhonsle family. Serfoji was quite interested in medicine and established the Dhanwantari Mahal, a centre of medicine that offered free treatment of diseases using both Indian and Western medicine. He also started a printing press, the first such example in India by a native ruler. He got the history of the Bhonsle family inscribed on the walls of the Brihadishwara temple at Thanjavur, which is one of the largest single inscriptions in India, a record for posterity. The cultural environment of Thanjavur was multilingual, with a mix of many influences. The local Tamil culture, the Telugu culture of the former rulers, and the current rulers Marathi culture interacted with each other freely. The Maratha legacy The Maratha rule challenged Mughal dominance and established the largest Indian empire before the British took over the Subcontinent, controlling much of central and northern India. They set up a new way of governing with an efficient administration, and also revived the local Hindu traditions without religious discrimination. Their brave fight against oppressive rule and foreign power was driven by the fiery ideal of Swarajya. Later it inspired many Indians to believe they could govern themselves, planting the early seeds for