for his kingdom. He abolished the hereditary posts (generally practised under the Sultans or the Mughals) and land assignments and paid a salary to every government official out of the state treasury. Many officials were periodically transferred as well, ensuring that they would not have enough power to dictate terms to the king. Shivaji also gave pensions to widows of soldiers who died in battles, even offering military Fig. 3.13. Shivaji minted gold and copper posts to their sons, thus coins in his own name, signifying his . . sovereignty. The use of the Devanagari script demonstrating his care for the was also an assertion of his culturalidentity. soldiers and their families. Y THINK ABOUT IT Shivaji issued strict instructions to his officials not to mistreat the subjects or to forcefully grab even a blade of grass from them. In one of the letters issued to his officials, Shivaji says: Wood from big trees like teak is required for the Navy. If needed, secure permission for cutting the trees from the forest and then proceed. Other trees like the mango and jackfruit are also useful, but do not touch them. Because such trees take many years to mature, and the people look after them like their children. If you cut them, will their sorrow ever end? If you accomplish something by oppressing others, it perishes soon, along with the oppressor. There is harm in the absence of such trees as well. Therefore, do not use force in any circumstances. Based on Shivaji s letter, what can you tell about his values asa ruler? Shivaji also had an ashta pradhana mandala, or council of eight ministers (Fig. 3.14), to assist him with administration. Finance Prime Minister Land Revenue Minister Minister Intelligence Minister Minister for Head of Foreign Affairs Religious Affairs Commander-in-chief Nyayadhish Chief Justice Fig. 3.14. 3 - The Rise of the Marathas Tapestry of the Past Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 The Marathas often levied taxes called chauth (25 per cent) and sardeshmukhi (an additional 10 per cent to chauth) from provinces that were not directly under them, including places in the Deccan and north India. In return, the Marathas protected those provinces and did not intervene in their internal administration. The Mughals also approved of this arrangement through various treaties, and over time, some of these provinces became a part of the Maratha Empire. is, DON T MISS OUT In the 18" century, the Marathas often adopted the Mughal style of coinage owing to its popularity, but added their own cultural symbols to it. For instance, this rare Maratha coin known as the Ganapati-Pantapradhan rupee , minted in the early 19" century by the Patwardhans (generals under the Peshwa), features inscriptions in two scripts Devanagari and Persian. One | flake side is an _ invocation to G TEN . vie os Ganapati (Ganesha) while the id 2S =o other declares loyalty to the Peshwa (often referred to as Pantapradhar in Marathi). JAP * Military