its popularity, but added their own cultural symbols to it. For instance, this rare Maratha coin known as the Ganapati-Pantapradhan rupee , minted in the early 19" century by the Patwardhans (generals under the Peshwa), features inscriptions in two scripts Devanagari and Persian. One | flake side is an _ invocation to G TEN . vie os Ganapati (Ganesha) while the id 2S =o other declares loyalty to the Peshwa (often referred to as Pantapradhar in Marathi). JAP * Military administration The Maratha armed forces were divided into three parts infantry, cavalry and navy. The cavalry was made up of two types of soldiers the bargirs, whose horses and equipment were paid for by the state, and the shiledars, whose horses and equipment were paid for by the soldiers themselves. In the 18" century, the Marathas also noticed the superiority of Europeanstyle disciplined troops and artillery, and they tried to raise and recruit such troops. In particular, Mahadji Shinde had a large European-style army. Swords and lances were the preferred weapons of the Marathas (Fig. 3.16). However, they also used guns in sizable numbers. Rockets were used in military campaigns from the days of Shivaji himself, and by 1770, metal tube rockets were also being used. Chapter 3.indd 75 As we saw earlier, forts were initially the mainstay of Maratha power. Shivaji controlled and built a considerable number of forts, as they were essential to strategically control important routes and shelter the army when engaging in guerrilla warfare. Ramachandrapant Amatya, the finance minister of Shivaji, in his work Adnyapatra ( The Royal Edict ) gets devastated in the face of an invasion. Therefore, all the former kings secured the country by building forts. This kingdom (Maratha kingdom) was created by the late great master [Shivaji] from forts alone... A great enemy like Aurangzeb invaded [this kingdom], conquered great empires like Bijapur and Bhaganagar [... but] it was due to forts that the [Maratha] state survived despite decades of onslaught. C C Forts are the core of thestate. In their absence, the land Maritime supremacy As we saw, Shivaji created a navy to secure the west coast. In the 18" century, Kanhoji Angre guided the Marathas to victory in many naval battles, thanks to a clever use of geography and battle tactics, despite the Maratha ships not being as technologically advanced as the European ones. At the time, the main strength of Europeans in India was their navies. They forced Indians to purchase their naval trade passes (cartaz in Portuguese) at a price; any ship without a pass was confiscated. The Marathas challenged this practice and started demanding passes from the Europeans themselves who showed their frustration by labelling Kanhoji Angre a pirate ! : Fig. 3.16. Some of the weapons explains, used by the Marathas. Tapestry of the Past 3 - The Rise of the Marathas 05-07-2025 17:26:09 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 MAHRATPA GRABS AND GALLIVATS ATTACKING AN ENGLISIL SUTP, [Prontispicce. (From @ picture