chiefs wielding more power. In particular, the Peshwa (a Persian term for prime minister ) wielded great influence, even over the Chhatrapati himself. In particular, Peshwa Bajirao I and his son Nanasaheb Peshwa were instrumental in the _ pan-Indian expansion of the Marathas. The Marathas brought large parts of India (Fig. 3.11) under their control and generally ruled them well. But with the regional chiefs acquiring more power and autonomy, this also resulted in occasional indiscipline and abuse, in stark contrast with Shivaji s values. For instance, the Marathas ten-year campaign in Fig. 3.10. Chhatrapati Shahu Maharaj (Sambhaji s son, seated right and sporting a falcon, in counsel with Nanasaheb Peshwa Bengal inflicted much cruelty and devastation on the common people. In their northward expansion, the Marathas briefly controlled the areas of Lahore, Attock and even Peshawar (in modern-day Pakistan). They fought with the Afghans, and despite suffering a disastrous defeat at Panipat in 1761, they quickly recovered during the time of Peshwa Madhavrao I. Under the leadership of Mahadji Shinde (also known as Mahadji Scindia), they went on to recapture Delhi in 1771, which remained under their control till the British captured it three decades later. In the latter half of the 18" century, the chief rivals of the British in India were the Marathas. Three Anglo-Maratha wars (as they are called) were fought between 1775 and 1818. Owing to the Marathas increased internal disunity and the superior organisational and technological abilities of the British, they succeeded in ending the Maratha power. In effect, the British took India from the Marathas more than from the Mughals or any other power. 05-07-2025 17:26:08 30 N 20 N 10 N LEGEND ! Maratha Empire (including tributary states) @ City ruled by Marathas and allies Cities under other rulers: Other Indian rulers British 7O E French Portuguese River 80 E 90 E Fig. 3.11. The extent of the Maratha empire in 1759. N 002 N oOL 3 - The Rise of the Marathas Tapestry of the Past Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 \<), DON T MISS OUT Did you know that Nana Phadnavis, a powerful official under the Peshwas, is credited with organising the first pan-Indian anti-British alliance? He even united with old adversaries like Hyder Ali of Mysore and the Nizam of Hyderabad in this endeavour. Fig. 3.12. A mural of a British officer surrendering before Nana Phadnavis and Mahadji Shinde after the first Anglo-Maratha war. MARATHA ADMINISTRATION Civilian administration Shivaji instituted a relatively centralised administration for his kingdom. He abolished the hereditary posts (generally practised under the Sultans or the Mughals) and land assignments and paid a salary to every government official out of the state treasury. Many officials were periodically transferred as well, ensuring that they would not have enough power to dictate terms to the king. Shivaji also gave pensions to widows of soldiers who died in battles, even offering military Fig. 3.13. Shivaji minted gold and copper posts to their sons, thus