in diplomatic exchanges, as a result of which, the percentage of foreign loanwords in Maratha diplomacy decreased considerably. Shivaji was a devout Hindu who respected other religions while upholding his own. His saffron-coloured flag was adopted by all Marathas. He rebuilt desecrated temples, promoted Sanskrit and Marathi literature, religious institutions, and traditional arts. But perhaps he contributed most to the revival of ancient Indian culture and values by giving people a demonstration that mighty kingdoms and empires could be defeated, and the Marathas could maintain, expand and administer an empire of their own. 3 - The Rise of the Marathas Tapestry of the Past 05-07-2025 17:26:09 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Chapter 3.indd 78 The mighty Maratha women Fig. 3.19. Tarabai in battle (painting by M.V. Dhurandhar) Tarabai was a fearless Maratha warrior queen who ruled in the early 18" century after the death of her husband Rajaram. Realising that with the presence of Aurangzeb and the Mughal army in the Deccan, north India was unprotected, she organised large Maratha armies and sent them to invade Mughal territories in the north. In that sense, she was the architect of the northward Maratha expansion. Her sense of military strategy and her tenacity outsmarted the Mughal Empire and_ preserved Maratha independence during a critical period. Ahilyabai Holkar was a scion of the Holkar dynasty, one of the chief families instrumental for the Maratha expansion in north India; during the 18" century, this dynasty ruled a kingdom of considerable extentin central India, around present-day Indore. Even after losing her husband and son, she bravely governed the state for thirty years, administering it wisely while caring for the common people. Ahilyabai was a devout person who built and restored hundreds of temples, ghats, wells, and roads throughout India, from Kedarnath in the north to Rameswaram in the south. Most famously, she rebuilt the Kashi Vishwanath temple in Varanasi that had been destroyed by Aurangzeb and the Somnath temple in Gujarat that had been destroyed by Mahmud of Ghazni. Ahilyabai Holkar is also credited with promoting the Maheshwar weaving industry in Madhya Pradesh, revitalising traditional handloom crafts that continue to thrive today. atfeeurar Bley AHILYABAI HOLKAR P96 Fig. 3.20. A postage stamp commemorating Ahilyabai Holkar 05-07-2025 17:26:10 /<> DON T MISS OUT The Modi script (a cursive form of Devanagari) was the main script used by Marathas for their Fig. 3.21. A sample of Chhatrapati Shahu correspondence. Maharaj s handwriting in the Modi script Shivaji s example continued to inspire his successors. For instance, the Bhonsles of Nagpur emerged as the enthusiastic supporters of local culture and tradition, and the worship of the deity Jagannath at Puri (in Odisha), which was often interrupted during the Mughal rule, was revived with the support of the | Marathas. But perhaps the most impressive contribution came from a few remarkable Maratha women. Let us hear about two of them (see facing page). In focus: Thanjavur Let us turn southward to witness another example