ever heard the term bhakti ? What does it mean to you? Choose a bhakti saint from any part of India and learn about their life, their teachings, and the message they shared. You can also find one of their poems or bhajans and share it with your classmates. 3 - The Rise of the Marathas Tapestry of the Past Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Jagir: Ajdagir was a piece of land given bya king or ruler to someone (usually a noble or soldier) asa reward for their service. The person who got the jagir could collect taxes from the land and use the money to take care of their needs or help the king when needed. Chapter 3.indd 64 In Maharashtra, many saints like Dnyaneshwar, Namdev, Tukaram, Ramdas, etc., gained popularity at this time. They helped translate important texts like the Upanishads and the Bhagavad Gita into Marathi, making their philosophy accessible to the people. Some also focused on social organisation and political awareness, similar to the Sikh gurus. As a result, the society acquired a solid cultural foundation, which later helped the Marathas to organise themselves into a political power. By the 17" century, some Maratha chiefs made early attempts at establishing sovereignty, but they proved unsuccessful until Shivaji rose to power and brought the Marathas together. But who was Shivaji? FOUNDATION OF MARATHA POWER AND THE RISE OF SHIVAJI In 1630, Shivaji was born in the Bhonsle clan to Shahji and Jijabai. At the time, Shahji served the Deccan sultanates and was often away from his family. Meanwhile, in his jagir at Pune, Shivaji grew up under the watchful eyes of Jijabai and some trusted officials, receiving values and a good education. At this time, the Pune region was deeply affected by constant infighting between the Deccan sultans whom the Marathas served, which caused much Fig. 3.5. A painting of Shivaji made hardshipforthecommonpeople. _ e 1680s (British Museum) When he was just 16, Shivaji launched military campaigns, first consolidating his hold over the Pune region by capturing neglected and unoccupied forts and strengthening their defences. His vision of a sovereign kingdom or Swarajya grew over the years, extending to political, economic and cultural aspects, which we will explore in this chapter. 05-07-2025 17:26:02 se i f; 6 Fig. 3.6. The Sindhudurg Fort near the Maharashtra-Goa border is one of the several naval fortifications built by the Marathas. Shivaji s kingdom soon expanded to India s west coast, and to secure access to the resources of coastal regions, he felt the need to establish a navy. This was a truly revolutionary step at the time. By comparison, the Bijapur Sultanate (ruled by the Adil Shahi dynasty), maintained merchant ships but did not possess a fulltime naval force which could protect the coast; even the Mughal Empire s use of a navy was very limited. Thus, the Maratha Navy was born, whose exploits became legendary. To protect his people from powerful enemies, Shivaji had