next day sent to the guillotine. Compare the views of Desmoulins and Robespierre. How does each one understand the use of state force? What does Robespierre mean by the war of liberty against tyranny ? How does Desmoulins perceive liberty? Refer once more to Source C. What did the constitutional laws on the rights of individuals lay down? Discuss your views on the subject in class. 6 Reprint 2025-26 New words Treason Betrayal of one s country or government Source D What is liberty? Two conflicting views: The revolutionary journalist Camille Desmoulins wrote the following in 1793. He was executed shortly after, during the Reign of Terror. Some people believe that Liberty is like a child, which needs to go through a phase of being disciplined before it attains maturity. Quite the opposite. Liberty is Happiness, Reason, Equality, Justice, it is the Declaration of Rights ... You would like to finish off all your enemies by guillotining them. Has anyone heard of something more senseless? Would it be possible to bring a single person to the scaffold without making ten more enemies among his relations and friends? On 7 February 1794, Robespierre made a _ speech at the _ Convention, which was then carried by the newspaper Le Moniteur Universel. Here is an extract from it: To establish and consolidate democracy, to achieve the peaceful rule of constitutional laws, we must first finish the war of liberty against tyranny .... We must annihilate the enemies of the republic at home and abroad, or else we shall perish. In time of Revolution a democratic government may rely on terror. Terror is nothing but justice, swift, severe and inflexible; ... and is used to meet the most urgent needs of the fatherland. To curb the enemies of Liberty through terror is the right of the founder of the Republic. Aba eR Ay Ava A BF Oa bb Rl dnb NTA ry ih ul RAL a ia) Fig.77 The revolutionary government sought to mobilise the loyalty of its subjects through various means one of the aura of a hallowed history. The pavilion on the raised platform in the middle carried by classical columns was made of perishable material that could be dismantled. Describe the groups of people, their clothes, their roles and actions. What impression of a revolutionary festival does this image convey? them was the staging of festivals like this one. Symbols from civilisations of ancient Greece and Rome were used to convey 3.2 A Directory Rules France ~ us 2 The fall of the Jacobin government allowed the wealthier middle classes to seize power. A new constitution was introduced which denied the vote to non-propertied sections of society. It provided for two elected legislative councils. These then appointed a Directory, an executive made up of five members. This was meant as a safeguard against the concentration of power in a one-man executive as under the Jacobins. However, the Directors often clashed with the legislative councils, who then sought to dismiss them.