of bread rose, often bakers exploited the situation and hoarded supplies. After spending hours in long queues at the bakery, crowds of angry women stormed into the shops. At the same time, the king ordered troops to move into Paris. On 14 July, the agitated crowd stormed and destroyed the Bastille. In the countryside rumours spread from village to village that the lords of the manor had hired bands of brigands who were on their way to destroy the ripe crops. Caught in a frenzy of fear, peasants in several districts seized hoes and pitchforks and attacked chateaux. They looted hoarded grain and burnt down documents containing records of manorial dues. A large number of nobles fled from their homes, many of them migrating to neighbouring countries. Faced with the power of his revolting subjects, Louis XVI finally accorded recognition to the National Assembly and accepted the principle that his powers would from now on be checked by a constitution. On the night of 4 August 1789, the Assembly passed a decree abolishing the feudal system of obligations and taxes. Members of the clergy too were forced to give up their privileges. Tithes were abolished and lands owned by the Church were confiscated. As a result, the government acquired assets worth at least 2 billion livres. Reprint 2025-26 Mediterranean Regions not affected by the Great Fear Areas of agrarian revolt early 1789 Epicentres of main panic movements ~W The spread of the Great Fear Fig.6 The spread of the Great Fear. The map shows how bands of peasants spread from one point to another. New words Chateau (pl. chateaux) Castle or stately residence belonging to a king or a nobleman Manor An estate consisting of the lord s lands and his mansion = lo) oe > lo) > CP) [a4 = YY = CP) es The To c= S e = lo) a S u Y i= UO cP) = ~ To i= a) Pe mo} iS 2.1 France Becomes a Constitutional Monarchy The National Assembly completed the draft of the constitution in 1791. Its main object was to limit the powers of the monarch. These powers instead of being concentrated in the hands of one person, were now separated and assigned to different institutions the legislature, executive and judiciary. This made France a constitutional monarchy. Fig. 7 explains how the new political system worked. Judiciary Executive Legislature CONTROL Judge King > National Assembly (745 members) /\ RS Z\ VOTE of Ministers Electors (50,000 men) maAaA0o< Z\ VOTE *, fi Active citizens: entitled to vote. About 4 million of a fh n i population of 28 million fh PAAR ih Passive citizens: no voting rights. About 3 million men a (Ce ao By \ Women, children and youth below 25. fel th Rea Fig.7 The Political sytstem under the Constitution of 1797. The Constitution of 1791 vested the power to make laws in the National Assembly, which was indirectly elected. That is, citizens voted for a group of electors, who