law. Marat commented in his newspaper 11. Every citizen may speak, write and print L Ami du peuple (The friend of the people) on the Constitution drafted by the National Assembly: The task of representing the people has been given to the rich ... the lot of the poor and oppressed will never be improved by peaceful means alone. Here we have absolute proof of how wealth influences the law. Yet laws will last only as long as the people agree to obey them. And when they have managed to cast off the yoke of the aristocrats, they will do the same to the other owners of wealth. Source: An extract from the newspaper L Ami du peuple. Reprint 2025-26 freely; he must take responsibility for the abuse of such liberty in cases determined by the law. 12. For the maintenance of the public force and for the expenses of administration a common tax is indispensable; it must be assessed equally on all citizens in proportion to their means. 17. Since property is a sacred and inviolable right, no one may be deprived of it, unless a legally established public necessity requires it. In that case a just compensation must be given in advance. = lo) oe > lo) > CP) [a4 a YY = CP) es The To e = (=) [oe = u ~ i= UO cP) fo ens) To i= a] Pe mo} iS _ Box 1 Reading political symbols The majority of men and women in the eighteenth century could not read or write. So images and symbols were frequently used instead of printed words to communicate important ideas. The painting by Le Barbier (Fig. 8) uses many such symbols to convey the content of the Declaration of Rights. Let us try to read these symbols. The broken chain: Chains were used to fetter slaves. A broken chain stands for the act of becoming free. The bundle of rods or fasces: One rod can be easily broken, but not an entire bundle. Strength lies in unity. s 7 = am \ wv, The eye within a triangle radiating light: The all / Oy seeing eye stands for knowledge. The rays of the sun y eae will drive away the clouds of ignorance. Sceptre: Symbol of royal power. Snake biting its tail to form a ring: Symbol of Eternity. A ring has neither beginning nor end. Reprint 2025-26 Red Phrygian cap: Cap worn by a slave upon becoming free. Blue-white-red: The 1. Identify the symbols in Box 1 which stand for liberty, equality and fraternity. i) Explain the meaning of the painting of the Declaration of Rights of Man and Citizen (Fig. 8) by reading only the symbols. [e) . Compare the political rights which the Constitution of 1791 gave to the citizens with Articles 1 and 6 of the Declaration (Source C). Are the two documents consistent? Do the two documents convey . i ? The winged woman: the same idea Personification of the law. KR