saw Napoleon as a liberator who would bring freedom for the people. But soon the Napoleonic armies came to be viewed everywhere as an invading force. He was finally defeated at Waterloo in 1815. Many of his measures that carried the revolutionary ideas of liberty and modern laws to other parts of Europe had an impact on people long after Napoleon had left. The ideas of liberty and democratic rights were the most important legacy of the French Revolution. These spread from France to the rest of Europe during the nineteenth century, where feudal systems Reprint 2025-26 Fig.17 Napoleon crossing the Alps, painting by David. were abolished. Colonised peoples reworked the idea of freedom from (Box? bondage into their movements to create a sovereign nation state. Tipu Raja Rammohan Roy was one of those who Sultan and Rammohan Roy are two examples of individuals who WAS inspired by new ideas that were spreading : ; : through Europe at that time. The French responded to the ideas coming from revolutionary France. Revolution and later, the July Revolution excited his imagination. He could think and talk of nothing else when he heard of the July Revolution in France in 1830. On his way to England at Cape Town he insisted on visiting frigates (warships) flying the revolutionary tri-colour flag though he had been temporarily lamed by an accident. Susobhan Sarkar, Notes on the Bengal Renaissance 1946. Activities C~. 1. Find out more about any one of the revolutionary figures you have read about in this chapter. Write a short biography of this person. 2. The French Revolution saw the rise of newspapers describing the events of each day and week. Collect information and pictures on any one event and write a newspaper article. You could also conduct an imaginary interview with important personages such as Mirabeau, Olympe de Gouges or Robespierre. Work in groups of two or three. Each group could then put up their articles on a board to produce a wallpaper on the French Revolution. _ . Describe the circumstances leading to the outbreak of revolutionary protest in France. 2. Which groups of French society benefited from the revolution? Which groups were forced to relinquish power? Which sections of society would have been disappointed with the outcome of the revolution? 3. Describe the legacy of the French Revolution for the peoples of the world during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. 4. Draw up alist of democratic rights we enjoy today whose origins could be traced to the French Revolution. 5. Would you agree with the view that the message of universal rights was beset with contradictions? Explain. To c= S e = lo) a S u Y i= UO cP) = ~ To i= a) Pe mo} iS 6. How would you explain the rise of Napoleon? Reprint 2025-26