discuss and voice their interests women started their own were expected to behave in public? What political clubs and newspapers. About sixty women s clubs came up CH yOu ins Gtoes Ie aruls. Sy ipa with the women s activities or is he critical in different French cities. The Society of Revolutionary and ; ; of them? Discuss your views in the class. Republican Women was the most famous of them. One of their 8 Reprint 2025-26 main demands was that women enjoy the same political rights as men. Women were disappointed that the Constitution of 1791 reduced them to passive citizens. They demanded the right to vote, to be elected to the Assembly and to hold political office. Only then, they felt, would their interests be represented in the new government. In the early years, the revolutionary government did introduce laws that helped improve the lives of women. Together with the creation of state schools, schooling was made compulsory for all girls. Their fathers could no longer force them into marriage against their will. Marriage was made into a contract entered into freely and registered under civil law. Divorce was made legal, and could be applied for by both women and men. Women could now train for jobs, could become artists or run small businesses. Women s struggle for equal political rights, however, continued. During the Reign of Terror, the new government issued laws ordering closure of women s clubs and banning their political activities. Many prominent women were arrested and a number of them executed. Women s movements for voting rights and equal wages continued through the next two hundred years in many countries of the world. The fight for the vote was carried out through an international suffrage movement during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The example of the political activities of French women during the revolutionary years was kept alive as an inspiring memory. It was finally in 1946 that women in France won the right to vote. Source E The life of a revolutionary woman Olympe de Gouges (1748-1793) Olympe de Gouges was one of the most important of the politically active women in revolutionary France. She protested against the Constitution and the Declaration of Rights of Man and Citizen as they excluded women from basic rights that each human being was entitled to. So, in 1791, she wrote a Declaration of the Rights of Woman and Citizen, which she addressed to the Queen and to the members of the National Assembly, demanding that they act upon it. In 1793, Olympe de Gouges criticised the Jacobin government for forcibly closing down women s clubs. She was tried by the National Convention, which charged her with treason. Soon after this she was executed. = lo) oe > lo) > CP) [a4 = YY = CP) es The Reprint 2025-26 Source F Some of the basic rights set forth in Olympe de Gouges Declaration. 1. Woman is born free and remains equal to man in