estate Big businessmen, a | merchants, court officials, lawyers etc. We Thay Peasants and artisans Small peasants, landless labour, servants Fig.2 A Society of Estates. Note that within the Third Estate some were rich and others poor. New words Livre Unit of currency in France, discontinued in 1794 Clergy Group of persons invested with special functions in the church Tithe A tax levied by the church, comprising one-tenth of the agricultural produce Taille Tax to be paid directly to the state M ;: Yona de moyens, pls Of en vent auc Ce y le tl 2 . . 0 Neon ibhod acre pect ta This poor fellow brings everything, pe Wey veut pos donase le douceur grain, fruits, money, salad. The fat lord sits there, ready to acceptit all. He does not even care to grace him with a look. ~ Explain wh yi has portrayed the nobl the spider and the peasant as theft le Paterar. io mote a. SS fags ra The nobleman is the spider, the peasant the fly. e the devil has, the more he wants. Fig.3 The Spider and the Fly. An anonymous etching. 1.1 The Struggle to Survive wy The population of France rose from about 23 million in 1715 to 28 = ) ov =) > CP) pe million in 1789. This led to a rapid increase in the demand for foodgrains. Production of grains could not keep pace with the demand. So the price of bread which was the staple diet of the majority rose rapidly. Most workers were employed as labourers in workshops Jay words French whose owner fixed their wages. But wages did not keep pace with the rise in prices. So the gap between the poor and the rich widened. Subsistence crisis An extreme situation where The Things became worse whenever drought or hail reduced the harvest. the basic means of livelihood are endangered Anonymous One whose name remains This led to a subsistence crisis, something that occurred frequently unknown in France during the Old Regime. Reprint 2025-26 To c= S e = lo) a S u Y i= UO cP) = ~ To i= a) Pe mo} iS 1.2 How a Subsistence Crisis Happens Bad harvest Disease The poorest can no longer buy bread L epidemics Fig.4 The course of a subsistence crisis. 1.3 A Growing Middle Class Envisages an End to Privileges > In the past, peasants and workers had participated in revolts against increasing taxes and food scarcity. But they lacked the means and programmes to carry out full-scale measures that would bring about a change in the social and economic order. This was left to those groups within the third estate who had become prosperous and had access to education and new ideas. The eighteenth century witnessed the emergence of social groups, termed the middle class, who earned their wealth through an expanding overseas trade and from the manufacture of goods such as woollen and silk textiles that were either exported or bought by the