1 which stand for liberty, equality and fraternity. i) Explain the meaning of the painting of the Declaration of Rights of Man and Citizen (Fig. 8) by reading only the symbols. [e) . Compare the political rights which the Constitution of 1791 gave to the citizens with Articles 1 and 6 of the Declaration (Source C). Are the two documents consistent? Do the two documents convey . i ? The winged woman: the same idea Personification of the law. KR . Which groups of French society would have gained from the Constitution of 1791? Which groups would have had reason to The Law Tablet: The law is the same for all be dissatisfied? What developments does and all are equal before it. Marat (Source B) anticipate in the future? a Imagine the impact of the events in France on neighbouring countries such as Prussia, = lo) oe > lo) > CP) [a4 a YY = CP) jem Austria-Hungary or Spain, all of which were absolute monarchies. How would the kings, The traders, peasants, nobles or members of the clergy here have reacted to the news of what was happening in France? Reprint 2025-26 To c= S <j i) = lo) a u Y i= UO cP) = ~ To i= a) Pe mo} = The situation in France continued to be tense during the following years. Although Louis XVI had signed the Constitution, he entered into secret negotiations with the King of Prussia. Rulers of other neighbouring countries too were worried by the developments in France and made plans to send troops to put down the events that had been taking place there since the summer of 1789. Before this could happen, the National Assembly voted in April 1792 to declare war against Prussia and Austria. Thousands of volunteers thronged from the provinces to join the army. They saw this as a wat of the people against kings and aristocracies all overt Europe. Among the patriotic songs they sang was the Marseillaise, composed by the poet Roget de L Isle. It was sung for the first time by volunteers from Marseilles as they marched into Paris and so got its name. The Marseillaise is now the national anthem of France. The revolutionary wars brought losses and economic difficulties to the people. While the men were away fighting at the front, women were left to cope with the tasks of earning a living and looking after their families. Large sections of the population were convinced that the revolution had to be carried further, as the Constitution of 1791 gave political rights only to the richer sections of society. Political clubs became an important rallying point for people who wished to discuss government policies and plan their own forms of action. The most successful of these clubs was that of the Jacobins, which got its name from the former convent of St Jacob in Paris. Women too, who had been active throughout this period, formed their own clubs. Section 4 of this