Active citizens: entitled to vote. About 4 million of a fh n i population of 28 million fh PAAR ih Passive citizens: no voting rights. About 3 million men a (Ce ao By \ Women, children and youth below 25. fel th Rea Fig.7 The Political sytstem under the Constitution of 1797. The Constitution of 1791 vested the power to make laws in the National Assembly, which was indirectly elected. That is, citizens voted for a group of electors, who in turn chose the Assembly. Not all citizens, however, had the right to vote. Only men above 25 years of age who paid taxes equal to at least 3 days of a labourer s wage were given the status of active citizens, that is, they were entitled to vote. The remaining men and all women were classed as passive citizens. To qualify as an elector and then as a member of the Assembly, a man had to belong to the highest bracket of taxpayers. 10 . Reprint 2025-26 Fig.8 The Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen, painted by the artist Le Barbier in 1790. The figure on the right represents France. The figure on the left symbolises the law. Source C The Declaration of Rights of Man and Citizen 1. Men are born and remain free and equal in rights. 2. The aim of every political association is the preservation of the natural and inalienable rights of man; these are liberty, property, security and resistance to oppression. 3. The source of all sovereignty resides in the nation; no group or individual may exercise authority that does not come from the people. The Constitution began with a Declaration of the Rights of Man and Citizen. Rights such as the right to life, freedom of speech, freedom of opinion, equality before law, were established as natural 4. Liberty consists of the power to do whatever is not injurious to others. 5. The law has the right to forbid only actions that are injurious to society. and inalienable rights, that is, they belonged to each human being by birth and could not be taken away. It was the duty of the state to protect each citizen s natural rights. ; 6. Law is the expression of the general will. All citizens have the right to participate in its formation, personally or through their representatives. All citizens are equal before it. Source B 7. No man may be accused, arrested or detained, except in cases determined by The revolutionary journalist Jean-Paul the law. Marat commented in his newspaper 11. Every citizen may speak, write and print L Ami du peuple (The friend of the people) on the Constitution drafted by the National Assembly: The task of representing the people has been given to the rich ... the lot of the poor and oppressed will never be improved by peaceful means alone. Here we have absolute proof of how wealth influences the law. Yet laws will last only as long as the people