fall of the Jacobin government allowed the wealthier middle classes to seize power. A new constitution was introduced which denied the vote to non-propertied sections of society. It provided for two elected legislative councils. These then appointed a Directory, an executive made up of five members. This was meant as a safeguard against the concentration of power in a one-man executive as under the Jacobins. However, the Directors often clashed with the legislative councils, who then sought to dismiss them. The political instability of the Directory paved the way for the rise of a military dictator, Napoleon Bonaparte. Through all these changes in the form of government, the ideals of freedom, of equality before the law and of fraternity remained inspiring ideals that motivated political movements in France and the rest of Europe during the following century. Reprint 2025-26 = lo) oe > lo) > CP) [a4 = YY = CP) es The Did Women have a Revolution? Fig.12 Parisian women on their way to Versailles. This print is one of the many pictorial representations of the events of 5 October 1789, when women marched to Versailles and brought the king back with them to Paris. From the very beginning women were active participants in the events which brought about so many important changes in French society. They hoped that their involvement would pressurise the revolutionary government to introduce measures to improve their lives. Most women of the third estate had to work for a living. They worked as Activity seamstresses or laundresses, sold flowers, fruits and vegetables at the Describe the persons represented in Fig. 12 their actions, their postures, the objects they are carrying. Look carefully to see whether all of them come from the same social group. What symbols has the artist included in the image? What do they stand for? Do the actions of the women reflect traditional ideas of how women market, or were employed as domestic servants in the houses of prosperous people. Most women did not have access to education or job training. Only daughters of nobles or wealthier members of the third estate could study at a convent, after which their families arranged a marriage for them. Working women had also to care for their families, that is, cook, fetch water, queue up for bread and look after the children. Their wages were lower than those of men. To c= S <j i) = lo) a u Y i= UO cP) = ~ To i= a) Pe mo} = In order to discuss and voice their interests women started their own were expected to behave in public? What political clubs and newspapers. About sixty women s clubs came up CH yOu ins Gtoes Ie aruls. Sy ipa with the women s activities or is he critical in different French cities. The Society of Revolutionary and ; ; of them? Discuss your views in the class. Republican Women was the most famous of them. One of their 8 Reprint 2025-26 main demands was