that they act upon it. In 1793, Olympe de Gouges criticised the Jacobin government for forcibly closing down women s clubs. She was tried by the National Convention, which charged her with treason. Soon after this she was executed. = lo) oe > lo) > CP) [a4 = YY = CP) es The Reprint 2025-26 Source F Some of the basic rights set forth in Olympe de Gouges Declaration. 1. Woman is born free and remains equal to man in rights. 2. The goal of all political associations is the preservation of the natural rights of woman and man: These rights are liberty, property, security, and above all resistance to oppression. 3. The source of all sovereignty resides in the nation, which is nothing but the union of woman and man. 4. The law should be the expression of the general will; all female and male citizens should have a say either personally or by their representatives in its formulation; it should be the same for all. All female and male citizens are equally entitled to all honours Activity and public employment according to their abilities and without any other distinction than that of their talents. ; ; ; ; ; ; Compare the manifesto drat d by Olympe de 5. No woman is an exception; she is accused, arrested, and detained in G S F Sealer ath cases determined by law. Women, like men, obey this rigorous law. ouges (Source 2, 2 Berar ator ay Ine Rights of Nera i (Source C). Source GS In 1793, the Jacobin politician Chaumette sought to justify the closure of women s clubs on the following grounds: Has Nature entrusted domestic duties to men? Has she given us breasts to nurture babies? No. She said to Man: = A. qe ey : pe FP ae : > uses ai sional a ROY TR Be a man. Hunting, agriculture, political duties Fig.73 Women queuing up at a bakery. ... that is your kingdom. She said to Woman: Be a woman ... the things of the household, the sweet duties of motherhood those are your tasks. become men. Have not duties been fairly Imagine yourself to be one of the women in Fig. 13. Formulate a disincui2ee response to the arguments put forward by Chaumette (Source G). To c= S e = lo) a S u Y i= UO cP) = ~ To i= a) Pe mo} iS 20 . Reprint 2025-26 The Abolition of Slavery One of the most revolutionary social reforms of the Jacobin regime was the abolition of slavery in the French colonies. The colonies in the Caribbean Martinique, Guadeloupe and San Domingo were important suppliers of commodities such as tobacco, indigo, sugar and coffee. But the reluctance of Europeans to go and work in distant and unfamiliar lands meant a shortage of labour on the plantations. So this was met by a triangular slave trade between Europe, Africa and the Americas. The slave trade began in the seventeenth century. French merchants