are all that I have left. They are made of rare sapphires, which were gb The Happy Prince/ 31 tops, Bos <a gen Reprint 2025-26 brought out of India a thousand years ago. He ordered the swallow to pluck out one of them and take it to the playwright. He will sell it to the jeweller, and buy firewood, and finish his play, he said. Dear Prince, said the swallow, I cannot do that, and he began to weep. Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow, said the Prince, do as I command you. So the swallow plucked out the Prince s eye, and flew away to the young man s garret. It was easy enough to get in, as there was a hole in the roof. Through this he darted, and came into the room. The young man had his head buried in his hands, so he did not hear the flutter of the bird s wings, and when he looked up he found the beautiful sapphire lying on the withered violets. Iam beginning to be appreciated, he cried. This is from some great admirer. Now I can finish my play, and he looked quite happy. The next day the swallow flew down to the harbour. He sat on the mast of a large vessel and watched the sailors working. I am going to Egypt, cried the swallow, but nobody minded, and when the moon rose he flew back to the Happy Prince. I have come to bid you goodbye, he cried. Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow, said the Prince, will you not stay with me one night longer? It is winter, answered the swallow, and the snow will soon be here. In Egypt the sun is warm on the green palm trees, and the crocodiles lie in the mud and look lazily about them. In the square below, said the Happy Prince, there stands a little matchgirl. She has let her matches fall in the gutter, and they are all spoiled. Her father will beat her if she does not bring home some money, and she is crying. She has no shoes or 32 / Moments Reprint 2025-26 oe x! a * ar stockings, and her little head is bare. Pluck out my other eye, and give it to her, and her father will not beat her. I will stay with you one night longer, said the swallow, but I cannot pluck out your eye. You would be quite blind then. Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow, said the Prince, do as I command you. So he plucked out the Prince s other eye, and darted down with it. He swooped past the matchgirl, and slipped the jewel into the palm of her hand. What a lovely bit of glass! cried the little girl; and she ran home, laughing. Then the swallow came back to the Prince. You are blind now, he said, so I will stay with you always. No, little Swallow, said the poor Prince, you must go away to Egypt. No,