him too well. He picked up crumbs outside the baker s door when the baker was not looking, and tried to keep himself warm by flapping his wings. But at last he knew that he was going to die. He had just enough strength to fly up to the Prince s shoulder once more. Goodbye, dear Prince! he murmured. Will you let me kiss your hand? Iam glad that you are going to Egypt at last, little Swallow, said the Prince. You have stayed too long here but you must kiss me on the lips, for I love you. It is not to Egypt that Iam going, said the swallow. I am going to the House of Death. Death is the brother of Sleep, is he not? And he kissed the Happy Prince on the lips, and fell down dead at his feet. At that moment a curious crack sounded inside the statue, as if something had broken. The fact is that the leaden heart had snapped right in two. It certainly was a dreadfully hard frost. Early the next morning the Mayor was walking in the square below in company with the Town Councillors. As they passed the column he looked up at the statue. Dear me! How shabby the Happy Prince looks! he said. How shabby, indeed! cried the Town Councillors, who always agreed with the Mayor and they went up to look at it. The ruby has fallen out of his sword, his eyes are gone, and he is golden no longer, said the Mayor. In fact, he is little better than a beggar! Little better than a beggar, said the Town Councillors. And here is actually a dead bird at his feet! continued the Mayor. We must really issue a proclamation that birds are not 34 / Moments * gs ? Dvn Ba: Reprint 2025-26 Bow hsb to be allowed to die here. And the Town Clerk made a note of the suggestion. So they pulled down the statue of the Happy Prince. As he is no longer beautiful he is no longer useful, said the Art Professor at the University. Then they melted the statue in a furnace. What a strange thing! said the overseer of the workmen at the foundry. This broken lead heart will not melt in the furnace. We must throw it away. So they threw it on a dust heap where the dead swallow was also lying. Bring me the two most precious things in the city, said God to one of His Angels; and the Angel brought Him the leaden heart and the dead bird. You have rightly chosen, said God, for in my garden of Paradise this little bird shall sing for ever more and in my city of gold the Happy Prince shall praise me. Oscar WILDE ? The Happy Prince/ 35 a Pars Tm Py Reprint 2025-26 Glossary seamstress: a woman who makes a living by sewing thimble: a metal or plastic cap with a closed end,