I died. And now that I am dead they have set me up here so high that I can see the ugliness and all the misery of my city, and though my heart is made of lead yet I cannot choose but weep. What! Is he not solid gold? said the swallow to himself. He was too polite to make any personal remarks. Far away, continued the statue in a low musical voice, far away in a little street there is a poor house. One of the windows is open, and through it I can see a woman seated at a table. Her face is thin and worn, and she has coarse, red hands, all pricked by the needle, for she is a seamstress. She is embroidering flowers on a satin gown for the loveliest of the Queen s maids of honour, to wear at the next Court ball. In a bed in the corner of the room her little boy is lying ill. He has a fever, and is asking his mother to give him oranges. His mother has nothing to give him but river water, so he is crying. Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow, will you not bring her the ruby out of my sword hilt? My feet are fastened to this pedestal and I cannot move. The Happy Prince/ 29 fad disee Ww a SF 5 My soe Reprint 2025-26 I am waited for in Egypt, said the swallow. My friends are flying up and down the Nile, and talking to the large lotus flowers. Soon they will go to sleep. The Prince asked the swallow to stay with him for one night and be his messenger. The boy is so thirsty, and the mother so sad, he said. I don t think I like boys, answered the swallow. I want to go to Egypt. But the Happy Prince looked so sad that the little swallow was sorry. It is very cold here, he said. But he agreed to stay with him for one night and be his messenger. Thank you, little Swallow, said the Prince. The swallow picked out the great ruby from the Prince s sword, and flew away with it in his beak over the roofs of the town. He passed by the cathedral tower, where the white marble angels were sculptured. He passed by the palace and heard the sound of dancing. A beautiful girl came out on the balcony with her lover. I hope my dress will be ready in time for the State ball, she said. I have ordered flowers to be embroidered on it, but the seamstresses are so lazy. He passed over the river, and saw the lanterns hanging on the masts of the ships. At last he came to the poor woman s house and looked in. The boy was tossing feverishly on his bed, and the mother had fallen asleep, she was so tired. In he hopped, and laid the great ruby on the table beside the woman