State ball, she said. I have ordered flowers to be embroidered on it, but the seamstresses are so lazy. He passed over the river, and saw the lanterns hanging on the masts of the ships. At last he came to the poor woman s house and looked in. The boy was tossing feverishly on his bed, and the mother had fallen asleep, she was so tired. In he hopped, and laid the great ruby on the table beside the woman s thimble. Then he flew gently round the bed, fanning the boy s forehead with his wings. How cool I feel! said the boy, I must be getting better; and he sank into a delicious slumber. Then the swallow flew back to the Happy Prince, and told him what he had done. It is curious, he remarked, but I feel quite warm now, although it is so cold. That is because you have done a good action, said the Prince. And the little swallow began to think, and then fell asleep. Thinking always made him sleepy. When day broke he flew down to the river and had a bath. Tonight I go to Egypt, said the swallow, and he was in high 30 / Moments * gs ? Dvn Ba: Reprint 2025-26 Bow hsb spirits at the prospect. He visited all the monuments and sat a long time on top of the church steeple. When the moon rose he flew back to the Happy Prince. Have you any commissions for Egypt? he cried. I am just starting. Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow, said the Prince, will you stay with me one night longer? I am waited for in Egypt, answered the swallow. Swallow, Swallow, little Swallow, said the Prince, far away across the city I see a young man in a garret. He is leaning over a desk covered with papers, and in the glass by his side there is a bunch of withered violets. His hair is brown and crisp, and his lips are red as a pomegranate, and he has large and dreamy eyes. He is trying to finish a play for the Director of the Theatre, but he is too cold to write any more. There is no fire in the grate, and hunger has made him faint. IT will wait with you one night longer, said the swallow, who really had a good heart. He asked if he should take another ruby to the young playwright. Alas! I have no ruby now, said the Prince. My eyes are all that I have left. They are made of rare sapphires, which were gb The Happy Prince/ 31 tops, Bos <a gen Reprint 2025-26 brought out of India a thousand years ago. He ordered the swallow to pluck out one of them and take it to the playwright. He will sell it to the jeweller, and buy firewood, and finish his play, he said. Dear Prince, said the swallow, I cannot do that, and he began to weep. Swallow,