you. So he plucked out the Prince s other eye, and darted down with it. He swooped past the matchgirl, and slipped the jewel into the palm of her hand. What a lovely bit of glass! cried the little girl; and she ran home, laughing. Then the swallow came back to the Prince. You are blind now, he said, so I will stay with you always. No, little Swallow, said the poor Prince, you must go away to Egypt. No, I will stay with you always, said the swallow, and he slept at the Prince s feet. All the next day he sat on the Prince s shoulder, and told him stories of what he had seen in strange lands. Dear little Swallow, said the Prince, you tell me of marvellous things, but more marvellous than anything is the suffering of men and women. There is no Mystery so great as Misery. Fly over my city, little Swallow, and tell me what you see there. So the swallow flew over the great city, and saw the rich making merry in their beautiful houses, while the beggars were sitting at the gates. He flew into dark lanes, and saw the white faces of starving children looking out listlessly at the black streets. Under the archway of a bridge two little boys were lying in each other s arms to try and keep themselves warm. How hungry we are! they said. You must not lie here, shouted the watchman, and they wandered out into the rain. Then he flew back and told the Prince what he had seen. Iam covered with fine gold, said the Prince. You must take it off, leaf by leaf, and give it to the poor; the living always think that gold can make them happy. Leaf after leaf of the fine gold the swallow picked off, till the Happy Prince looked quite dull and grey. Leaf after leaf of the The Happy Prince/ 33 fad disee Ww a SF 5 My soe Reprint 2025-26 fine gold he brought to the poor, and the children s faces grew rosier, and they laughed and played in the street. We have bread now! they cried. Then the snow came, and after the snow came the frost. The streets looked as if they were made of silver. Everybody went about in furs, and the little boys wore scarlet caps and skated on the ice. The poor little swallow grew colder and colder, but he would not leave the Prince, he loved him too well. He picked up crumbs outside the baker s door when the baker was not looking, and tried to keep himself warm by flapping his wings. But at last he knew that he was going to die. He had just enough strength to fly up to the Prince s shoulder once more. Goodbye, dear Prince! he murmured. Will you let me kiss your hand? Iam glad that you are going to Egypt at last, little Swallow, said the