Lines and Angles Chapter 5 5.1 INTRODUCTION You already know how to identify different lines, line segments and angles in a given shape. Can you identify the different line segments and angles formed in the following figures? (Fig 5.1) calsind (iv) Fig 5.1 Can you also identify whether the angles made are acute or obtuse or right? Recall that a line segment has two end points. If we extend the two end points in either direction endlessly, we get a line. Thus, we can say that a line has no end points. On the other hand, recall that a ray has one end point (namely its starting point). For example, look at the figures given below: Q (i) Fig 5.2 Here, Fig 5.2 (1) shows a line segment, Fig 5.2 (ii) shows a line and Fig 5.2 (iii) is that of aray. A line segment PQ is generally denoted by the symbol PQ, a line AB is denoted by the symbol AB and the ray OP is denoted by OP . Give some examples of line segments and rays from your daily life and discuss them with your friends. 2024-25 LINES AND ANGLES Again recall that an angle is formed when lines or line segments meet. In Fig 5.1, observe the corners. These corners are formed when two lines or line segments intersect at a point. For example, look at the figures given below: A P B C R oR. A Ke [ (i) (ii) i Fig 5.3 In Fig 5.3 (i) line segments AB and BC intersect at B to form angle y, ah ABC, and again line segments BC and AC intersect at C to form angle ACB and so on. Whereas, in Fig 5.3 (11) lines PQ and RS intersect at O Ftay Tass represented by the symbol ZABC. Thus, in Fig 5.3 (i), the three angles and identify the acute, obtuse formed are ZABC, ZBCA and ZBAC, and in Fig 5.3 (ii), the four andright angles found in them. angles formed are ZPOS, ZSOQ, ZQOR and ZPOR. You have already studied how to classify the angles as acute, obtuse or right angle. Note: While referring to the measure of an angle ABC, we shall write mZABC as simply ZABC. The context will make it clear, whether we are referring to the angle or its measure. 5.2 RELATED ANGLES 5.2.1 Complementary Angles When the sum of the measures of two angles is 90 , the angles are called complementary angles. 30 35 @) (ii) (iit) (iv) Are these two angles complementary? Are these two angles complementary? Yes No Fig 5.4 Whenever two angles are complementary, each angle is said to be the complement of the other angle. In the above diagram (Fig 5.4), the 30 angle is the complement of the 60 angle and vice versa. 2024-25 MATHEMATICS (> Tuink, Discuss AND WRITE \we \ 1. Cantwo acute angles be complement to each other? (1 VY 2. Can two obtuse angles be complement to each other? =.