6. Inthe given figure, 71 and 22 are supplementary angles. If Z1 is decreased, what changes should take place in Z2 so that both the angles still remain 1 supplementary. 7. Can two angles be supplementary if both of them are: (i) acute? (ii) obtuse? (ii) right? 2024-25 LINES AND ANGLES 8. Anangle is greater than 45 . Is its complementary angle greater than 45 or equal to 45 or less than 45 ? 9. Fillin the blanks: (i) Iftwo angles are complementary, then the sum of their measures is (i) Iftwo angles are supplementary, then the sum of their measures 1s (ii) If two adjacent angles are supplementary, they form a 10. Inthe adjoining figure, name the following pairs of angles. (i) Obtuse vertically opposite angles A E (ii) Adjacent complementary angles (ii) Equal supplementary angles 4 D (iv) Unequal supplementary angles B O (v) Adjacent angles that do not form a linear pair 5.3 Pairs or LINES 5.3.1 Intersecting Lines NZ ZS Q Re y, MX re > S Fig 5.8 The blackboard on its stand, the letter Y made up of line segments and the grill-door of a window (Fig 5.8), what do all these have in common? They are examples of intersecting lines. Two lines / and m intersect if they have a point in common. This common point O is their point of intersection. THINK, DISCUSS AND WRITE In Fig 5.9, AC and BE intersect at P. AC and BC intersect at C, AC and EC intersect at C. Try to find another ten pairs of intersecting line segments. Should any two lines or line segments necessarily intersect? Can you find two pairs of non-intersecting line segments in the figure? Can two lines intersect in more than one point? Think about it. 2024-25 EE a is emarics 1. Find examples from your surroundings where lines intersect at right angles. 2. Find the measures of the angles made by the intersecting lines at the vertices of an equilateral triangle. 3. Draw any rectangle and find the measures of angles at the four vertices made by the intersecting lines. 4. Iftwo lines intersect, do they always intersect at right angles? 5.3.2 Transversal You might have seen a road crossing two or more roads or a railway line crossing several other lines (Fig 5.10). These give an idea of a transversal. (i) Fig 5.10 (it) A line that intersects two or more lines at distinct points is called a transversal. In the Fig 5.11, p is a transversal to the lines / and m. P Fig 5.11 Fig 5.12 In Fig 5.12 the line p is not a transversal, although it cuts two lines / and m. Can you say, why ? 2024-25 LINES AND ANGLES iit is 5.3.3. Angles made by a Transversal In Fig 5.13, you see lines / and m cut by transversal p. The eight angles marked 1| to 8 have their special names: 1. Suppose two lines are given. Dp How many transversals