and definitions related to lines and angles learnt in earlier classes. 6.2 Basic Terms and Definitions Recall that a part (or portion) of a line with two end points is called a line-segment and a part ofa line with one end point is called a ray. Note that the line segment AB is denoted by AB, and its length is denoted by AB. The ray AB is denoted by AB, and a line is denoted by AB. However, we will not use these symbols, and will denote the line segment AB, ray AB, length AB and line AB by the same symbol, AB. The meaning will be clear from the context. Sometimes small letters /, m, n, etc. will be used to denote lines. If three or more points lie on the same line, they are called collinear points; otherwise they are called non-collinear points. Recall that an angle is formed when two rays originate from the same end point. The rays making an angle are called the arms of the angle and the end point is called the vertex of the angle. You have studied different types of angles, such as acute angle, right angle, obtuse angle, straight angle and reflex angle in earlier classes (see Fig. 6.1). (i) acute angle : 0 <x <90 (i1) right angle : y= 90 (ii1) obtuse angle : 90 <z < 180 (iv) straight angle : s = 180 (v) reflex angle : 180 <t< 360 Fig. 6.1 : Types of Angles Reprint 2025-26 LINES AND ANGLES 71 An acute angle measures between 0 and 90 , whereas a right angle is exactly equal to 90 . An angle greater than 90 but less than 180 is called an obtuse angle. Also, recall that a straight angle is equal to 180 . An angle which is greater than 180 but less than 360 is called a reflex angle. Further, two angles whose sum is 90 are called complementary angles, and two angles whose sum is 180 are called supplementary angles. You have also studied about adjacent angles in the earlier classes (see Fig. 6.2). Two angles are adjacent, if they have a common vertex, a common arm and their non-common arms are D on different sides of the common arm. In Fig. 6.2, Z ABD and Z DBC are adjacent angles. Ray BD is their common arm and point B is their common vertex. Ray BA and ray BC are non common arms. Moreover, when two B angles are adjacent, then their sum is always equal to the angle formed by the two noncommon arms. So, we can write Z ABC = Z ABD + Z DBC. Note that Z ABC and Z ABD are not D adjacent angles. Why? Because their noncommon arms BD and BC lie on the same side of the common arm BA. C Fig. 6.2: Adjacent angles If the non-common arms BA and BC in Fig. 6.2, form a line then it will look like Fig. 6.3.