sum is always equal to the angle formed by the two noncommon arms. So, we can write Z ABC = Z ABD + Z DBC. Note that Z ABC and Z ABD are not D adjacent angles. Why? Because their noncommon arms BD and BC lie on the same side of the common arm BA. C Fig. 6.2: Adjacent angles If the non-common arms BA and BC in Fig. 6.2, form a line then it will look like Fig. 6.3. In this case, Z ABD and Z DBC are called ; ; ; linear pair of angles. Fig. 6.3 : Linear pair of angles A B C You may also recall the vertically opposite angles formed when two lines, say AB and CD, intersect each other, say at the point O (see Fig. 6.4). There are two pairs of vertically opposite angles. One pair is ZAOD and ZBOC. Can you find the other pair? Fig. 6.4 : Vertically opposite angles Reprint 2025-26 72 MATHEMATICS 6.3 Intersecting Lines and Non-intersecting Lines Draw two different lines PQ and RS on a paper. You will see that you can draw them in two different ways as shown in Fig. 6.5 (i) and Fig. 6.5 (11). + R Ss (1) Intersecting lines (11) Non-intersecting (parallel) lines Fig. 6.5 : Different ways of drawing two lines Recall the notion ofa line, that it extends indefinitely in both directions. Lines PQ and RS in Fig. 6.5 (1) are intersecting lines and in Fig. 6.5 (11) are parallel lines. Note that the lengths of the common perpendiculars at different points on these parallel lines is the same. This equal length is called the distance between two parallel lines. 6.4 Pairs of Angles In Section 6.2, you have learnt the definitions of some of the pairs of angles such as C complementary angles, supplementary angles, adjacent angles, linear pair of angles, etc. Can you think of some relations between these angles? Now, let us find out the relation between the angles formed when a ray stands on a line. Draw a figure in which a ray stands ona line as ~", O B shown in Fig. 6.6. Name the line as AB and the ray as OC. What are the angles formed at the _ Fig. 6.6: Linear pair of angles point O? They are Z AOC, Z BOC and Z AOB. Can we write Z AOC + Z BOC = 4 AOB? (1) Yes! (Why? Refer to adjacent angles in Section 6.2) What is the measure of Z AOB? It is 180 . (Why?) (2) From (1) and (2), can you say that Z AOC + Z BOC = 180 ? Yes! (Why?) From the above discussion, we can state the following Axiom: Reprint 2025-26 LINES AND ANGLES 73 Axiom 6.1 : If a ray stands on a line, then the sum of two adjacent angles so formed is 180 . Recall that when the sum of two adjacent angles is 180 , then they are called