Z AOB? It is 180 . (Why?) (2) From (1) and (2), can you say that Z AOC + Z BOC = 180 ? Yes! (Why?) From the above discussion, we can state the following Axiom: Reprint 2025-26 LINES AND ANGLES 73 Axiom 6.1 : If a ray stands on a line, then the sum of two adjacent angles so formed is 180 . Recall that when the sum of two adjacent angles is 180 , then they are called a linear pair of angles. In Axiom 6.1, it is given that a ray stands on a line . From this given , we have concluded that the sum of two adjacent angles so formed is 180 . Can we write Axiom 6.1 the other way? That is, take the conclusion of Axiom 6.1 as given and the given as the conclusion . So it becomes: (A) If the sum of two adjacent angles is 180 , then a ray stands on a line (that is, the non-common arms form a line). Now you see that the Axiom 6.1 and statement (A) are in a sense the reverse of each others. We call each as converse of the other. We do not know whether the statement (A) is true or not. Let us check. Draw adjacent angles of different measures as shown in Fig. 6.7. Keep the ruler along one of the non-common arms in each case. Does the other non-common arm also lie along the ruler? A C (iii) Fig. 6.7 : Adjacent angles with different measures Reprint 2025-26 74 MATHEMATICS You will find that only in Fig. 6.7 (111), both the non-common arms lie along the ruler, that is, points A, O and B lie on the same line and ray OC stands on it. Also see that Z AOC + Z COB = 125 + 55 = 180 . From this, you may conclude that statement (A) is true. So, you can state in the form of an axiom as follows: Axiom 6.2 : If the sum of two adjacent angles is 180 , then the non-common arms of the angles form a line. For obvious reasons, the two axioms above together is called the Linear Pair Axiom. Let us now examine the case when two lines intersect each other. Recall, from earlier classes, that when two lines intersect, the vertically opposite angles are equal. Let us prove this result now. See Appendix | for the ingredients of a proof, and keep those in mind while studying the proof given below. Theorem 6.1 : If two lines intersect each other, then the vertically opposite angles are equal. Proof : In the statement above, it is given that two lines intersect each other . So, let AB and CD be two lines intersecting at O as shown in Fig. 6.8. They lead to two pairs of vertically opposite angles, namely, (i) Z AOC and Z BOD (ii) Z AOD and Z BOC. Fig. 6.8 : Vertically opposite angles