made farming tools, including the plough (Fig. 6.9), some of which continue to be used by modern day farmers. Fig. 6.9. A small clay model of a plough (from Banawali in Haryana) Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:04:52 | This intense agricultural activity was managed by hundreds of small rural sites or villages. Then as now, the cities could survive only if enough agricultural produce from rural areas reached them on a daily basis. The Harappans also domesticated a number of animals for meat consumption and fished both in rivers and in the sea. This is known from the large numbers of animal and fish bones found during excavations. What did Harappan cooking pots contain? Scientific examinations of clay pots have provided some answers, both expected ones (dairy products) and surprising ones such as remains of turmeric, ginger and banana. Clearly, their diet was quite diverse! LET US EXPLORE Imagine you cook a meal in a Harappan house. What dish or dishes would you prepare, based on the data given above? A Brisk Trade The Harappans were engaged in active trade, not only within their own civilisation (other cities nearby or far away), but with other civilisations and cultures within and outside India. They exported ornaments, timber, some objects of daily use (Fig. 6.11 on page 98), probably also gold and cotton, and possibly some food items. The most favoured ornaments were beads of carnelian (Fig. 6.10 on page 98), a reddish semiprecious stone found mostly in Gujarat. Harappan craftspeople developed special techniques to drill them, so a string could pass through them, and to decorate them in various ways. They also worked conch shells into beautiful shell bangles, which requires sophisticated techniques as shell is a hard material. What the Harappans imported in exchange of the exported goods is not so clear. It probably included copper, since this metal was not so common back home. 6 The Beginnings of Indian Civilisation Reprint 2025-26 chapter6_310125.indd 97 & 03-02-2025 05:04:52 | DON T MISS OUT The Harappans mastered the art of working copper, a soft metal. If tin is added to copper, the resulting metal is bronze, which is harder than copper. The Harappans used bronze to make tools, pots and pans, and, as we will see later, some figurines. Fig. 6.11. Harappan ivory comb (about 7 cm long) found on the coast of Oman aed ee To conduct such a trade, they used land routes and rivers, and the sea ae for more distant destinations this is the first intensive maritime a aranwaerms activity in India. Indeed, quite a few Harappan settlements are Fig. 6.10. Harappan beads of carnelian located in the coastal regions beads excavated at Susa (present-day Iran) of Gujarat and Sindh. Lothal, a small settlement in Gujarat, has a surprisingly huge basin measuring 217 metres in length and 36 metres in width the length is just a little more than that of two football grounds! This basin must have been a | dockyard, that is, a structure used to