page? 6 The Beginnings of Indian Civilisation Reprint 2025-26 | chapter6_310125.indd 89 & 03-02-2025 05:04:49 | Exploring Society: India and Beyond Tapestry of the Past S| chapter6_310125.indd 90 Harappan city Modern state / region The Sarasvati River The map (Fig. 6.3 on page 89) shows the Indus (or Sindhu) and its five main tributaries; important cities grew along those rivers, such as Mohenjo-daro and Harappa. But there are also many sites along the Sarasvati River, which today goes by the name of Ghaggar in India and Hakra in Pakistan (hence the name Ghaggar-Hakra River ). This river is now seasonal, because it flows only during the rainy season. The Sarasvati River is first mentioned in the Rig Veda, an ancient collection of prayers which we will read about in Chapter 7. In this text, Sarasvati is worshipped both as a goddess and as a river flowing from the mountain to the sea . Later texts describe the river as drying up and eventually disappearing. Town-Planning Harappa and Mohenjo-daro, now in Pakistan, were the first two cities of this civilisation to be discovered; their identification goes back to 1924, a century ago. Several sites followed in the Indus plains, which is why the civilisation was initially called Indus Valley civilisation . Later on, other major cities, such as Dholavira (in Gujarat), Rakhigarhi (in Haryana), Ganweriwala (in the Cholistan desert of Pakistan), and hundreds of smaller sites (such Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:04:49 | v THINK ABOUT IT You may have come across the term Indus Valley civilisation and noticed that we have not used it. A look at the map (Fig. 6.3 on page 89) explains why the term Valley is obsolete, as we now know that the civilisation extended much beyond the Indus region. as Lothal in Gujarat), were discovered, some of them excavated. Such discoveries continue even today! It is interesting to note that the Sarasvati basin includes not only two major cities Rakhigarhi and Ganweriwala but also several smaller ones (Farmana in Haryana, Kalibangan in Rajasthan) and a few towns (Bhirrana and Banawali, both in Haryana); indeed, the map (Fig. 6.3 on page 89) makes clear the high density of sites in that region. The larger Harappan cities were built according to precise plans. They had wide streets (Fig. 6.4 and 6.5 on page 92), which were often oriented to the cardinal directions. Most cities seem to have been surrounded by fortifications and had two distinct parts the upper town , where the local elite probably lived, and the lower town , where common people lived. Some large buildings seem to have been used for collective purposes for instance, warehouses where goods to be transported were stored. Individual houses of various sizes lined the streets and smaller lanes. Interestingly, the quality of construction was the same for small and big houses. All those buildings were generally made of bricks. The purpose of some of the structures remains a matter of debate. This is the case of the famous Great