a seal showing a swastika; a seal depicting a three-faced deity seated on a raised platform, surrounded by powerful animals chapter6_310125.indd 101 Fig. 6.15-4, 6.15-5, 6.15-6. The Dancing Girl , a bronze figurine from Mohenjo-daro (it is 10.8 cm high); a terracotta figurine seated in a namaste ; a design on a pot which seems to tell the story of the thirsty crow, who finds a clever way to drink water at the bottom of the pot (from Lothab. Reprint 2025-26 6 The Beginnings of Indian Civilisation 03-02-2025 05:04:58 | ;EssC P#/) Se is Vv THINK ABOUT IT Looking at the objects on pages 100 and 101 or any other pictured in this chapter can you make out what activities or aspects of life were important for the Harappans? LET'S EXPLORE > Complete the story found on the Lothal pot. How was such a story remembered for more than 4,000 years, in your opinion? > Consider the Dancing Girl figurine. What do you make of the attitude the figurine expresses? Observe her bangles covering an entire arm, a practice still visible in parts of Gujarat and Rajasthan. Where else in this chapter can you spot bangles worn in this manner. What conclusion should we draw from this? The End or a New Beginning? Around 1900 BCE, this Sindhu-Sarasvati civilisation, despite all its achievements, began to fall apart. The cities were abandoned one by one. If any inhabitants remained, they adopted a rural lifestyle in the changed environment it appears that the earlier government or administration no longer existed. Gradually the Harappans scattered over hundreds, if not thousands, of small rural settlements. Y THINK ABOUT IT The Harappans returned to rural settlements because a rural lifestyle gives easier access to food and water than an urban lifestyle. Then as now, cities depended on villages to provide food, and sometimes water. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Tapestry of the Past What caused this decline? Archaeologists have proposed many factors. Long back, it was thought that warfare or e Reprint 2025-26 chapter6_310125.indd 102 & 03-02-2025 05:04:59 | invasions may have destroyed the cities, but there is no trace of warfare or invasion. Indeed, the Harappans do not seem to have kept any army or weapons of war; as far as the evidence goes, it seems to have been a relatively peaceful civilisation. Two factors are currently agreed upon. First, a climatic change which affected much of the world from 2200 BCE onward, causing reduced rainfall and a drier phase. This would have made agriculture more difficult and could have reduced food supply to the cities. Second, the Sarasvati River dried up in its central basin; suddenly, cities there, such as Kalibangan or Banawali were abandoned. There could have been other factors, but these two remind us of how much we depend on climate and the environment for our well-being. Although the cities disappeared, much of the Harappan culture and technology survived and was passed on to the next phase of Indian civilisation, which