The Beginnings of Indian Civilisation The most ancient civilisation of India, known variously as the Harappan, Indus or Indus-Sarasvatt Civilisation, was indeed remarkable in many ways. ... [It showed how] a well-balanced community lives in which the differences between the rich and the poor are not glaring. ... In essence, the Harappan societal scenario was not that of exploitation , but of mutual accommodation . B.B. Lal Fig. 6.1. The North Gate entrance to Dholavira s Castle area. eprint 2025-26 & 03-02-2025 05:04:46 | Metallurgy: Includes the techniques of extracting metals from nature, purifying or combining them, as well as the scientific study of metals and their properties. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Tapestry of the Past | chapter6_310125.indd 86 What Is a Civilisation? At the end of Chapter 4, we saw the first human groups settling down, practising agriculture, developing some technologies (such as construction, metallurgy, transport) and moving towards civilisation . What, then, is civilisation? In general, the term is used for an advanced stage of human societies. To be precise, we will consider here that a civilisation should have at least the following characteristics: some form of government and administration to manage a more complex society and its many activities; urbanism town-planning, the growth of cities and their management, which generally includes water management and a drainage system; a variety of crafts including the management of raw materials (such as stone or metal) and the production of finished goods (such as ornaments and tools); trade both internal (within a city or a region) and external (with distant regions or other parts of the world) to exchange all sorts of goods; some form of writing needed to keep records and to communicate; cultural ideas about life and the world, expressed through art, architecture, literature, oral traditions or social customs; a productive agriculture enough to feed not just the villages, but also the cities. v THINK ABOUT IT Which of the above characteristics do you think is the most fundamental that is, a characteristic essential to the development of all others? Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:04:46 | LET'S EXPLORE For each characteristic in the list above, can you make a list of professions or occupations that might exist in such a society? It is easy enough to see that all these characteristics are present in most societies in the world today. But when did civilisation begin, in the sense we have now defined? Civilisation began at different times in different parts of the world. In the region known as Mesopotamia (modern Irag and Syria), that happened about 6,000 years ago, and the civilisation in ancient Egypt followed a few centuries later. You will learn about these and a few more civilisations in a later grade. Inmany ways, humanity would nothave reached its present stage without the enormous contributions and advances of those ancient civilisations. For now, however, we will only look at the Indian Subcontinent, and its northwest region is where our story begins. Beginning of +... Mesopotamian civilisation Beginning