be visible from your location, you may take the help of sky mapping apps that can be downloaded on a mobile phone, or other online resources. More to know! Can we try to find any constellation or star of our choice on any night from our location? Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 12.indd 236 10/4/2024 3:07:57 PM Chapter 12.indd 237 Preparation for night sky watching Ad Under the guidance of adults, identify a dark open area for night sky watching. This should be away from lights, tall buildings and trees. Choose the date and time based upon what you plan to identify in the night sky. Choose a moonless night with no clouds, particularly for the Pole Star which is not very bright. It may be useful to have access to a mobile app with a sky map, or print out images of the constellations you plan to view. You may also carry a magnetic compass to find directions and a notebook to note or draw your observations. On the particular day and time selected, go to the identified place with an adult, where the night sky watching is to be done. After reaching there, wait for about half an hour for your eyes to get adjusted to the darkness. This will help you to see the night sky better (Fig. 12.5). Fig. 12.5: Night sky watching A Caution Do not gotoa dark open place at night time without adults accompanying you. Beyond Earth You may easily identify the Big Dipper and the Pole Star in the night sky. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:07:57 PM Activity 12.2: Let us try to locate es Look for the Big Dipper during summer time in the early part of the night, say, around 9 p.m. View the sky above the horizon towards the northern part of the sky and identify the Big Dipper. Once you identify the Big Dipper, try to locate the Pole Star. Look at the two stars present at the end of the Big Dipper s cup and imagine a straight line passing through these towards the north. At about five times the distance between these two stars, the imaginary line will lead to another star which is not very bright. This star is the Pole Star. You may also locate the bright constellation Orion and the star Sirius in the night sky. Activity 12.3: Let us try to identify OD In India, Orion is best viewed during the months of December to April after sunset. So, look for it during that period. Three bright stars in a short straight line are located around the middle of Orion (imagined to be the belt of a hunter). Identify these three stars first, as this is the easiest way to find Orion. @ Once you identify Orion, it is easy to locate the very bright star Sirius which is located close to Orion. Imagine a straight line passing through the three middle stars of Orion and look