appears stationary in the North direction, which helps to locate the North direction in the Northern hemisphere. The Big Dipper lies in the constellation Ursa Major while the Little Dipper lies in the constellation Ursa Minor. In India, the Big Dipper is known as Saptarishi, and the Pole Star is known as Dhruva tara. More to know! Pole star * * Fig. 12.4: Big Dipper, Little Dipper and Pole Star (The lines are not seen in the sky and have been drawn only for easy identification) Apart from common regional stories au i tellations, many tore ith stars In the cons Mest: communities or tribes of India ae oe e i oc about them. For example, their own storles aDOW eee i ig Dipper that app four stars M the Big pf forma rectangle, are viewed by tribes = Centr India as the grandmother's cot wit the three thieves (other three stars) stealing it. Fishermen along the Konkan coast imagine the four stars as a boat, with the last three Do you oat. stars as the neck of the b know? Reprint 2025-26 How can we identify some of these constellations in the night sky? Beyond Earth 10/4/2024 3:07:31 PM TT = | 2 2 Night Sky Watching If it is a clear cloudless night, a large number of stars may be visible in the sky. If you stay in a big city, you may find that the sky is rarely clear and only a few stars are seen in the night sky. This is due to light pollution, smoke and dust. The presence of excessive artificial light at night time is referred to as light pollution. In villages or areas where there is less light pollution, a larger number of stars can be seen. Also, your house may be surrounded by tall buildings and trees, which may block your view. The night sky is best viewed from open dark areas. Not all stars and constellations are visible from all places on Earth and on all nights in a year. For example, the Pole Star is not visible from the southern hemisphere of Earth. To identify a star or a constellation, you need to know how a particular constellation looks like and where to look for it in the night sky. To get familiar with the pattern of a constellation you may use images such as Fig. 12.3 and Fig. 12.4. __ To find out when and in which portion of the sky a star or ~ a constellation will be visible from your location, you may take the help of sky mapping apps that can be downloaded on a mobile phone, or other online resources. More to know! Can we try to find any constellation or star of our choice on any night from our location? Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 12.indd 236 10/4/2024 3:07:57 PM Chapter 12.indd 237 Preparation for night sky watching Ad Under the guidance of adults, identify a dark