sunset. So, look for it during that period. Three bright stars in a short straight line are located around the middle of Orion (imagined to be the belt of a hunter). Identify these three stars first, as this is the easiest way to find Orion. @ Once you identify Orion, it is easy to locate the very bright star Sirius which is located close to Orion. Imagine a straight line passing through the three middle stars of Orion and look along this line towards the east. This will lead to Sirius. Which star is closest to us? mum 12.3 Our Solar System The Sun The Sun is a star. It is the star closest to us. It is an extremely hot spherical ball of gases. The Sun gives out a huge amount of energy, and that is why it glows so brightly. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 12.indd 238 10/4/2024 3:07:58 PM Chapter 12.indd 239 The Sun produces heat and light, and is the main source of energy on the Earth (Fig. 12.6). How big is the Sun? It is about 100 times bigger than the Earth in diameter. And still, it looks so small because it is very far from the Earth. Fig. 12.6: The rising Sun The distance of the Sun from the Earth is about 150 million km. A useful unit for expressing distances within the solar system is astronomical unit (au) which is approximately the ] distance between the Sun and the Earth. More to know! The Sun, being the brightest object and the source of eae and heat on Earth, was elevated = as j ivilizati to the status 0 ; ncient civilizations i A = India, the Sun is worshipped as a, o heat provided by the Sun keeps the ee at a temperature that makes life pos Feet tial for plants [0 Sunlight is essen , to animals, which provide food and oxyg Tae ee one water cycle, . S climate, seasons, winds all of which are important for sustaining life on the Earth. However, the Sun is much closer to us than the other stars hence it appears much bigger than the stars. As the stars (other than the Sun) are much farther away, they appear like points, even though some of those stars are much bigger Reprint 2025-26 The Sun is resp onsible for Our Sun is also a star. So how is it that the Sun appears big and lights up the sky while the other stars look like bright dots in the night sky and are not even visible during the day time? Beyond Earth 10/4/2024 3:08:24 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 12.indd 240 than our Sun. During daytime, due to the extreme brightness of the Sun, it is not possible to view the other stars. More to know! There are many more objects in the sky. Our Earth, along with some of these objects, and the Sun