Saturn, Uranus and Neptune have a large number of moons. The Moon Earth s natural satellite, the Moon, takes about 27 days to complete one revolution around the Earth. It is our nearest neighbour in the space. Unlike on the Earth, there is hardly any atmosphere on the Moon. How big is the Moon as compared to the Earth? The Moon is about a quarter the size of the Earth in diameter. The Moon s surface shows circular bowl-like structures called craters (Fig. 12.9). Most of these craters have been formed due to the impact of asteroids or rocks from the space hitting the Moon s surface. Since there is no Fig. 12.9: The Moon (a) Image taken by Cartosat, ISRO. (b) Close-up image by cameras onboard Chandrayaan-3, ISRO. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:10:08 PM atmosphere, water or life on the Moon, these features stay on the Moon s surface for a very long time. Although the Moon is very far, humans have sent spacecrafts to explore and understand more about the Moon. India has also launched three Chandrayaan missions to study the Moon, and a further mission is being planned. -, Do you know? Asteroids The Sun and the planets are nearly spherical in shape. There are many small objects in the Solar System which are rocky and irregular in shape. These are called asteroids. Many of these asteroids revolve around the Sun in paths that lie between those of Mars and Jupiter. This region is called the asteroid belt (Fig. 12.7). Occasionally, asteroids pass very close to the Earth. Comets More to know! Sometimes we have visitors from the outer regions of the Solar System! These objects with long tails are called comets (Fig. 12.10). They are made up of dust, gases, rocks and ice. As a comet approaches close to the Sun, the frozen material in it starts evaporating. This evaporating Beyond Earth Se Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 12.indd 245 10/18/2024 9:59:37 AM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 12.indd 246 material forms the tail of the comet. Comets appear dim as they move away from the Sun and then, it is not possible to see them with the naked eye. Fig. 12.10: A Comet More to know! Many comets have been found that revolve around the Sun. These comets approach close to the Sun periodically. However, there are a few comets that escape and move out of the Solar System. Few other comets get broken up, or fall into the Sun or other planets when they approach them. We have learnt about the objects which form the Solar System. Which are these objects? The Sun, eight planets, their moons, and many _ smaller objects including asteroids, and comets, together form the Solar System. The Sun our star is the largest and the heaviest object in the Solar System. The Sun produces almost all the energy in the Solar System. All other objects in our Solar System shine due to the sunlight that they reflect from