water and thus, it appears blue from the space. Due to this, the Earth is also called the Blue Planet. The four outermost planets Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune are much larger compared to the Earth, and are mostly made of gases. These giant gaseous planets have large flat ring-like structures around them which are made of dust particles and rocky material. Planets get most of their energy from the Sun. So, the farther they are, the colder they are in general. The presence of an atmosphere on a planet can trap heat which can significantly change the temperature of a planet. That is why Venus, for example, is hotter than Mercury, although it is farther from the Sun. More to know! Among the planets, it is easiest to identify Venus which is very bright. After the Sun and the Moon, Venus is the brightest object in the sky. Mercury, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn can also be seen with the naked eye. They are Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:09:18 PM so far away that they look like shining dots, just like stars. So how can we distinguish between planets and the stars? Unlike planets, the stars appear to twinkle a lot. Activity 12.4: Let us try to identify SS For most of the year, Venus can be located either at dawn or at dusk. How can we see the planets which are not visible to the naked eye? @ When you are viewing at dawn, look for it near the Eastern direction before sunrise. @ When you are viewing at dusk, look for it near the Western direction after sunset. While many of the objects in the sky can be seen with our naked eyes directly, we can see them brighter and larger using a pair of binoculars or an instrument called a telescope (Fig. 12.8). A telescope also helps us view many dim objects not visible by our naked eyes directly. You may get an opportunity to view the sky through a telescope whenever a night sky watching event is organised in your region. We know that Fig. 12.8: A telescope planets move around the Sun. Are there any objects that move around planets? Beyond Earth Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 12.indd 243 10/4/2024 3:09:33 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 12.indd 244 Natural Satellites Objects that move around planets are commonly called satellites. They are smaller in size than planets. Moons are natural satellites of planets. The Earth has one Moon, while Mars has two moons. Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune have a large number of moons. The Moon Earth s natural satellite, the Moon, takes about 27 days to complete one revolution around the Earth. It is our nearest neighbour in the space. Unlike on the Earth, there is hardly any atmosphere on the Moon. How big is the Moon as compared to the Earth? The Moon is about a quarter the size of the Earth in diameter. The Moon s surface shows circular bowl-like structures