when watching stars in the night sky was a favourite pastime of our ancestors, they identified these star patterns with animals, things or characters in stories. Many cultures had names for patterns based on their own stories. These imaginary shapes helped them in recognising stars in the sky. Recognising stars and their patterns was a useful skill for navigation in the olden times. Before the arrival of modern technology or even before the invention of the magnetic compass, it helped people, particularly sailors and travellers, in finding directions at sea or on land. It is still used in emergencies as a backup method. In earlier times, groups of stars forming patterns were called constellations. Currently, the regions of sky, which include these groups of stars, are defined as constellations. However, since in constellations, the patterns of stars are often the most prominent, the term constellation is still commonly used for these groups of stars. Do we find patterns among the stars just for fun or is there some use of these patterns? More to know! Some constellations are shown in Fig. 12.3. The stars are joined by imaginary lines, drawn for easy identification. The constellation Orion is often represented as a hunter. There are three stars in the middle, which represent the belt of the hunter. Some people imagine that the hunter Orion, followed by his dog (constellation Canis Major), is battling a bull (constellation Taurus). Canis Major contains a star Beyond Earth Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 12.indd 233 10/7/2024 9:58:14 AM Chapter 12.indd 234 called Sirius, which is the brightest star in the night sky (Fig. 12.3). Sirius Fig. 12.3: Some constellations and stars (The red lines indicate the patterns of stars while the green lines indicate the regions of the sky. The lines are not seen in the sky and have been drawn only for easy identification) ee Betelguese a oe) > Aldebaran Pleiades vr | Rohini) | (Krittika) aa \ In Indian astronomy, the term nakshatra is used to denote either a certain star or a group of stars, such as Ardra (a star called Betelgeuse in the Orion constellation) and krittika (a group of stars called Pleiades in the Taurus constellation). Aldebaran, a star in the constellation Taurus, is known as Rohint. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:07:11 PM Chapter 12.indd 235 Two distinct patterns of stars, the Big Dipper and the Little Dipper, are shown in Fig. 12.4. The Pole Star or Polaris, which is part of the Little Dipper is also shown (Fig. 12.4). The Pole Star appears stationary in the North direction, which helps to locate the North direction in the Northern hemisphere. The Big Dipper lies in the constellation Ursa Major while the Little Dipper lies in the constellation Ursa Minor. In India, the Big Dipper is known as Saptarishi, and the Pole Star is known as Dhruva tara. More to know! Pole star * * Fig. 12.4: Big Dipper, Little Dipper and Pole Star (The lines are not seen in the sky and have