find out the names of planets in your local language. Also, find out the stories associated with stars and constellations in your region. Present these stories in a pictorial form. If there is a planetarium or a science museum nearby, then you can visit it, especially if a night sky observation session is scheduled by them. You will get to see the Moon, the planets and the stars through a telescope. If you visit the planetarium during daytime, you can also see their models, pictures and sky shows. Reprint 2025-26 Beyond Earth 10/4/2024 3:11:36 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 12.indd 252 Fig. 12.15: Embroidery of constellations Find out if the increasing light pollution is causing problems for humans, wildlife and the environment. Write an action that you would take at the personal level to control light pollution. Find out the weather conditions due to which the Indian Institute of Astrophysics (IIA) found Hanle, Ladakh a suitable place to set up an observatory. If you enjoy doing embroidery, try to embroider on a dark coloured cloth the constellations that you have seen (Fig. 12.15). Otherwise, you may use your creativity and depict constellations in multiple other ways using various art and craft ideas. Indian Astronomical Observatory, Hanle, is situated atop the highest peak of Digparatsa-Ri mountain range in Hanle. This peak has been renamed Mount Saraswati. It has several telescopes. One of them is called the Himalayan Chandra Telescope, which has been named after the Nobel VV Prize winning scientist Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar. It is an More to know! observatory at one of the highest locations in the world. The area surrounding this observatory was notified as the Hanle Dark Sky Reserve (HDSR) in December 2022. The reserve is open to the public throughout the year. Local people have been provided with small telescopes and are trained to be Astronomy Ambassadors for visitors by the Indian Institute of Astrophysics. It is expected to promote astro-tourism in the region. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:11:55 PM It is not the end, my friend! This might be the last page of this book, but it is certainly not the end of our Curiosity . The title of this book not only drives our journey through the amazing world of science, but also defines what it means to be human. As a species, we are curious. We want to find out more about the world we live in and worlds beyond. By now, you have perhaps read a little bit about the world of plants and animals, done some fun activities, learnt about how we measure, wondered about the stars that shine in the night sky, and so on. But remember, this is just the beginning. Science is a never-ending adventure, with new discoveries coming up all the time. And as you progress through the Middle Stage, the things you come across will help you find out even more about the world around you. The key lies in that curiosity you have