the other stars look like bright dots in the night sky and are not even visible during the day time? Beyond Earth 10/4/2024 3:08:24 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 12.indd 240 than our Sun. During daytime, due to the extreme brightness of the Sun, it is not possible to view the other stars. More to know! There are many more objects in the sky. Our Earth, along with some of these objects, and the Sun together form our Solar System (Fig. 12.7). Most of these objects move around the Sun. The movement of an object around the Sun is called revolution. Are stars the only objects in the sky? Or, are there more objects which we may not have noticed? Planets A planet is a large, nearly spherical object that revolves around the Sun. Our Earth is a planet as it revolves around the Sun as shown in Fig. 12.7. The Earth takes nearly one year to complete one revolution. Like the Earth, there are other planets that revolve around the Sun. More to know! Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:08:50 PM Asteroid Mercury | Earth Jupiter | Uranus Belt Sun Venus Mars Saturn Neptune Fig. 12.7: An artist s representation of the Solar System (To fit this figure within the page, the sizes and distances of various objects are not as per their actual sizes and distances in relation to each other, that is, the sizes and distances are not to scale in the figure) The eight planets, in order of their increasing distance from the Sun, are Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune (Fig. 12.7). The inner four planets nearest to the Sun Mercury, Venus, Earth and Mars are smaller in size. They have solid surfaces with rocks on them. From ancient times, various names have been used across India for the planets visible to the naked eye. For example, Budha (Mercury), Shukra (Venus), ) s Prithvi (Earth), Mangala (Mars), Brihaspati or Guru g (Jupiter) and Shani (Saturn). More to 5 know! a Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 12.indd 241 10/4/2024 3:09:04 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 12.indd 242 Venus is usually seen shining brightly at dawn and dusk, and is commonly called the Morning Star or the Evening Star, even though it is not a star. Mars is called the Red Planet because it appears red. This is because the soil on Mars is reddish in colour. A large portion of the Earth s surface is covered with water and thus, it appears blue from the space. Due to this, the Earth is also called the Blue Planet. The four outermost planets Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus and Neptune are much larger compared to the Earth, and are mostly made of gases. These giant gaseous planets have large flat ring-like structures around them which are made of dust particles and rocky material. Planets get most of their energy from the Sun. So, the farther they are, the colder they are