Chapter 12.indd 231 Nubra is a beautiful region in Ladakh. An eleven-year old osrrcwie girl Yangdol and her twin brother Dorjay live in one of the villages of this region. eS ~S Nubra in Ladakh, India They love their surroundings the majestic mountain peaks, and the glaciers, but their favourite is the night sky when the entire sky is lit up with thousands of stars (Fig. 12.1). The weather in Nubra is almost cloudless. With almost no air or light pollution, the night sky is very clearly visible. Night after night, Yangdol and Dorjay observe the stars and experience an Fig. 12.1: The beauty of night sky froma very dark immense sense of awe. location in Ladakh, India Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:06:43 PM Growing up, Yangdol and Dorjay have been hearing | interesting stories about stars from their elders. They have heard how some particular stars in the clear skies helped the caravans passing through Nubra in finding direction in the ancient days. They wonder how far away and how big the stars are. They also enjoy trying to find some patterns among the stars that remind them of familiar objects. Have you ever looked at the stars in the night sky and tried to connect them with imaginary lines, just like dots and lines in a drawing? Activity 12.1: Let us draw SS @ Fig. 12.2 shows bright stars in one part of the night sky. Lookat it carefully and try to imagine a pattern formed by a group of stars. Draw lines to connect the stars and make the pattern. Think of an animal or an object that is similar to the pattern drawn by you. Write its name near your pattern. @ Repeat the above steps and make some more patterns. @ Now think of an interesting story about your patterns. Compare your patterns with the patterns drawn by your friends. Are the patterns same or _ different? Narrate your story to others and listen to their stories. Do you notice that everyone s patterns, names and stories are different? Is it not fun? Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Fig. 12.2: A part of the night sky Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 12.indd 232 10/4/2024 3:06:44 PM mus 12.1 Stars and Constellations At night, when we look up at the sky, we see many stars. Some stars are bright and others are dim. Stars shine with their own light. Some groups of stars appear to form patterns which are like shapes of familiar things. Long ago, when watching stars in the night sky was a favourite pastime of our ancestors, they identified these star patterns with animals, things or characters in stories. Many cultures had names for patterns based on their own stories. These imaginary shapes helped them in recognising stars in the sky. Recognising stars and their patterns was a useful skill for navigation in the olden times. Before the arrival of modern technology or even before the invention of the magnetic compass, it helped