they approach them. We have learnt about the objects which form the Solar System. Which are these objects? The Sun, eight planets, their moons, and many _ smaller objects including asteroids, and comets, together form the Solar System. The Sun our star is the largest and the heaviest object in the Solar System. The Sun produces almost all the energy in the Solar System. All other objects in our Solar System shine due to the sunlight that they reflect from their surfaces. What is beyond the Solar System? Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:11:07 PM ems 12.4 The Milky Way Galaxy In the moonless night sky, viewed from dark locations away from city lights, one can see an extended faint band of light from near north to south across the sky (Fig. 12.11). This is our home galaxy called the Milky Way Galaxy or Akdsha Ganga. A galaxy has millions to billions of stars. Our Solar System is part of the Milky Way Galaxy. Fig. 12.11: Milky Way Galaxy as seen from a very dark location in Ladakh, India mum 12.5 The Universe There are many galaxies in the outer space beyond the Milky Way Galaxy. Scientists study them to understand the stars, galaxies and the universe. We do not know yet if life exists elsewhere in the Universe. The search for life has been directed mostly towards exoplanets the planets discovered revolving around other stars in our galaxy. Till now, scientists have not found any evidence of life but this search is on and continuing. Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 12.indd 247 beyond the What is Galaxy? Is there life anywhere else in the Universe? Beyond Earth g 10/4/2024 3:11:11 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 12.indd 248 we Keywords Draw Explore Identify Observe Thesky is divided into regions called constellations, which include groups of stars that appear to form patterns. The Pole Star appears stationary in the North direction, which helps in locating the North direction in the Northern hemisphere. The Sun is a star which produces heat and light. A planet is a large, nearly spherical object that revolves around the Sun. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:11:22 PM Chapter 12.indd 249 The eight planets, in order of their increasing distance from the Sun, are Mercury, Venus, Earth, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune. @ The Earth revolves around the Sun in nearly one year. @ Objects that move around planets are commonly called satellites. @ The Moon is Earth s natural satellite. @ The Moon revolves around the Earth in nearly 27 days. @ The Sun, eight planets, their moons, and many smaller objects including asteroids and comets, together form the Solar System. Our Solar System is part of the Milky Way Galaxy. Sw ( LA Let us enhance our learning 1. Match the column: (i) Satellite of Earth (a) Orion (ii) Red planet (b) Venus (iii) Constellation (c) Mars (iv) Planet which is commonly (d) Moon 2. called an evening star (i) Solve the following riddle. My