attached two incompletely inflated balloons to the mouth of each test tube. She kept the set-up in a warm place, away from sunlight. (i) What do you predict will happen after 3-4 days? She observed that the balloon attached to testtube B was inflated. What can be a possible explanation for this? (a) Water evaporated in test tube B and filled the balloon with the water vapour. (b) The warm atmosphere expanded the air inside the test tube B, which inflated the balloon. (c) Yeast produced a gas inside the test tube B which Fig. 2.14: Experimental inflated the balloon. set-up (d) Sugar reacted with warm air, which produced gas, eventually inflating the balloon. (ii) She took another test tube, 1/4 filled with lime water. She removed the balloon from test tube B in such a manner that the gas inside the balloon did not escape. She attached the balloon to the test tube with lime water and shook it well. What do you think she wants to find out? Chapter 2.indd 25 6/30/2025 4:19:50 PM Chapter 2.indd 26 . A farmer was planting wheat crops in his field. He added nitrogen-rich fertiliser to the soil to get a good yield of crops. In the neighbouring field, another farmer was growing bean crops, but she preferred not to add nitrogen fertiliser to get healthy crops. Can you think of the reasons? . Snehal dug two pits, A and B, in her garden. In pit A, she put fruit and vegetable peels and mixed it with dried leaves. In pit B, she dumped the same kind of waste without mixing it with dried leaves. She covered both the pits with soil and observed after 3 weeks. What is she trying to test? . Identify the following microorganisms: (i) I live in every kind of environment, and inside your gut. (ii) I make bread and cakes soft and fluffy. (iii) I live in the roots of pulse crops and provide nutrients for their growth. . Devise an experiment to test that microorganisms need optimal temperature, air, and moisture for their growth. . Take 2 slices of bread. Place one slice in a plate near the sink. Place the other slice in the refrigerator. Compare after three days. Note your observations. Give reasons for your observations. . A student observes that when curd is left out for a day, it becomes more sour. What can be two possible explanations for this observation? . Observe the set-up given in Fig. 2.15 and answer the following questions. (i) What happens to the sugar solution in flask A? (ii) What do you observe in test tube B after four hours? Why do you think this happened? (iii) What would happen if yeast was not added in flask A? SS. Warm sugar he solution + Yeast { t Lime water A B Fig. 2.15 : Experimental set-up Prepare some questions based on your learnings So far ... 6/30/2025 4:19:51 PM Chapter 2.indd 27 ne Co 2 The