vacuoles store certain substances dissolved in water (Fig. 2.5). So, a cell is not just a simple bag of liquid it is a complex structure made up of many different parts, each with its own special function to allow the cell, and in turn the entire organism to work. Cell membrane Nucleus Chloroplast Cytoplasm Vacuole Mitochondria (a) Fig. 2.5: A schematic drawing of (a) An animal cell and (b) A plant cell. (The colours are to show different parts of the cell) We have now understood the basic structure of cell. And we now also understand that plant and animal cells differ in shape and structure. Do different animal cells also vary in their shape and structure? 2.1.1 Variation in shape and structure of cells (a) Muscle cell The muscle cell and the nerve cell of ahuman are shown in Fig. 2.6a and (b). What are the similarities and differences you see in them? A muscle cell (Fig. 2.6a) is shaped like a spindle, while a nerve cell (Fig. 2.6b) is very long and has branches. Similarly, some cells are round in shape, while others are long and thin. The number of cells also varies in different organisms. Why do cells look so (b) Nerve cell different from each other? Does the shape and structure ofacell Fig 2.6: pifferent cells relate to its function? in humans Chapter 2.indd 13 6/30/2025 4:19:40 PM (a) Cell (d) Organ system (e) Organism Fig. 2.7: Levels of organisation of life | Chapter 2.indd 14 The unique shape, size, and structure of cells help them carry out their specific functions. But how do these cells help in performing various functions in the body? Let us find out. You observed in Activity 2.3 that inner cheek cells are thin and flat. They form a protective lining on the inner surface of the cheek. Nerve cells also known as neurons carry messages in our body. The elongated shape and branched structure help them reach different parts of the body and pass on messages quickly. Similarly, plant cells also show variation. In plants, too, cells may be rectangular, elongated, oval, or even tube-like. Some plant cells form long tubes that help carry water throughout the plant. You have already studied the digestive system in Grade 7. Different parts of the digestive system are made up of different types of cells. A group of muscle cells are present in the food pipe. These cells contract and relax in a wave-like manner, pushing the food down to the stomach. This movement is possible because muscle cells are thin, flexible, and spindle-shaped. The stomach also has different types of cells for performing different functions. Muscle cells in the stomach wall help churn the food. Other cells in the inner lining of the stomach produce digestive juices and acid that help break down the food. All these cells work together to make digestion possible. 2.2 What Are the Levels of Organisation in the Body of a Living Organism? The body of a