e Observe the slide under a microscope and draw what you see in your notebook. What did you observe? You will observe a polygon shaped structure as shown in Fig. 2.4. These are cheek cells, which form the inner lining of your mouth. Cytoplasm fo) What similarities and differences did you observe between the cells of onion peel in Activity 2.2 and 2) human cheek cells in Activity 2.3? Nucleus Laie) You have observed that cells have three main parts <E a thin outer lining, a central region, and a small Fig. 2.4: Mount of human cheek cells _YOund structure inside it. The outer layer is called the cell membrane. The round structure in the middle is the nucleus, which is also covered by a thin membrane. The space between the cell membrane and nucleus is filled with cytoplasm. These three cell membrane, cytoplasm, and nucleus are the basic parts of a cell. Some cells, like onion peel cells, have an extra outer layer called the cell wall. What is the importance of these structures in a cell? What functions do they perform? Are these functions important for the maintenance of life? The cell membrane encloses the cytoplasm and nucleus. The cell membrane separates one cell from another. It is porous and allows the entry of materials essential for life processes and the exit of waste material. Cytoplasm contains other components of the cell and compounds, such as carbohydrates, proteins, fats, and mineral salts. Most of the life processes take place within the cytoplasm. Curiosity Textbook of Science for Grade a a a Chapter 2.indd 12 6/30/2025 4:19:39 PM Cell membrane ne Co 2 The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked ne] 1 The nucleus regulates all activities that occur within the cell. It also regulates growth. The cell wall in the plant cell provides rigidity and strength to plants. This is why all cells are arranged compactly with each other and look firm in structure. A step further Cells in all parts of a plant have tiny rod-shaped structures called plastids. Some plastids, like chloroplasts, contain chlorophyll, which makes them green and helps in photosynthesis. In non-green parts, they help in the storage of substances. Plant cells also have a large, empty-looking space called a vacuole. This helps the plant cell store important substances, get rid of waste, and maintain the shape of the cell. This gives strength and support to the plant. In animal cells, vacuoles are usually not present, if present, they are usually small. These small vacuoles store certain substances dissolved in water (Fig. 2.5). So, a cell is not just a simple bag of liquid it is a complex structure made up of many different parts, each with its own special function to allow the cell, and in turn the entire organism to work. Cell membrane Nucleus Chloroplast Cytoplasm Vacuole Mitochondria (a) Fig. 2.5: A schematic drawing of (a) An animal cell and (b) A plant cell. (The colours are to show different parts of