differences helps us learn how these organisms function differently. In this chapter, we have learnt about the beneficial microorganisms. However, there are some microbes that cause diseases in plants and animals including humans. We will learn about some of the diseases caused by microbes in the next chapter. Snapshots Microorganisms are small-sized organisms and are not visible to the unaided eye. They can live in all kinds of environments, and even in the bodies of plants and animals. They are either unicellular or multicellular. Bacteria and protozoans are unicellular; fungi can be unicellular or multicellular, while plants and animals are multicellular. @ The cell is a basic unit of life. The body of all living organisms is made up of cells. A cell contains various components which help the organisms perform their functions and survive. @ Atypical cell is bounded by a cell membrane, filled with cytoplasm and contains a nucleus. Plant, fungal, and bacterial cells have an extra covering, called a cell wall, around the cell membrane. Bacteria lack a well-defined nucleus. @ Cells differ in shape and size. Their shape is related to the function performed by them. Bacteria, fungi, and protozoa are different kinds of microorganisms. Viruses are also small in size, but they are different from other microorganisms since they reproduce only inside the host organism. Curiosity Textbook of Science for Grade a a a Chapter 2.indd 24 6/30/2025 4:19:49 PM ne Co 2 The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked se) 2 Microorganisms can be beneficial or harmful to us. Some microorganisms decompose the plant and animal waste into simple substances and clean up the environment. Some microorganisms reside in the root nodules of legumes, such as peas, beans, and lentils. They trap nitrogen from the air and increase the soil fertility. Yeasts are fungi which are used in the process of making breads, cakes, pastries, idlis, dosas, and bhaturas. Lactobacillus is used in the curd formation at home and fermentation process in food industry. C Keep the curiosity alive 1. Various parts of a cell are given below. Only in. Animal Cell Write them in the appropriate places in the f following diagram. Common to all three cells _ Nucleus Cytoplasm Chloroplast Cell wall _ Cell membrane Nucleoid a 2. Aanandi took two test tubes and marked Only in Bacterial Cell Only in Plant Cell them A and B. She put two spoonfuls of sugar solution in each of the test tubes. In test tube B, she added a spoonful of yeast. Then she attached two incompletely inflated balloons to the mouth of each test tube. She kept the set-up in a warm place, away from sunlight. (i) What do you predict will happen after 3-4 days? She observed that the balloon attached to testtube B was inflated. What can be a possible explanation for this? (a) Water evaporated in test tube B and filled the balloon with the water vapour. (b) The warm atmosphere expanded the air inside the test tube B, which