flour after Knead the flour of the two bowls with warm water to make addition of yeast, sugar,and soft dough (Fig. 2.11). warm water Curiosity Textbook of Science for Grade a a a Chapter 2.indd 20 6/30/2025 4:19:48 PM ne Co 2 The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked se) 2 e Cover the dough with a damp cloth and keep it in a warm place. e Observe both the bowls after 4-5 hours. Did you find any change in the volume, smell, or texture of the dough? If not, leave the dough for some more time. After some time, you may notice that the dough in bowl A, where yeast was added, has risen slightly, become fluffy, and has a different smell compared to the dough kneaded without yeast. Why does this happen? What is the role of yeast? Why did we add sugar and warm water to the flour? Yeast is a type of microorganism. It belongs to a group of microorganisms, called fungi. Yeast grows well in warm conditions. You may recall from chapter Life Process in Animals in Grade 7 that, like other organisms, yeast also respires and breaks down food to release energy for their growth and carry out life processes. During this process, carbon dioxide is released, which forms bubbles that makes the dough soft and fluffy. Yeast also produces a small amount of alcohol during this process, which gives the dough a slightly different smell. This special property of yeast is used in the process of making breads, cakes, and more! In addition to yeast, some bacteria, such as Lactobacillus, help in fermentation of batter for making idli and dosa, and dough for making bhatura. | Activity 2.9: Let us prepare e Take two small glass bowls label them A and B . e Pour lukewarm milk in bowl A, and cold milk in bow] B. e Now, add a small spoonful of curd to each bowl and mix well using a spoon. e Cover both bowls. Keep bowl Aina warm place and bow1 B in a cool place (like a refrigerator) for a few hours or overnight. e Observethe changes inthe glass bowls. Write your predictions and observations in Table 2.4. Table 2.4: Testing for curd formation using milk in different conditions Change in the Change in the : appearance of milk | _ colour of milk Possible Prediction Observation Chapter 2.indd 21 6/30/2025 4:19:48 PM You will observe that in bowl A, the milk has turned into curd after a few hours and has become little sour. Whereas in bow! B, the milk has not curdled, but it might be a little sour. Do you know why this happens? The curd contains several types of bacteria. One of them is Lactobacillus. This bacterium feeds on the sugar in the milk (lactose), multiplies, and ferments the milk to form curd. Instead of producing alcohol (like Fig. 2.12: Root nodules of Cowpea yeast), these bacteria produce plant which contain Rhizobium _ lactic acid,