becoming a feasible livelihood opportunity. You can grow Spirulina easily by following these steps: 1. Seta clear glass tank in a bright place away from direct sunlight. 2. Cover the tank with a shade net, or keep the tank at a place with moderate temperature conditions. harvested from the tank by fltri1 it re=== through a fine cloth. 3. Fill the tank with pond water. 4. Add living Spirulina collected from a Conservation of microalgae is a good practice for ensuring food security and livelihood development. pond. 5. Stir the growing Spirulina twice a week. 6. After 3-6 weeks, Spirulina may be 2.5 Why Is Cell Considered to Be a Basic Unit of Life? The body of all living organisms are made up of tiny building blocks called cells. A single cell contains various components that help organisms perform various functions. The bodies of all plants and animals are made up of many cells. Therefore, they are called multicellular (many-celled) organisms. In multicellular organisms, cells carry out specialised functions individually but also cooperate with each other to increase the chance of survival. Some microorganisms, such as bacteria and protozoa, are made up of just one cell. These are called unicellular (single-celled) organisms. They carry out all the functions necessary for their survival in a single cell. A Other microbes, like algae and fungi, are Nucleoid - / made up of one or more cells. For example, le yeast is a unicellular fungus while mould is a multicellular fungus. Fig. 2.13: A bacterial cell showing the nucleoid region 6/30/2025 4:19:49 PM Like animal and plant cells, the cells of microorganisms are also surrounded by a cell membrane. Cells of fungi additionally have a cell wall, but they do not have chloroplasts, so they cannot make their own food through photosynthesis. Bacteria do not have a well-defined nucleus and a nuclear membrane. Instead they have a nucleoid. This feature distinguishes them from cells of yeast, protozoa, algae, fungi, plants, and animals. We have only looked at a few basic cell structures here. The cell has other components about which you will learn in higher classes. For observing subcellular components, we need microscopes with high magnification. An electron microscope magnifies the cell about 10,00,000 times, where we can see more structures present in a cell. By now, you must have understood that all living beings, including microorganisms, are made up of one or more cells. Their cells differ in size, shape, and structure. Plant and animal cells also have some differences. Understanding these differences helps us learn how these organisms function differently. In this chapter, we have learnt about the beneficial microorganisms. However, there are some microbes that cause diseases in plants and animals including humans. We will learn about some of the diseases caused by microbes in the next chapter. Snapshots Microorganisms are small-sized organisms and are not visible to the unaided eye. They can live in all kinds of environments, and even in the bodies of plants and animals. They are