garden, disappear after some time from the surroundings. This is because microorganisms breakdown and turn them into simpler substances rich in nutrients. These nutrients go back to the soil and help plants grow better. Microorganisms also decompose bodies of dead animals. So, microbes help recycle the waste and return important nutrients to nature. Manure formation occurs at optimal temperature and appropriate moisture level. Isn t it interesting? By now, you must have understood that bacteria and some fungi are types of microorganisms that play an important role in our lives. And guess what, these helpful bacteria can also decompose animal wastes like dung! From Activity 2.7, we can also infer that microorganisms not only help in plant growth, but also clean our environment by breaking down waste. 6/30/2025 4:19:46 PM Now, think what would have happened if microorganisms did not exist on Earth? A step further Microbes as a source of biogas Many microorganisms, like bacteria and fungi, live in an oxygenfree environment. Some of these bacteria have the ability to decompose plant and animal waste present in the environment or household wastewater. During the process, they release a mixture of gases containing carbon dioxide, and a high proportion of another gas, methane. This gas has been used as a fuel source for cooking, heating, generating electricity, and to even run vehicles. Dr. Ananda Mohan Chakrabarty (1938-2020) was a scientist who studied bacteria. In 1971, he developed a special bacterium that could break down oil spills, helping to clean the environment. His discovery received a patent in 1980. Patent is a copyright given to a person so that no one else can copy, use or sell his/her invention without permission. His work showed how microorganisms could be used to solve environmental problems like pollution. He is remembered for his contributions to science and for protecting the environment using microbes. What are the other problems which you How does the diversity of microorganisms help in our kitchen? 2.4.2 Microorganisms and food Let us try to understand by performing activities in the kitchen. | Activity 2.8: Let us perform e Take two bowls A and B. e In each, take 200 g of flour (atta or maida) and add a pinch of sugar. e Now, in bowl A, add asmall amount of yeast powder and mix it well with the flour. (b) Dough in bowl B e In bow1B, do not add any yeast, so that we can compare the Fig. 2.11: Change in the results of the two bowls. volume of flour after Knead the flour of the two bowls with warm water to make addition of yeast, sugar,and soft dough (Fig. 2.11). warm water Curiosity Textbook of Science for Grade a a a Chapter 2.indd 20 6/30/2025 4:19:48 PM ne Co 2 The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked se) 2 e Cover the dough with a damp cloth and keep it in a warm place. e Observe both the bowls after 4-5 hours. Did you find any change in