seconds. This will give onion peel from an a pinkish colour to the cells and help us see them clearly. e With the help of thin brush transfer the onion peel to another petri dish containing water to rinse the peel and remove extra stain. e Now, carefully place the stained onion peel on the glass slide using a thin brush, ensuring it does not break or fold. e Put a drop of glycerin over the onion peel on the slide. The glycerin will prevent drying of the cells and improve clarity for better visualisation of cells. e Slowly place a coverslip over the peel using a needle, such that no air bubbles get trapped. e Use blotting paper to gently wipe off any extra glycerin around the edges of the coverslip. e View the slide under a microscope or a foldscope. Compare it with Fig. 2.3c. e What similarities do you find in Fig. 2.3c and Fig. 2.3d? You will observe nearly rectangular structures under the microscope. These are the cells of the onion peel, which are closely arranged without any space between them. Try to observe the peels of the leaves of different plants around you. You will find that all plants are made up of cells. What do you think the body of an animal is made of? onion bulb One drop of en Glycerin ; ; safranin Onion peel ie I I I I 1 @ (2) (3) (4) f] P I I . I Cover slip Microscope ! I I SS I ! 6) (6) ! ee | Cell wall Cell membrane (da) Fig. 2.3: (b) Mounting the onion peel in glycerin using a needle; (c) Structure of onion peel under the microscope; and (d) A wall made of brick 6/30/2025 5:26:03 PM Activity 2.3: Let us investigate e Rinse your mouth with clean water. e Use the blunt end of a clean toothpick, and gently scrape the inside of your cheek. e Place the scraped material in a drop of water on a clean glass slide and spread it evenly. e Add a drop of methylene blue (a blue-coloured stain) over the material on slide. Adding stain improves the visibility of the material under the microscope by increasing contrast. e After one minute, add a drop of glycerin over the material on the slide to prevent the cells from drying. e Now, carefully place a clean coverslip on the material, and remove the excess glycerin from the edges of the coverslip using blotting paper. e Observe the slide under a microscope and draw what you see in your notebook. What did you observe? You will observe a polygon shaped structure as shown in Fig. 2.4. These are cheek cells, which form the inner lining of your mouth. Cytoplasm fo) What similarities and differences did you observe between the cells of onion peel in Activity 2.2 and 2) human cheek cells in Activity 2.3? Nucleus Laie) You have observed that cells have three main parts