hours and has become little sour. Whereas in bow! B, the milk has not curdled, but it might be a little sour. Do you know why this happens? The curd contains several types of bacteria. One of them is Lactobacillus. This bacterium feeds on the sugar in the milk (lactose), multiplies, and ferments the milk to form curd. Instead of producing alcohol (like Fig. 2.12: Root nodules of Cowpea yeast), these bacteria produce plant which contain Rhizobium _ lactic acid, which makes curd sour. These bacteria grow well in warm conditions. That is why curd is formed in bowl A but not in bow] B. We can categorise the microorganisms into different categories, such as protozoa, fungi, bacteria, some algae, and more. Some bacteria, such as Rhizobium, form the swollen regions called nodules and live in them as shown in Fig. 2.12. Roots of certain legumes, such as beans, peas, and lentils have root nodules that contain Rhizobium bacteria. These bacteria trap nitrogen from the air and make it useful for the plants. This helps plants grow better without chemical fertilisers. That is why farmers grow legumes in rotation with other crops. This naturally increases the nitrogen in the soil and keeps it healthy for the next crop. 2.4.3 Amazing microalgae: tiny helpers in water Microalgae are microscopic plant-like organisms that live in water, soil, air, and even on trees. They make their own food using sunlight. While doing this, they also release oxygen and produce more than half of the Earth s oxygen supply. They are rich in nutrients and serve as a food source for many aquatic animals. Some, like Spirulina, Chlorella, and Diatoms, are also used by humans as health supplements and medicines. Microalgae also help in cleaning water and are used to make biofuel. However, pollution, climate change, and habitat destruction are threatening microalgal diversity and abundance. It is important to conserve these tiny organisms to protect the environment and maintain oxygen balance on Earth. Curiosity Textbook of Science for Grade a a a Chapter 2.indd 22 6/30/2025 4:19:48 PM ne Co 2 The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked se) 2 Ever heard of ... Spirulina, a microalga, is called a superfood %, because of its health benefits. Spirulina is also a good source of vitamin B12, which is os essential for our body. It has a lot of protein nes more than 60 per cent of its body weight and Nereis only a small amount of fat and sugar. Nowadays, farming of Spirulina is becoming a feasible livelihood opportunity. You can grow Spirulina easily by following these steps: 1. Seta clear glass tank in a bright place away from direct sunlight. 2. Cover the tank with a shade net, or keep the tank at a place with moderate temperature conditions. harvested from the tank by fltri1 it re=== through a fine cloth. 3. Fill the tank with pond water. 4. Add living Spirulina collected from a Conservation of microalgae is a good practice for