look like? Are they like the plant and animal cells we just learnt about, or are they different? To observe the cells of a microorganism, again, we need to use a microscope which magnifies their size and makes them visible to us. Scientists have also created a low-cost and foldable paper microscope or foldscope. Foldscopes may not provide the same level of details like high-powered laboratory microscopes. However, these make microscopic world accessible to many people. Let us now take a closer look at the fascinating world of microbes. Activity 2.4: Let us observe pond water/ stagnant water e Take a container and collect pond or stagnant water in it with the help of your teacher or elder(s). e Use a dropper and place a drop of pond or stagnant water on a microscope or foldscope slide. Put a coverslip and observe it under the microscope or foldscope. e Observe the tiny organisms found in the pond or stagnant water. Activity 2.5: Let us observe soil suspension e Take a beaker and collect some moist soil in it from the nearby field or garden. Do not touch the soil with your bare hands use a spoon or gloves. 6/30/2025 4:19:42 PM e Pour some water into the beaker and stir it with a glass rod. The liquid, which may look dirty, has very fine particles of soil, and is called soil suspension. Keep it aside for some time and let the mixture settle. e Use a dropper and take a drop of water from the top layer. Place the drop on a microscope slide. e Cover it gently with a coverslip and observe it under the microscope (Fig. 2.8). You may observe small moving organisms similar to those you saw in Activity 2.4. This indicates that even soil suspension contains a variety of tiny creatures that cannot be seen with the unaided eye. The tiny creatures that cannot be seen with the naked eye are called microorganisms (micro means very small; organisms means living beings) or microbes. | Activity 2.6: Let us study Fig. 2.8: Observation A Sroup of students studying in Grade 8 performed Activities 2.4 of soilsuspension and 2.5. They also collected information from the library and under the microscope internet. They recorded the data obtained after observing pond water in Table 2.1 and the data obtained after observing soil suspension in Table 2.2. They identified the microorganisms as protozoa, algae, fungi, and bacteria. You can record if you find any of these categories of organisms. Table 2.1: Organisms present in pond water ce Amoeba 1. (Protozoa) Single cell, moving, irregular shape Paramecium ps (Protozoa) Single cell, moves from one place to another, movement takes place with the help of specialised structures Single cell, looks green because of the presence of green pigment, movement takes place with the help of specialised structures Curiosity Textbook of Science for Grade a a a Chapter 2.indd 16 6/30/2025 4:19:43 PM 3. Algae ne Co 2 The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our