Organisms present in pond water ce Amoeba 1. (Protozoa) Single cell, moving, irregular shape Paramecium ps (Protozoa) Single cell, moves from one place to another, movement takes place with the help of specialised structures Single cell, looks green because of the presence of green pigment, movement takes place with the help of specialised structures Curiosity Textbook of Science for Grade a a a Chapter 2.indd 16 6/30/2025 4:19:43 PM 3. Algae ne Co 2 The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked se) 1 Table 2.2: Organisms present in soil suspension So] Diagram | Remarks Bread mould (Fungi) 1 Branched filament without chlorophyll having : sac-like structure Mould (Fungi) ! Branched filament without chlorophyll having 2. ; brush-like structure 3 Spherical, presence of chlorophyll a green , pigment Bacteria BD (@ 9 Spherical, comma, spiral or rod-shaped, one 4. Qo @B long hair-like structure and many small $58 hair-like projections around the cell Did you also observe any of these microorganisms or something different? Record in your notebook and discuss in your class. In Tables 2.1 and 2.2, you have identified a variety of microorganisms. They are everywhere, and we can only see them with a microscope a device that magnifies them 100 to 400 times. Though microorganisms are small in size, they play an important role in our lives. Ever heard of ... Viruses are microscopic and acellular. Viruses multiply when they enter a living cell. They may infect plants, animals, or bacterial cells and may cause a disease. Chapter 2.indd 17 6/30/2025 4:19:44 PM 2.4 How Are We Connected to Microbes? Can we find microorganisms in other places, too? Let us have a discussion: Have you ever seen a lemon, tomato, orange, or any other food item rot after being left outside for some time? If yes, you may have noticed a powdery or cotton-like growth on them (Fig. 2.9). This happens because they have been infected by microbes. But Fig. 2.9: Fruit with microorganism where did these microbes come from? How did they growing on it come in contact with the food? This happens because microorganisms can be _ found everywhere, be it in water, soil, air, or even in some food items. You can use a foldscope or a microscope to explore surfaces of leaves, stems, roots, or any other part to see them. Like plants and animals, microorganisms also show great diversity. Some of them can even be found in extreme climatic conditions, such as hot water springs and snow cold zones as well as at moderate temperatures. You already know some of these organisms live inside our bodies, especially in our gut! You have studied in the chapter Life Processes in Animals in Curiosity, Grade 7 that our intestine has many bacteria that help in digestion. Like plants and animals, microorganisms vary in shape, size, and structure. In Tables 2.1 and 2.2, you would have observed microorganisms of different shapes spherical, rod-shape, or irregular. How does the diversity of microorganisms play a role in our