able to see the details of its body more clearly? For a long time, people were curious to explore the tiny organisms around them, but they could not see them with their naked eyes. So, how did we finally discover this invisible world? Do you know which scientific discovery helped us see the tiny world for the first time? Fig. 2.1: Round-bottom flask 6/30/2025 4:19:35 PM Ever heard of ... In 1665, a scientist named Robert Hooke published a book called Micrographia. He was a careful observer, and a skilled artist. In this book, he showed detailed drawings of tiny things that people had never seen before things he saw using a tool we now call a microscope. His microscope made things look 200 to 300 times bigger, than what one could see with the unaided eye. One day, he looked at a thin slice of cork and saw it was made of many small, empty spaces. These compartments reminded him of a honeycomb. He drew what he saw and called each small space a cell. This was the first time the word cell was used in science to describe the basic unit of life. Around the same time in 1660s, Antonie van Leeuwenhoek, a Dutch scientist, made better lenses that allowed him to build more useful microscopes. He was the first person to clearly see and describe tiny living things like bacteria and blood cells. Because of this, he is known as the Father of Microbiology. (a) (b) Fig. 2.2: (a) Micrographia book; (b) Microscope of Robert Hooke; (c) Cork cells as published in the Micrographia 2.1 What Is a Cell? All living beings are made up of cells. You might wonder what cells actually look like. Let us take a closer look at the basic structure of a cell using a microscope. Curiosity Textbook of Science for Grade a a a Chapter 2.indd 10 6/30/2025 4:19:38 PM Chapter 2.indd 11 ne Co 2 The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked se) 1 e Take an onion bulb from your kitchen or garden and wash it thoroughly with water. e Cut the onion bulb vertically into pieces. e Take one piece of onion and pull out the thin, transparent layer from its inner surface with the help of forceps. This layer is called the onion peel. Activity 2.2: Let us study a cell (Teacher demonstration activity) e Place the peel in a petri dish containing a few drops of / 8- 2.3: (@) Removing safranin (red-coloured stain) for 30 seconds. This will give onion peel from an a pinkish colour to the cells and help us see them clearly. e With the help of thin brush transfer the onion peel to another petri dish containing water to rinse the peel and remove extra stain. e Now, carefully place the stained onion peel on the glass slide using a thin brush, ensuring it does not break or fold. e Put a drop of glycerin over the onion peel on the