The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked Eye Probe and ponder e Have you ever wondered what you might see if the invisible world around you became visible? e How do you think your observation of this hidden world might change the way you think about size, complexity, or even what counts as living ? Have you thought how these tiny living beings interact with each other? Share your questions Chapter 2.indd 8 6/30/2025 4:19:34 PM Chapter 2.indd 9 ne Co 2 The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked ne] The human eye can only see objects that are above a certain size. For a long time, many tiny things around us remained unknown. Long ago, people discovered that a curved piece of glass could make small things look bigger. The piece of glass was shaped like a lentil seed thick in the middle and thin at the edge hence they called it a lens. Over time, lenses were improved to become more powerful. Each new tool, from simple magnifying glasses to microscopes, helped humans see what their eyes could not. The invention of the microscope opened a fascinating hidden world filled with tiny living creatures. We will explore some of these life forms in this chapter. You have already learnt about the amazing variety of living beings. Just look around there are so many beautiful plants and animals! They are of all shapes, sizes, and colours. Some living beings are tiny, while others are really big. They differ not only in their structure but also in many other features. All these living beings, whether plants or animals, are called organisms. Have you ever noticed the smallest organism around you that is visible to the naked eye? Think about it how small a thing can your eyes actually see? You might have seen some people using reading glasses. How does it help them see better? Or what happens when we use a magnifying glass to observe something? | Activity 2.1: Let us observe e Take a round-bottom flask made up of glass as shown in Fig. 2.1. Fill it with water. e Close the mouth of the flask with a cork. e Now, place the flask on an open book and look at the letters through it. Do you notice something interesting? The letters appear larger when seen through the flask! This happens because the flask filled with water acts like a magnifying glass. Now, use a real magnifying glass to look at small organisms, like an ant. Were you able to see the details of its body more clearly? For a long time, people were curious to explore the tiny organisms around them, but they could not see them with their naked eyes. So, how did we finally discover this invisible world? Do you know which scientific discovery helped us see the tiny world for the first time? Fig. 2.1: Round-bottom flask 6/30/2025 4:19:35 PM Ever heard of ... In 1665, a scientist named Robert Hooke published a book