movement is possible because muscle cells are thin, flexible, and spindle-shaped. The stomach also has different types of cells for performing different functions. Muscle cells in the stomach wall help churn the food. Other cells in the inner lining of the stomach produce digestive juices and acid that help break down the food. All these cells work together to make digestion possible. 2.2 What Are the Levels of Organisation in the Body of a Living Organism? The body of a living organism is organised in a complex way. Cell (Fig. 2.7a), isthe basic unit of life, just like a brick is the basic unit of wall (Fig. 2.3d). A group of similar cells forms a type of tissue (Fig. 2.7b). Different tissues are organised to form an organ (Fig. 2.7c). Several organs work together to form an organ system that performs a major function of the body (Fig. 2.7d). All the organ systems together make up acomplete organism (Fig. 2.7e) like a plant or an animal. So, the levels of organisations are: Cell > Tissue > Organ Organ system Organism These levels of organisation help us understand how simple building blocks like cells come together to form a complex living being. The life of complex living organisms begins with a single cell ego . The egg of any organism has an amazing ability to divide repeatedly to form a complete living being made up of many cells. Such living beings are called multicellular organisms. Animals, including humans, and plants are all examples of multicellular organisms. Textbook of Science for Grade a a a 6/30/2025 4:19:41 PM Chapter 2.indd 15 ne Co 2 The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked se) 1 Ever heard of ... _ The yolk (the yellow part of an egg) of an ostrich egg is a single cell the largest known cell in the living a world measuring about 130 mm to 170 mm in diameter. The egg contains extra non-cellular material: a shell for protection and a white liquid that nourishes the cell during its continued development. 2.3 What Are Microorganisms? Some living organisms are made up of just one or very few cells. They are so small that they can not be seen with the naked eye. These are called microorganisms. Some microorganisms, like bacteria and Amoeba, are made of just one cell (unicellular). Others, like some fungi and algae, have many cells (multicellular). They are found all around us in water, soil, air, and even inside our body! But what do their cells look like? Are they like the plant and animal cells we just learnt about, or are they different? To observe the cells of a microorganism, again, we need to use a microscope which magnifies their size and makes them visible to us. Scientists have also created a low-cost and foldable paper microscope or foldscope. Foldscopes may not provide the same level of details like high-powered laboratory microscopes. However, these make microscopic world accessible to many people. Let us now take