moderate temperatures. You already know some of these organisms live inside our bodies, especially in our gut! You have studied in the chapter Life Processes in Animals in Curiosity, Grade 7 that our intestine has many bacteria that help in digestion. Like plants and animals, microorganisms vary in shape, size, and structure. In Tables 2.1 and 2.2, you would have observed microorganisms of different shapes spherical, rod-shape, or irregular. How does the diversity of microorganisms play a role in our daily life? How do they help clean the environment? But why do microorganisms not infect the pickles and murabbas? This is because you add many spices with salt or sugar to it which act as preservatives. High concentration of salt or sugar do not allow these organisms to grow on them. 2.4.1 Key players in cleaning the environment Let us attempt to understand this by doing an activity. | Activity 2.7: Let us do e Take an empty container and fill it halfway with garden soil. e Add some fruit and vegetable peels to the container. Thereafter, put a layer of soil on it and leave it aside. Curiosity Textbook of Science for Grade a a a Chapter 2.indd 18 6/30/2025 4:19:45 PM Chapter 2.indd 19 ne Co 2 The Invisible Living World: Beyond Our Naked ae] 1 e After 2-3 weeks, observe the changes that have taken place. e Do you observe any difference in the contents of the container? You may find that peels of fruits and vegetables have turned into a dark-coloured material. This is manure, which is rich in nutrients and helps increase the fertility of the soil. But how did the peels of fruits and vegetables turn into manure? In Activity 2.6, you saw that soil contains various kinds of microorganisms. Some of Fig. 2.10: Recycling of nutrients by making these microorganisms, like fungi and bacteria, manure act on the plant waste and slowly break it down into simpler, nutrient-rich manure. You may have seen gardeners in your school or in a field near your house collecting dry leaves and plant waste and putting them into pits. Do you now understand why they do this? It is to make natural manure. Our scientific heritage Ancient Indian texts, particularly the Vedas, have references of the word Krim? which means different tiny entities including mention their beneficial and harmful effects. Atharvaveda also refers to Krim? . If you look around carefully, you might see decaying plants and fallen leaves stored in a container or lying in the garden, disappear after some time from the surroundings. This is because microorganisms breakdown and turn them into simpler substances rich in nutrients. These nutrients go back to the soil and help plants grow better. Microorganisms also decompose bodies of dead animals. So, microbes help recycle the waste and return important nutrients to nature. Manure formation occurs at optimal temperature and appropriate moisture level. Isn t it interesting? By now, you must have understood that bacteria and some fungi are types