OE rr |) F ) 1062CHO3 Parr OF LINEAR EQUATIONS IN wo VARIABLES 3.1 Introduction You must have come across situations like the one given below : Akhila went to a fair in her village. She wanted to enjoy rides on the Giant Wheel and play Hoopla (a game in which you throw a ring on the items kept in a stall, and if the ring covers any object completely, you get it). The number of times she played Hoopla is half the number of rides she had on the Giant Wheel. If each ride costs = 3, and a game of Hoopla costs 4, how would you find out the number of rides she had and how many times she played Hoopla, provided she spent & 20. May be you will try it by considering different cases. If she has one ride, is it possible? Is it possible to have two rides? And so on. Or you may use the knowledge of Class IX, to represent such situations as linear equations in two variables. Reprint 2025-26 Pair OF LINEAR EQUATIONS IN TWO VARIABLES 25 Let us try this approach. Denote the number of rides that Akhila had by x, and the number of times she played Hoopla by y. Now the situation can be represented by the two equations: y= ae (1) 3x + 4y = 20 (2) Can we find the solutions of this pair of equations? There are several ways of finding these, which we will study in this chapter. 3.2. Graphical Method of Solution of a Pair of Linear Equations A pair of linear equations which has no solution, is called an inconsistent pair of linear equations. A pair of linear equations in two variables, which has a solution, is called a consistent pair of linear equations. A pair of linear equations which are equivalent has infinitely many distinct common solutions. Such a pair is called a dependent pair of linear equations in two variables. Note that a dependent pair of linear equations is always consistent. We can now summarise the behaviour of lines representing a pair of linear equations in two variables and the existence of solutions as follows: (i) the lines may intersect in a single point. In this case, the pair of equations has a unique solution (consistent pair of equations). (ii) the lines may be parallel. In this case, the equations have no solution (inconsistent pair of equations). (iti) the lines may be coincident. In this case, the equations have infinitely many solutions [dependent (consistent) pair of equations]. Consider the following three pairs of equations. (i) x - 2y =0 and 3x + 4y -20=0 (The lines intersect) (ii) 2x + 3y 9=O0 and 4x +6y 18=0 (The lines coincide) (it) x +2y 4=0 and 2x+4y 12=0 (The lines are parallel) ay b 2) and & in all the Let us now write down, and compare, the values of a a 2 2 2 three examples. Here, a,, b,, c, and a,,