is a product of its factors. The term 3xy is a product of the factors 3, x and y. 2024-25 EE i emarics Expression (4x? 3xy) Terms 4x? 3xy 7 T, 7 On 7tn 7ItN ra iN iy N Factors 4 x x = # Expression (5xy + 10) Terms 5xy 10 ww aly 7 IN 7 i] N A 1 S, Factors 5 x y We can represent the terms and factors of the terms of an expression conveniently and elegantly by a tree diagram. The tree for the expression (4x? 3xy) is as shown in the adjacent figure. Note, in the tree diagram, we have used dotted lines for factors and continuous lines for terms. This is to avoid mixing them. Let us draw a tree diagram for the expression Sxy + 10. The factors are such that they cannot be further factorised. Thus we do not write 5xy as 5 x xy, because xy can be further factorised. Similarly, if x* were a term, it would be written as xxx xx and not x? x x. Also, remember that 1 is not taken as a separate factor. Coefficients Try THESE We have learnt how to write a term as a product of factors. 1. What are the terms in the One of these factors may be numerical and the others algebraic following expressions? (i.e., they contain variables). The numerical factor is said to be Show how the terms are the numerical coefficient or simply the coefficient of the term. formed. Drawatreediagram _ It is also said to be the coefficient of the rest of the term (which *< _ for each expression: is obviously the product of algebraic factors of the term). Thus Sy + 3x2, Imre 2x2y. in 5xy, 5 is the coefficient of the term. It is also the coefficient 1 f ; : of xy. In the term 10xyz, 10 is the coefficient of xyz, in the term 2. Write three expression each ~7xy?, -7 is the coefficient of xy . having 4 terms. When the coefficient of a term is +1, itis usually omitted. For example, |x is written as x; 1 x y is written as x y* and so on. Also, the coefficient ( 1) is indicated only by the minus sign. Thus ( 1) x is written as x; ( 1) x? y is written as x y and so on. Sometimes, the word coefficient is used in a more general way. Thus Try THESE we Say that in the term 5xy, 5 is the coefficient of xy, x is the coefficient of Sy Identify the coefficients of the terms of following expressions: and y is the coefficient of 5x. In 10.xy?, 10 is the coefficient of xy , x is the coefficient of 10 y? and y is the coefficient of 10x. Thus, in this more general way, a coefficient may be either a numerical factor or an algebraic factor or a product of two or more factors. It