Algebraic Expressions Chapter 10 0756CH12 10.1 INTRODUCTION We have already come across simple algebraic expressions like x + 3, y 5, 4x +5, 10y 5 and so on. In Class VI, we have seen how these expressions are useful in formulating puzzles and problems. We have also seen examples of several expressions in the chapter on simple equations. Expressions are a central concept in algebra. This Chapter is devoted to algebraic expressions. When you have studied this Chapter, you will know how algebraic expressions are formed, how they can be combined, how we can find their values and how they can be used. 10.2 How are ExXprREssIons FORMED? We now know very well what a variable is. We use letters x, y, /, m, ... etc. to denote variables. A variable can take various values. Its value is not fixed. On the other hand, a constant has a fixed value. Examples of constants are: 4, 100, 17, etc. We combine variables and constants to make algebraic expressions. For this, we use the operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication and division. We have already come across expressions like 4x + 5, 10y 20. The expression 4x + 5 is obtained from the variable x, first by multiplying x by the constant 4 and then adding the constant 5 to the product. Similarly, 10y 20 is obtained by first multiplying y by 10 and then subtracting 20 from the product. The above expressions were obtained by combining variables with constants. We can also obtain expressions by combining variables with themselves or with other variables. Look at how the following expressions are obtained: x , 2y , 3x? 5, xy, 4xy +7 (i) The expression x is obtained by multiplying the variable x by itself; XXX=X? Just as 4 x 4 is written as 4 , we write x x x =x . Itis commonly read as x squared. 2024-25 (it) (iti) (iv) (v) ALGEBRAIC EXPRESSIONS ii RR i (Later, when you study the chapter Exponents and Powers you will realise that x may also be read as x raised to the power 2). In the same manner, we can write XXxXxXx=%x3 Commonly, x? is read as x cubed . Later, you will realise that x may also be read as x raised to the power 3. x, x , x , ... are all algebraic expressions obtained from x. The expression 2y7is obtained fromy: 2y?=2xyxy Here by multiplying y with y we obtain y? and then we multiply y by the constant 2. In (3x? 5) we first obtain x , and multiply it by 3 to get 3x . From 3x , we subtract 5 to finally arrive at 3x? 5. Describe how the following expressions are obtained: In xy, we multiply the variable x with another variable y. Thus, XxX y=xy. In 4xy + 7, we first obtain xy, multiply it by 4 to get 4xy and 22 2 add 7 to 4xy to get the expression. Ixy + 5, xy,