Data Handling Chapter 3 3.1 REPRESENTATIVE VALUES You might be aware of the term average and would have come across statements involving the term average in your day-to-day life: @ Isha spends on an average of about 5 hours daily for her studies. @ The average temperature at this time of the year is about 40 degree celsius. @ The average age of pupils in my class is 12 years. @ The average attendance of students in a school during its final examination was 98 per cent. Many more of such statements could be there. Think about the statements given above. Do you think that the child in the first statement studies exactly for 5 hours daily? Or, is the temperature of the given place during that particular time always 40 degrees? Or, is the age of each pupil in that class 12 years? Obviously not. Then what do these statements tell you? By average we understand that Isha, usually, studies for 5 hours. On some days, she may study for less number of hours and on the other days she may study longer. Similarly, the average temperature of 40 degree celsius, means that, very often, the temperature at this time of the year is around 40 degree celsius. Sometimes, it may be less than 40 degree celsius and at other times, it may be more than 40 C. Thus, we realise that average is anumber that represents or shows the central tendency of a group of observations or data. Since average lies between the highest and the lowest value of the given data so, we say average is a measure of the central tendency of the group of data. Different forms of data need different forms of representative or central value to describe it. One of these representative values is the Arithmetic mean . You will learn about the other representative values in the later part of the chapter. 2024-25 DATA HANDLING ii oe 3.2 ARITHMETIC MEAN The most common representative value of a group of data is the arithmetic mean or the mean. To understand this in a better way, let us look at the following example: Two vessels contain 20 litres and 60 litres of milk respectively. What is the amount that each vessel would have, if both share the milk equally? When we ask this question we are seeking the arithmetic mean. In the above case, the average or the arithmetic mean would be Total quantity of milk 20+60 Number of vessels 2 litres = 40 litres. Thus, each vessels would have 40 litres of milk. The average or Arithmetic Mean (A.M.) or simply mean is defined as follows: Sum of all observations number of observations mean = Consider these examples. EXAMPLE 1 Ashish studies for 4 hours, 5 hours and 3 hours respectively on three consecutive days. How many hours does he study daily on an average? SOLUTION The average study time of Ashish would be Total number of study hours 44543 Number of days