Laws. After the Corn Laws were scrapped, food could be imported into Britain more cheaply than it could be produced within the country. ao) = = i i) ( s) oO jo iS) lop) & oO = (J) = Ee British agriculture was unable to compete with imports. Vast areas of land were now left uncultivated, and thousands of men and women were thrown out of work. They flocked to the cities or migrated overseas. Reprint 2025-26 Ke) ro = oO _ [oe = Vu oa] = (S) (J) = ~ ae) = oO oe ae) = As food prices fell, consumption in Britain rose. From the midnineteenth century, faster industrial growth in Britain also led to higher incomes, and therefore more food imports. Around the world in Eastern Europe, Russia, America and Australia lands were cleared and food production expanded to meet the British demand. It was not enough merely to clear lands for agriculture. Railways were needed to link the agricultural regions to the ports. New harbours had to be built and old ones expanded to ship the new cargoes. People had to settle on the lands to bring them under cultivation. This meant building homes and settlements. All these activities in turn required capital and labour. Capital flowed from financial centres such as London. The demand for labour in places where labour was in short supply as in America and Australia led to more migration. Nearly 50 million people emigrated from Europe to America and Australia in the nineteenth century. All over the world some 150 million are estimated to have left their homes, crossed oceans and vast distances over land in search of a better future. * s = ~ = *, as 2 ae Se Pe SS = == : ery ee wi aN eB ~ Ss Fig. 6 Emigrant ship leaving for the US, b M.W. Ridley, 1869. Fig. 7 Irish emigrants waiting to board the ship, by Michael Fitzgerald, 1874. Reprint 2025-26 Thus by 1890, a global agricultural economy had taken shape, Activity accompanied by complex changes in labour movement patterns, capital flows, ecologies and technology. Food no longer came from Prepare a flow chart to show how Britain's a nearby village or town, but from thousands of miles away. It was decision to import food led to increased not grown by a peasant tilling his own land, but by an agricultural migration to America and Australia. worker, perhaps recently arrived, who was now working on a large farm that only a generation ago had most likely been a forest. It was transported by railway, built for that very purpose, and by ships which were increasingly manned in these decades by low-paid workers from southern Europe, Asia, Africa and the Caribbean. Imagine that you are an agricultural worker who has arrived in America from Ireland. Write a paragraph on why you chose to come and how you are earning your living. Some of this dramatic change, though ona smaller scale, occurred closer home