Indentured labour - A bonded labourer under contract to work for an employer fora specific amount of time, to pay off his passage to a new country or home Ke) ro = as) Ho} & Oo oO qe [e) lop) = oO = (J) = e Ke) ro = oO _ [oe = Vu oa] = (S) (J) = ~ ae) = oO oe ae) = The main destinations of Indian indentured migrants were the Caribbean islands (mainly Trinidad, Guyana and Surinam), Mauritius and Fiji. Closer home, Tamil migrants went to Ceylon and Malaya. Indentured workers were also recruited for tea plantations in Assam. Recruitment was done by agents engaged by employers and paid a small commission. Many migrants agreed to take up work hoping to escape poverty or oppression in their home villages. Agents also tempted the prospective migrants by providing false information about final [i destinations, modes of travel, the nature of the | Fig. 74 Indian indentured labourers in a cocoa plantation in work, and living and working conditions. Often Trinidad, early nineteenth century. migrants were not even told that they were to embark on a long sea voyage. Sometimes agents even forcibly abducted less willing migrants. Nineteenth-century indenture has been described as a new system of slavery . On arrival at the plantations, labourers found conditions to be different from what they had imagined. Living and working conditions were harsh, and there were few legal rights. But workers discovered theit own ways of surviving. Many of them escaped into the wilds, though if caught they faced severe punishment. Others developed new forms of individual and collective selfexpression, blending different cultural forms, old and new. In Trinidad the annual Muharram procession was transformed into a riotous carnival called Hosay (for Imam Hussain) in which workers of all races and religions joined. Similarly, the protest religion of Rastafarianism (made famous by the Jamaican reggae star Bob Marley) is also said to reflect social and cultural links with Indian migrants to the Caribbean. Chutney music , popular in Trinidad and Guyana, is another creative contemporary expression of the post-indenture experience. These forms of cultural fusion are part of the making of the global world, where things from different places get mixed, lose their original characteristics and become something entirely new. Most indentured workers stayed on after their contracts ended, or returned to their new homes after a short spell in India. Consequently, there are large communities of people of Indian descent in these countries. Have you heard of the Nobel Prize-winning writer Reprint 2025-26 Discuss Discuss the importance of language and popular traditions in the creation of national identity. i312 Fig. 15 Indentured laboureres photographed for identification. For the employers, the numbers and not the names mattered. V.S. Naipaul? Some of you may have followed the exploits of West Indies cricketers Shivnarine Chanderpaul and Ramnaresh Sarwan. If you have wondered why their names sound vaguely Indian, the answer is that they are descended from indentured labour migrants from India.