with India. Britain used this surplus to balance its trade deficits with other countries that is, with countries from which Britain was importing more than it was selling to. This is how a multilateral settlement system works it allows one country s deficit with another country to be settled by its surplus with a third country. By helping Britain balance its deficits, India played a crucial role in the late-nineteenth-century world economy. Britain s trade surplus in India also helped pay the so-called home charges that included private remittances home by British officials and traders, interest payments on India s external debt, and pensions of British officials in India. _____ . Sea route - Land route ~~ Volume of trade passing through the port Fig. 19 - The trade routes that linked India to the world at the end of the seventeenth century. Reprint 2025-26 as) s i) Ze) Oo oO qe [e) lo?) Ss ds oO (J) = Ry The Inter-war Economy The First World War (1914-18) was mainly fought in Europe. But its impact was felt around the world. Notably for our concerns in this chapter, it plunged the first half of the twentieth century into a crisis that took over three decades to overcome. During this period the world experienced widespread economic and political instability, and another catastrophic wat. 3.1 Wartime Transformations The First World War, as you know, was fought between two power blocs. On the one side were the Allies Britain, France and Russia (later joined by the US); and on the opposite side were the Central Powers Germany, Austria-Hungary and Ottoman Turkey. When the war began in August 1914, many governments thought it would be over by Christmas. It lasted more than four years. The First World War was a war like no other before. The fighting involved the world s leading industrial nations which now harnessed the vast powers of modern industry to inflict the greatest possible destruction on their enemies. This war was thus the first modern industrial war. It saw the use of machine guns, tanks, aircraft, chemical weapons, etc. on a massive scale. These were all increasingly products of modern largescale industry. To fight the war, millions of soldiers had to be recruited from around the world and moved to the frontlines on large ships and trains. The scale of death and destruction 9 million dead and 20 million injured was unthinkable before the industrial age, without the use of industrial arms. Most of the killed and maimed were men of working age. These deaths and injuries reduced the able-bodied workforce in Europe. With fewer numbers within the family, household incomes declined after the war. produce war-related goods. Entire societies were ; b\w [| fe /, NG 7 j also reorganised for war as men went to battle, During the war, industries were restructured to S = = oO _ ) a iS Vu @ < fe) (S) (J) = _ S = oO oe Ss ; . : Fig.