communism in Eastern Europe brought many countries back into the fold of the world economy. Wages were relatively low in countries like China. Thus they became attractive destinations for investment by foreign MNCs competing to capture world markets. Have you noticed that most of the TVs, mobile phones, and toys we see in the shops seem to be made in China? This is because of the low-cost structure of the Chinese economy, most importantly its low wages. The relocation of industry to low-wage countries stimulated world trade and capital flows. In the last two decades the world s economic geography has been transformed as countries such as India, China and Brazil have undergone rapid economic transformation. Reprint 2025-26 Ke) = = i) Ho} Oo oO qe [e) lo?) = iS oO (J) = Write in brief 1. Give two examples of different types of global exchanges which took place before the seventeenth century, choosing one example from Asia and one from the Americas. 2. Explain how the global transfer of disease in the pre-modern world helped in the colonisation of the Americas. 3. Write a note to explain the effects of the following: a) The British government's decision to abolish the Corn Laws. The coming of rinderpest to Africa. The death of men of working-age in Europe because of the World War. The Great Depression on the Indian economy. The decision of MNCs to relocate production to Asian countries. [oy ao ~~ re wer wer a e 4. Give two examples from history to show the impact of technology on food availability. 5. What is meant by the Bretton Woods Agreement? 6. Imagine that you are an indentured Indian labourer in the Caribbean. Drawing from the details in this chapter, write a letter to your family describing your life and feelings. 7. Explain the three types of movements or flows within international economic exchange. Find one example of each type of flow which involved India and Indians, and write a short account of it. 8. Explain the causes of the Great Depression. 9. Explain what is referred to as the G-77 countries. In what ways can G-77 be seen as a reaction to the activities of the Bretton Woods twins? Find out more about gold and diamond mining in South Africa in the nineteenth century. Who controlled the gold and diamond companies? Who were the miners and what were their lives like? To = = vl _ le) Qa iS Vu Ww = [o} OU (J) = ~ we} Ss oO oe we} = Reprint 2025-26