years. Like other European and American explorers of the time, Stanley went with arms, mobilised local hunters, warriors and labourers to help him, fought with local tribes, investigated African terrains, and mapped different regions. These explorations helped the conquest of Africa. Geographical explorations were not driven by an innocent search for scientific information. They were directly linked to imperial projects. SPANISH | y py OE = ae MOROCCO _ ~ SS I} MEDITERRANEAN SEA | NISIA SPANISH RIO of fe DE ORO, EGYPTIAN SUDAN _ PORTUGUESE EAST AFRICA = BELGIAN BRITISH FRENCH GERMAN ITALIAN _ PORTUGUESE __ SPANISH Gm BRITISH DOMINION INDEPENDENT STATE Fig. 70 Map of colonial A frica at the end. of the nineteenth century. Fig. 11 Sir Henry Morton Stanley and his retinue in Central Africa, Illustrated London News, 7877. Reprint 2025-26 ao) = = i i) ( s) oO jo iS) lop) & oO = (J) = Ee India and the Contemporary World 2.4 Rinderpest, or the Cattle Plague In Africa, in the 1890s, a fast-spreading disease of cattle plague or Rinderpest had a terrifying impact on people s livelihoods and the local economy. This is a good example of the widespread European imperial impact on colonised societies. It shows how in this era of conquest even a disease affecting cattle reshaped the lives and fortunes of thousands of people and their relations with the rest of the world. Historically, Africa had abundant land anda relatively small population. For centuries, land and livestock sustained African livelihoods and people rarely worked for a wage. In latenineteenth-century Africa there were few consumer goods that wages could buy. If you had been an African possessing land and livestock - and there was plenty of both - you too would have seen little reason to work for a wage. In the late nineteenth century, Europeans were attracted to Fig. 12 - Transport to the Transvaal gold mines, The Graphic, 7887. Crossing the Wilge river was the quickest method of transport to the gold fields of Transvaal. After the discovery of gold in Witwatersrand, Europeans rushed to the region despite their fear of disease and death, and the difficulties of the journey. By the 1890s, South Africa contributed over 20 per cent of the world gold production. Africa due to its vast resources of land and minerals. Europeans came to Africa hoping to establish plantations and mines to produce crops and minerals for export to Europe. But there was an unexpected problem - a shortage of labour willing to work for wages. Employers used many methods to recruit and retain labour. Heavy taxes were imposed which could be paid only by working for wages on plantations and mines. Inheritance laws were changed so that Fig. 13 Diggers at work in the Transvaal gold fields in South Africa, The Graphic, 7875. Reprint 2025-26 peasants were displaced from land: only one member of a family was allowed to inherit land, as a result of which the others were pushed into the labour market.