observations. e Now blow harder and observe. When you blow between the two balloons, you observe that they move towards each other. This happens because when you blow air between the balloons, a low pressure area is created between them. The higher air pressure surrounding the balloon pushes them towards each other. You must have observed that blowing harder increases the speed at which the balloons approach each other. What can you infer from this activity? We infer that high speed winds are accompanied by a reduced air pressure. [have read that high-speed winds can blow off roofs. Fig. 6.13: Blowing between two balloons 6/28/2025 4:00:15 PM When high-speed winds blow over houses, a low-pressure area is created over them, as high-speed winds are accompanied by a reduced pressure. Therefore, the air pressure above the roofs of the houses is lower than the pressure below them. If the pressure difference is large and the roofs are weak, they may be blown away, as shown in Fig. 6.14a. That is Fig. 6.14: (a) Roof of a house why it is safer to keep doors and windows of blown away the houses open during storms with high-speed winds. When the same wind moves over the roofs, and through the houses, the pressure difference between inside of the houses and over the roofs is reduced to a large extent. This helps prevent the roofs from being blown off as shown in Fig. 6.14b. You must have experienced that when high-speed winds blow during storms, they are sometimes accompanied by thunder and lightning. Let us learn more about them. Fig. 6.14: (b) Roof of a house intact 6.5 Storms, Thunderstorms, and Lightning Yes, the sound of thunder is so frightening! Usually there is heavy rainfall too. Have you heard the sound of thunder and seen lightning during the rainy season? When land gets heated, the warm and moist air, being lighter, rises, thereby creating a low pressure area. Cooler air from the surrounding high-pressure areas flows to take its place. This air, in turn, gets heated and rises. This results in a continuous process of wind circulation. As the rising air expands, it cools and moisture in it condenses to form water droplets, creating clouds. The water droplets merge to form heavier drops, which come down as rain, hail, or snow. The strong winds accompanied by rain is called a storm. In hot, humid, and tropical regions like India, storms are more frequent. Under certain conditions, warm air rises to great heights that the low temperature there converts water droplets into ice particles. Strong winds blowing upwards and downwards Fig. 6.15: Strong winds going (Fig. 6.15) facilitate rubbing between water droplets up and down uriosity Textbook of Science for crades }- hy hy h hy h h Chapter 6.indd 90 6/28/2025 4:00:18 PM Chapter 6.indd 91 h h hy h hy { chapter Pressure, Winds, Storms, and cyclones and ice particles. You have learnt in the chapter Exploring Forces that when two objects are