change in the size of the balloons? Write down your observations. What can be the reason for the change in the sizes of the balloons? The air pressure in the inflated balloon is higher than that in the uninflated balloon. As a result, some air moves from the inflated balloon to the uninflated balloon, resulting in changes in the size of both the balloons. Do you notice that after some time both the balloons attain almost the same size and the flow of air stops? Why does the air flow stop? The flow of air continues till the air pressure in the inflated balloon is higher than the air pressure in the uninflated balloon. The air flow stops when the pressure in both balloons becomes equal. At this stage, both balloons are almost of the same size. Thus, we can conclude that air moves from a region of high air pressure to a region of low air pressure. You can relate this conclusion to the directions of the sea breeze and land breeze, which you studied in Curiosity, Grade 7. As land gets heated faster than water during the day, the air above the land uriosity Textbook of Science for crades }- hy hy h hy h h Chapter 6.indd 88 6/28/2025 4:00:14 PM Chapter 6.indd 89 h h hy h hy { chapter Pressure, Winds, Storms, and cyclones becomes warmer and lighter. Hence, it rises, creating an area of low pressure. The air from the high pressure region of the sea blows to the low pressure region which develops on the land, resulting in a sea breeze. At night, the water is warmer than the land. Therefore, a low pressure area develops above the sea. As a result, wind blows from the land to the sea, giving rise to land breeze. Thus, the phenomenon of land breeze and sea breeze is mainly due to the pressure differences over the land and the sea. If we could measure the speed ofthe escaping air in Activity 6.5, we would find that the speed of the air is higher if the pressure difference is higher. 6.4 High-Speed Winds Result in Lowering of Air Pressure Activity 6.6: Let us observe e Take two balloons of the same size. e Inflate both balloons and tie strings to them. e Hang the two balloons from a stick, leaving a gap of 6-10 cm (Fig. 6.13). e Now, blow air into the narrow space between the balloons. e What happens to the balloons? Note down your observations. e Now blow harder and observe. When you blow between the two balloons, you observe that they move towards each other. This happens because when you blow air between the balloons, a low pressure area is created between them. The higher air pressure surrounding the balloon pushes them towards each other. You must have observed that blowing harder increases the speed at which the balloons approach each other. What can you infer from this activity? We infer that high