easier to drive a nail using its pointed end, and it is easier to cut an apple with the sharp edge of a knife. You must have seen overhead water tanks (Fig. 6.4) in your locality, or on the rooftops of houses used for water supply. Why are these tanks always === placed at a height? Fig. 6.4: Overhead tank Do liquids also exert pressure? Let us find out by conducting the following activity. | Activity 6.1: Let us try and find out e Take two transparent glass or plastic pipes of the same length (about 25 cm), but of different diameters, as shown in Fig. 6.5. e Take two good-quality rubber balloons. Attach them to one end of each pipe. e Clamp the pipes on astand as shown in Fig. 6.5. e Now, fill both the pipes with water up to the same level about halfway. e Observe what happens to the balloons. e Do both balloons bulge? Do they bulge to the same extent? What can you infer from this activity? You must have observed that the two balloons bulge to the same extent. Why is it so? Notice that because of the different diameters, the weight of water in the two pipes is different. However, the bulge in both the balloons is the same. This means that the weight of Fs: 6.5: Equal heights of water columns water in the pipes could not be responsible for the produce same bulge in balloons extent of the bulge of the balloons. Could it be that the water column is exerting pressure? Yes, it is the pressure exerted by the water column which is responsible for the bulge. That is why equal water column heights produce equal bulges in the balloons, despite their different diameters. Chapter 6.indd 83 6/28/2025 4:00:02 PM qi What will happen to the bulge of the balloon if we increase the height of the water column? More Water water ; Pour some more water in any one of the pipes Balloon used in Fig. 6.5. Observe the bulge of the balloon. hulecs. bulges | Repeat this process a few times, adding more out more water each time and noting the extent of bulge as shown in Fig. 6.6. Do you see any relation between the amount of bulge of the rubber balloon and the height of Fig. 6.6: Higher heights of water column the water column in the pipe? You must have produce bigger bulge of the balloon observed that the bulge of the balloon increases as the height of the water column increases. Thus, as the height of the water column in the pipe increases, the pressure at the bottom of the pipe also increases, which causes the balloon to bulge more. So, we can say that the pressure exerted by a liquid in a vessel depends on the height of its column. This is the reason why overhead tanks are placed at a height so that the pressure in the taps is increased, resulting