as the height of the water column increases. Thus, as the height of the water column in the pipe increases, the pressure at the bottom of the pipe also increases, which causes the balloon to bulge more. So, we can say that the pressure exerted by a liquid in a vessel depends on the height of its column. This is the reason why overhead tanks are placed at a height so that the pressure in the taps is increased, resulting in a good stream of water from the taps. Suppose you are living on the second floor of a three-storeyed building and an overhead water tank is placed on the top floor. Will you or your friend on the first floor receive a more powerful stream of tap water? Give reasons. out Do liquids also exert pressure on the walls of the container? Let us find out by conducting the following activity. | Activity 6.2: Let us find out Bottle e Take a used plastic bottle and remove its cap. Make Holes four small holes near the bottom around the sides using a needle or a nail. Make sure that the holes are at the same height from the bottom as shown in Fig. 6.7. (If you find it difficult to make a hole, you can slightly heat the needle and poke it to make holes.) e Seal the holes with a tape and fill the bottle with water. Fi tees e Now, remove the tape from all holes at the same time. ig. 6.7: Liquid exerts pressure on the wall of the container e What do you observe? Water uriosity Textbook of Science for crades }- hy hy h hy h h Chapter 6.indd 84 6/28/2025 4:00:03 PM h h hy h hy { chapter Pressure, Winds, Storms, and cyclones 8 You observe water flowing out through the holes on the sides of the bottle. What can you infer from this observation? It indicates that water also exerts pressure on the sides of a container. Therefore, we can conclude that liquids exert pressure not only at the bottom of the container, but also on its sides. In fact liquids exert pressure in all directions. You must have seen water spurting out like a fountain from leaking joints or holes in water pipes. Can you explain why this happens? Is it due to the pressure exerted by water on the walls of the pipes? Ever heard of ... Do you know that the base of P=" a dam is much broader than the top? This is because a broad base not only supports the structure of the dam, but also withstands the horizontal (Fig. 6.8). The water stored in the dam, exerts pressure horizontally on the side walls arose of the dam and vertically on Fig. 6.8: Dam the floor due to the height of the water level. The pressure which acts horizontally, is very large near its bottom. Thus, to withstand the pressure, the base of the dam is