Tavern | a me 0877CHO6 | Probe and ponder e Why are winds stronger on some days than on others? e Why are water tanks usually placed at a height? e Can air pressure really crush us? e What causes storms and cyclones? If the Earth stopped rotating, would cyclones still form? Share your questions Chapter 6.indd 80 6/28/2025 3:59:54 PM | Chapter 6.indd 81 h h hy h hy { chapter Pressure, Winds, Storms, and cyclones You must have observed fallen leaves on the ground swirling in the air or being swept away, and trees swaying or even bending when a strong wind blows. Have you ever wondered why fallen leaves rise in the air or trees sway or bend? Does the wind exert force on fallen leaves to make them rise or on trees to bend? Recall other similar effects of the force exerted by wind like slamming of doors or rattling of windows, or fluttering of clothes? How does the force exerted by wind make this happen? The force exerted by wind creates wind pressure which causes these effects. In this chapter, we will explore the relationship between force and pressure, and understand how they shape powerful natural events like thunderstorms and cyclones. Megha and her brother Pawan are going on a picnic. They walk to the picnic spot, carrying identical items in their bags (Fig. 6.1). On the way, Pawan keeps adjusting his bag, and looks uncomfortable. Megha asks, Is there a problem with your bag? Pawan responds, Yes, it is hurting my shoulders. Megha says, Both our bags are equally heavy. Why does your bag hurt, and mine doesn t? Pawan reflects for a minute and says, Perhaps, it is because of the difference in the straps of our bags. My bag has narrow straps while your bag has broad straps. Can the shape or size of the straps really make a difference? Let us try to find out. When we carry a bag, we feel its weight because of the force of gravity acting on our shoulders. The weight of the bag with narrow straps acts on a Fig. 6.1: Megha and Pawan smaller area of our shoulders, whereas the weight of carrying their bags the bag with broad straps is spread out over a larger area of our shoulders. It is due to this reason that we feel more comfortable carrying a bag with broader straps than one with narrow straps, although both bags have the same weight. Since the area over which the force acts is involved, we define a quantity called pressure, which is the force per unit area. Force Area So, Pressure = At this stage, we will consider only those forces which act perpendicular to the surface on which the pressure is to be computed. 6/28/2025 3:59:56 PM Narrow Broad straps reduce the pressure exerted by the bag on our shoulders as compared to narrow straps. Therefore, we feel more comfortable carrying a bag with broad straps. Can you