15 cm x 15 cm is nearly equal to the force of gravity on an object of mass 225 kg (2250 N). The reason we are not crushed under this weight is that the pressure inside our bodies is also equal to the atmospheric pressure. This balances the pressure exerted from outside. The pressure inside our body is caused by the movement of fluids and gases in tissues and organs of the body. A step further The SI unit of pressure is N/m , also known as pascal (Pa). However, the practical unit of air pressure is millibar (mb), which is equal to 100 Pa. Air pressure is also expressed in hectopascal (hPa), which is equal to 100 Pa. 6.3 Formation of Wind You must have noticed that on some days, the wind blows strongly, whereas on other days, it is calm. Sometimes, wind becomes so strong that it causes damage to life and property. You must have seen that when an inflated balloon is kept without closing its mouth, the air from the balloon escapes. Recall that when there is a puncture in the bicycle tube, the air escapes and the tube collapses. In both of these cases, does air move from a high pressure region to a low pressure region? h h hy h hy { chapter Pressure, Winds, Storms, and cyclones 8 Fig. 6.11: A sucker 6/28/2025 4:00:13 PM Does the difference in air pressure have anything to do with the formation of winds? Let us find out from the following activity. | Activity 6.5: Let us observe e Take two similar balloons made of thin rubber, and a drinking straw. e Insert one end of the straw into one balloon and secure it with a rubber band or thread. e Nowinflate the second balloon and hold its mouth Fig. 6.12: Air moves froma with your fingers, so that air does not escape. high pressure region to a low e Insert the free end of the straw into the neck of pressure region . : . the inflated balloon and secure it with a rubber band or thread. Make sure that the air does not leak from the balloon as the straw is inserted in it. Now you have one end of the straw inside the inflated balloon and the other end inside the uninflated balloon as shown in Fig. 6.12. e Predict what would happen to the balloons. e Observe what happens to both the balloons. Did it happen as predicted? e Do you observe any change in the size of the balloons? Write down your observations. What can be the reason for the change in the sizes of the balloons? The air pressure in the inflated balloon is higher than that in the uninflated balloon. As a result, some air moves from the inflated balloon to the uninflated balloon, resulting in changes in the size of both the balloons. Do you notice that after some time both the balloons attain almost the same size and