the force acts is involved, we define a quantity called pressure, which is the force per unit area. Force Area So, Pressure = At this stage, we will consider only those forces which act perpendicular to the surface on which the pressure is to be computed. 6/28/2025 3:59:56 PM Narrow Broad straps reduce the pressure exerted by the bag on our shoulders as compared to narrow straps. Therefore, we feel more comfortable carrying a bag with broad straps. Can you now understand why it feels easier to lift a Fig. 6.2: Buckets with broad water-filled bucket with a broad handle than with a narrow and narrow handles handle (Fig. 6.2)? Similarly, we have seen that when people carry loads like pots or vegetable baskets on their heads, they often place a round piece of cloth under the loads (Fig. 6.3). In both cases, the objective is to reduce pressure by increasing the area over which the weight acts. Pressure is defined as the force per unit area. The SI unit of force is newton and that of area is metre . Therefore, the SI unit of pressure is newton/metre? (N/m7). This unit is also called a pascal, denoted by Pa. If a force of 100N is applied on a cardboard of area 2m/ , then the pressure applied on the cardboard will be: Force 100N Fig. 6.3: Persons = carrying loads Area 2m? There are many situations in daily life where pressure plays a role. Conduct the activities given in Table 6.1 and record your observations. Explain how pressure influences the mode of action undertaken for each activity. Pressure = = 50 N/m2 Safety first 4 > The activities listed in Table 6.1 should be conducted under the Vos % supervision of an adult. | Table 6.1: Record your observations Activity Modes of action Syl elie to perform? Give reasons. Driving an ae iron nail By the head of By the pointed the nail end of the nail Cutting an apple with a knife Using the sharp _ Using the blunt edge ofthe knife edge of the knife uriosity Textbook of Science for crades }- hy hy h hy h h Chapter 6.indd 82 6/28/2025 4:00:00 PM h h hy h hy { chapter Pressure, Winds, Storms, and cyclones ha What can you conclude from your observations in Table 6.1? We conclude that when the area over which a force applied is smaller, the resulting pressure is higher, making it easier to do certain tasks. This is why it is easier to drive a nail using its pointed end, and it is easier to cut an apple with the sharp edge of a knife. You must have seen overhead water tanks (Fig. 6.4) in your locality, or on the rooftops of houses used for water supply. Why are these tanks always === placed at a height? Fig. 6.4: Overhead tank Do liquids also exert pressure? Let us find out by conducting the following activity. | Activity 6.1: Let us try