cyclone in 2020 had peak wind speeds of 270 km/h. Strong winds during a cyclone push ocean water towards the shore, creating a wall of water that can be as high as 3-12 metres. This surge of water can flood coastal areas and even areas far from the sea. The heavy rainfall which accompanies a cyclone may cause rivers to overflow and can also trigger landslides. Seawater that rushes inland can contaminate drinking water sources and damage farmland. The salt in seawater can make soil less fertile, affecting crops. Roads may get blocked due to fallen trees and debris, making it difficult for help to reach the affected areas. Power outages can last for days, disrupting emergency services and daily life. How can we protect ourselves during cyclones? It is important to stay updated on weather reports and periodic alerts, and warnings issued by the India Meteorological Department (IMD). Thanks to the weather monitoring satellites, today we can track cyclones and predict their path, helping us reduce their impact on life and property. Several national and international organisations work together to monitor cyclone-related disasters. If you live in a cyclone-prone area, keep an emergency kit ready with essential items. During a cyclone, quickly move to a nearby designated cyclone shelter. Let us wrap up! Warm air rises, creating a low-pressure area. Cool air rushes to occupy the low-pressure area. Warm air rises, cools, and the water vapour condenses to form clouds. Bigger water drops in the clouds fall to the ground as rain, hail, or snow. Positive and negative charges are created in the clouds by strong winds blowing upwards and downwards. lightning. Lightning may occur within a cloud, between clouds, or between a cloud and the ground. When positive and negative charges meet, they cause \/ Under certain weather conditions, storms may develop into cyclones. 6/28/2025 4:00:35 PM. Pressure is defined as force per unit area. The SI unit of pressure is newton/metre (N/m?) and is also called pascal denoted by Pa. @ Liquids and gases exert pressure on the walls of a container. @ Thepressure exerted by the air around us is known as atmospheric pressure. @ Differences in air pressure cause winds to blow. @ Warm air rises, creating a low-pressure area. Cooler air from surrounding higher-pressure regions moves in to take its place. Important requirements for the formation of thunderstorms are moisture and strong winds. @ Strong winds moving upwards and downwards facilitate rubbing of ice particles with water droplets, causing electric charges to develop in clouds. Collision of electric charges within a clouds, or between clouds, or between a cloud and the ground causes lightning. Lightning strikes can cause destruction to life and property. Lightning conductors protect buildings from the effects of lightning. @ The India Meteorological Department (IMD) constantly monitors cyclones and thunderstorms in India. Keep the curiosity alive 1. Choose the correct statement. (i) Look at Fig. 6.21 carefully. Vessel R is filled with water. When pouring of water is stopped, the level