broader than the top? This is because a broad base not only supports the structure of the dam, but also withstands the horizontal (Fig. 6.8). The water stored in the dam, exerts pressure horizontally on the side walls arose of the dam and vertically on Fig. 6.8: Dam the floor due to the height of the water level. The pressure which acts horizontally, is very large near its bottom. Thus, to withstand the pressure, the base of the dam is made broader. Let us now try to understand if air also exerts pressure. 6.2 Pressure Exerted by Air You already know that air is all around us. The envelope of air surrounding the Earth is called atmosphere. The atmospheric air contains nitrogen, oxygen, argon, carbon dioxide, and other gases in small quantities. The atmosphere extends up to many kilometres above the surface of the Earth. Let us find outifthe atmosphere exerts pressure by performing Stick the following activity. Paper plate | Activity 6.3: Let us explore e Take a paper plate, invert it and attach a stick to it as shown in Fig. 6.9a. Place it on a plain surface. e Take two identical sheets of chart paper about 70cm x 56cm Fig. 6.9: (a) Inverted each. Fold one sheet twice and make a hole in the centre of paper plate setup Chapter 6.indd 85 6/28/2025 4:00:09 PM the folded chart paper sheet big enough for the stick to come out. Place the folded sheet on top of the inverted paper plate as shown in Fig. 6.9b. e Now, try to lift the paper plate covered with a folded sheet using the stick. e Observe how much effort is needed to lift it. e Now, place the second unfolded chart paper sheet in place of the folded sheet. Make a hole at the centre of this chart paper for the stick to pass Fig. 6.9: (b) Inverted paper plate through. Cover the paper plate with the unfolded with two folds of chart paper chart paper as shown in Fig. 6.9c. e Lift the paper plate again and feel the effort needed in doing so. e In which case is the lifting easier, with the folded or the unfolded chart paper covering the paper plate? You would have observed that more effort is needed to lift the paper plate when it is covered with the unfolded chart paper, than with the folded chart paper. When we cover the paper plate with unfolded chart paper, the area of the covering sheet increases. The effort needed to lift the paper plate increases. Notice that the weight of the covering sheet has not changed. What can you infer from this? We can infer from these observations that air exerts force on the covering sheet, which makes it difficult to lift the paper plate. Moreover, this force increases with increase in the area of covering sheets. It means that the air is exerting a force on the paper plate, which increases as the area of