The effort needed to lift the paper plate increases. Notice that the weight of the covering sheet has not changed. What can you infer from this? We can infer from these observations that air exerts force on the covering sheet, which makes it difficult to lift the paper plate. Moreover, this force increases with increase in the area of covering sheets. It means that the air is exerting a force on the paper plate, which increases as the area of the sheet covering it increases. As force per unit area is pressure, we can conclude that air exerts pressure on the paper sheet. In fact, air exerts pressure on all objects. The pressure exerted by air around us is known as the atmospheric pressure. You must have experienced that when you blow air into a balloon, it gets inflated. Why? This is because the air being filled inside the balloon exerts pressure on the walls of the balloon (Fig 6.10). Can we say that air exerts pressure in all directions? Yes, that is why the balloon expands in all directions. What happens Fig. 6.10: A girl when an inflated balloon is kept without closing its mouth? The blowing a balloon air escapes from the balloon. Why does the air escape from the balloon? Fig. 6.9: (c) Inverted paper plate with unfolded chart paper uriosity Textbook of Science for crades | hy hy h hy h h Chapter 6.indd 86 6/28/2025 4:00:10 PM Chapter 6.indd 87 Have you ever wondered how large the atmospheric pressure is? Let us get an idea about its magnitude by performing the following activity. | Activity 6.4: Let us perform e Take a good-quality rubber sucker. Press it firmly against a smooth flat surface (Fig. 6.11). e Do you realise that it sticks to the surface? e Now, try to pull it off. Do you find it difficult to pull it off? When we press the sucker, most of the air between its cup and the surface on which it is placed is pushed out and the air pressure inside it is reduced. The sucker sticks to the surface because the pressure of air surrounding the sucker is higher than the pressure exerted by the air inside the sucker. To pull the sucker off the surface, the applied force should be strong enough to overcome the pressure difference between outside the sucker and inside the sucker. Do you know how large the atmospheric pressure is? The force exerted by the atmospheric air column over an area 15 cm x 15 cm is nearly equal to the force of gravity on an object of mass 225 kg (2250 N). The reason we are not crushed under this weight is that the pressure inside our bodies is also equal to the atmospheric pressure. This balances the pressure exerted from outside. The pressure inside our body is caused by the movement of fluids and gases in tissues and organs of the body. A step further The SI unit of