a metallic rod. If you are in water, get out of it. If you are inside a bus or a car, you are comparatively safer. Fig. 6.17: Safe position during lightning 6/28/2025 4:00:24 PM Ever heard of ... A lightning conductor is a < Lightning metallic rod installed along the conductor walls of buildings during their construction. One end of the rod is pointed. This end is kept higher than the highest point of the building (Fig. 6.18). The other end of the rod is buried deep in the ground. The rod provides easy path for the transfer of electric charges into the ground. Fig. 6.18: A lightning conductor (6.6 Cyclone Cyclone Cyclones are large storms that form over warm ocean waters. As the ocean water gets heated, the warm and moist air above it rises. As the moist air rises, the water vapour condenses to form raindrops. We know that during evaporation, water takes up heat to change into vapour. When this water vapour condenses into raindrops, heat is released back into the atmosphere. This causes further warming of the ascending air leading it to rise even further, creating an even lower pressure. Air from the surrounding regions rushes in and it also starts rising. Earth s rotation causes the moving air to spin (Fig. 6.19). This cycle is repeated, resulting in the creation of a very Fig. 6.19: Winds blowing from low-pressure area with high-speed winds revolving high pressure areas to low around it. This spinning system of clouds, winds, and pressure areas . rain is called a cyclone. In a cyclone, the region of lowest Eye of cyclone pressure is at the centre, known as the eye of the cyclone. At the eye of the cyclone, the wind is calm, but the surrounding region experiences strong winds and heavy rainfall. As a cyclone moves from the ocean towards the land, it generates higher wind speeds compared to the wind speeds produced by regular thunderstorms. Once the cyclone reaches land, the source of moist air is cut off and it gradually loses its Fig. 6.20: A cyclone strength. uriosity Textbook of Science for crades | hy hy h hy h h Chapter 6.indd 92 6/28/2025 4:00:35 PM. Chapter 6.indd 93 h hy y h h { chapter Pressure, Winds, Storms, and cyclones Even as a cyclone loses its strength while travelling over land, it leaves behind a trail of destruction that can take months or even years to repair. Cyclones can be extremely destructive. For example, the Amphan cyclone in 2020 had peak wind speeds of 270 km/h. Strong winds during a cyclone push ocean water towards the shore, creating a wall of water that can be as high as 3-12 metres. This surge of water can flood coastal areas and even areas far from the sea. The heavy rainfall which accompanies a cyclone may cause rivers to overflow and can also trigger landslides. Seawater that rushes inland can contaminate drinking water sources and damage farmland. The salt