back at this same position. Moon overhead about 50 minutes later than today, when the Earth has rotated some more. Fig. 11.6: The Moon takes about 50 minutes longer to come back to nearly the same position in the sky. A step further The Moon phases do not happen due to Earth s shadow. It is an incorrect explanation for the Moon s phases that Earth s shadow falls on it. As we have learnt, the phases of the Moon occur due to the relative change in orientation of the Sun, Moon, and Earth as the Moon revolves around the Earth. The Earth s shadow on the Moon causes a lunar eclipse, not the Moon s phases as we learnt earlier (in chapter Earth, Moon and the Sur in the Curiosity, Grade 7). Lunar eclipses can only happen on a full Moon day and solar eclipses can happen only on a new Moon day. But they do not occur every month because of the small tilt of the Moon s orbit with respect to the Earth s orbit around the Sun. Position Earth s orbit ft ie oh 4 le for around Sun eclipses Lunar eclipse at Moons slightly Nhe this position No eclipses tilted orbit on these full around Earth and new Moon days Solar eclipse at these positions Position 4 favourable for eclipses on these full and new Moon days ee, bes sal Lunar eclipse at this position Chapter 1l.indd 177 6/28/2025 6:05:31 PM So, changing phases of the Moon is a natural periodic Yes, along with the natural periodic events of day and night and the changing seasons about which we learnt earlier. But how are these periodic events used for keeping time? event, with a cycle of almost a month, which can also be used for time keeping. 11.2 How Did Calendars Come into Existence? We have learnt earlier that when viewed from the Earth, the Sun appears to rise in the eastward direction, set in the westward direction every day, and rise again the next day. This apparent periodic motion of the Sun seen by us is primarily due to the rotation of the Earth around its own axis. This natural cycle of the Sun due to the rotation of the Earth, is the foundation of the day, a unit to measure time. The average time that the Sun takes to go from its highest position in the sky on one day to the highest position in the sky the next day, is 24 hours, and is called the mean solar day. The highest position of the Sun in the sky can be found by measuring the length of the shadows cast by an object during the day. The shadow is shortest when the Sun is at the highest point in the sky. | Activity 11.3: Let us measure a day! e Find a small flat area in a ground which receives sunlight during the day. Fix a 1 m stick vertically in it as