Chapter 1l.indd 170 Have you ever seen the Moon during the day? Why do you think it is sometimes visible when the Sun is up? Imagine you lived on the Moon instead of Earth. What would you mean by a day, a month or a year? What would happen if Earth had two moons instead of one? How would that change the night sky? If we didn t have clocks or calendars, how else could we measure time? 6/28/2025 6:04:22 PM | Chapter 1l.indd 171 It was Makar Sankranti, and Meera was in Ahmedabad for the Patang Mahotsav, the International Kite Festival. As she looked up at the sky filled with colourful kites, she noticed the Moon shining during the daytime. She was surprised as she had always thought the Moon appeared only at night. Also, the Moon did not appear like a full circle, but that didn t surprise her as much. She knew its shape changed every night. Still, it got her thinking. She remembered learning that the Moon is spherical and shines by reflecting sunlight. Then why isn t the whole Moon visible every night? For a moment, she wondered if it was due to a lunar eclipse. But eclipses are rare and brief. So, what causes the Moon s changing shape? 11.1 How Does the Moon's Appearance Change and Why? Let us carefully watch the Moon to understand how its appearance changes over a month. You may have done a similar activity earlier, but let us now do it in more detail. Begin this activity from the sunrise after a full Moon day, that is when it is easiest to spot the Moon in the sky. | Activity 11.1: Let us explore e Spot the Moon at sunrise in the western direction on the first day after the full Moon. e Makeatable similar to Table 11.1 in your notebook. Document the following: o Date o When you saw the Moon (at sunrise or sunset)? o Shade the corresponding Circle with pencil to show the bright portion of the Moon as shown in Fig. 11.1. e From the second day onwards also document the following. o Is the size of bright portion of the Moon increasing or decreasing from the previous day. o Whether the Moon appears closer to or farther from the Sun in the sky than the day before. e After about 15 days, you may not be able to see the Moon at sunrise or sunset. For the next 15 days, carry out this activity at sunset. * It is best to begin this activity a month or more before this chapter is scheduled to be learnt. \ . \ , \ \ \ F \ kp \ | \ [ Chapter 11 Keeping Time with the ses) 171 Fig. 11.1: Shading the dark portion of the Moon 6/28/2025 6:04:29 PM Table 11.1: Documenting changes in the Moon's appearance Appearance Size of the Moon and Sun Moon seen PP bright portion separation in the