full Moon to the next takes about a month. The changing shapes of the bright portion of the Moon from one day to another as seen from the Earth are called the phases of the Moon. 11.1.2 Locating the Moon When you checked the Moon at the same time on successive days (for example, at sunrise), did you see it in a different part of the sky? On a full Moon day, the Moon is nearly opposite the Sun when the Sun rises in the East, the Moon is almost setting in the West. On subsequent mornings at sunrise, as its bright part continues to decrease, the Moon appears to move closer in the sky to the Sun. When the bright part of the Moon decreases to a half circle shape, the Moon is overhead at Sunrise. A few days later, the crescent Moon appears even closer to the Sun. Knowing the phase of the Moon and whether it is waxing or waning can thus help us find out where and when to look for the Moon on any given day. A waxing Moon is easiest to spot at sunset, and a waning Moon at sunrise. Because of these shifts, the Moon always rises and sets at different times than the Sun. A step further Many people believe the Moon rises when the Sun sets, but that is not always true. Look in a local newspaper or on the Positional Astronomy Centre (India Meteorological Department) website to find the moonrise time in your area. Check these times for several days in a row and you will see that the Moon rises about 50 minutes later each day. Sometimes moonrise happens in the afternoon (around 2:00-4:00 p.m.), SO you can spot the Moon in the eastern sky during daylight. You may need to wait about 30 minutes past the listed moonrise time for the Moon to climb high enough for it to be seen. The time and position of moonrise changes from one day to the next. \ \ \ \ \ f \ f \ p \ \ \ [ Chapter 11 Keeping Time with the ses) 173 6/28/2025 6:04:43 PM 11.1.3 Making sense of our observations The shape of the Moon itself does not change, only what we see changes. You may recall learning earlier that the 1 Moon does not emit light of its own, but shines because it reflects sunlight that falls on it. The half of the Moon that 7 faces the Sun receives sunlight and becomes illuminated (Fig. 11.3). The other half facing away from the Sun does not receive sunlight and remains non-illuminated. The Moon revolves around the Earth and, only one Fig. 11.3: Sunlight falling on half of the Moon always faces the Earth. However, the the Moon portion of the Moon facing the Earth is not always its illuminated part. We can only see the illuminated portion ofthe Moon from Earth. Sometimes, the entire illuminated portion of the Moon faces the Earth,