was also the chairperson of the Calendar Reform Committee. 11.3 Are Festivals Related to Astronomical Phenomena? Many Indian festivals are tied to the phases of the Moon and hence are based on either lunar or luni-solar calendars. For instance, Diwali falls on the new Moon of the month of Kartika, Holi on the full Moon of Phalguna, Buddha Purnima on the full Moon of Vaisakha, Eid-ul-Fitr is celebrated after sighting the crescent Moon at the end of the month of Ramazan, while Dussehra is celebrated on the tenth day in the month of Ashwina. Hence, they occur on different dates in the Gregorian calendar in successive years. For festivals based on luni-solar calendars, the Gregorian calendar dates can shift, but this shift is typically less than a month. This is because the luni-solar calendars add the intercalary month every few years which correct for the difference between the lunar and the solar year. In contrast, purely lunar calendars do not account for this difference. Any festival celebrated according to the phases of the Moon, such as Eid-ul-fitr, therefore can occur in different months of the Gregorian calendar year after year. Why do most Indian festivals fall on different dates every year? Chapter 1l.indd 183 6/28/2025 6:06:07 PM A step further A few festivals in India, like Makar Sankranti, Pongal, Bihu, Vaisakhi, Poila Baisakh, and Puthandu, follow a solar sidereal calendar. These festivals happen on almost the same date every year in the Gregorian calendar which is based on the tropical year. A long time ago, these festivals were tied to either a solstice or an equinox. Due to the small difference in the sidereal and tropical years, the dates of these festivals slowly shift away from the solstices/equinoxes. This shift is due to slow wobble of the Earth s axis, similar to the movement of the axis of a wobbling top. This causes the dates of festivals based on the sidereal calendar to move ahead in tropical calendar. For example, Makar Sankranti moves ahead by one day every 71 years. Ever heard of ... The dates of many Indian festivals are based on the exact lunar phase at sunrise. As sunrise occurs earlier in Eastern India and later in Western India, these dates can also shift by a day between these regions even in the same year. To maintain uniformity throughout the country, the Positional Astronomy Center of the Government of India annually publishes the Rashtriya panchang, a detailed calculation of the positions of celestial objects, such as the Moon and the Sun for a central location in India. Based on these calculations, it provides an advance intimation on dates of festivals to Government of India for holiday declaration. Ever heard of ... The Moon and moonlight have inspired ragas in Indian classical music. Chandrakauns, Chandranandan, and Shubhapantuvarali (which also means auspicious moon ) are a few ragas that display the moon s imagery in their names and melodic expressions. Similarly, mudras (hand gestures), for example, Chandrakala, and Ardhachandran relating