and the Sun for a central location in India. Based on these calculations, it provides an advance intimation on dates of festivals to Government of India for holiday declaration. Ever heard of ... The Moon and moonlight have inspired ragas in Indian classical music. Chandrakauns, Chandranandan, and Shubhapantuvarali (which also means auspicious moon ) are a few ragas that display the moon s imagery in their names and melodic expressions. Similarly, mudras (hand gestures), for example, Chandrakala, and Ardhachandran relating to the Moon can be found in Indian classical dance Bharatanatyam. The same is true for other dance forms Kathak, Odissi, and Kuchipudi. Even the traditional painting styles: Madhubani, Warli, and other forms of art, such as sculpture and pottery among Saura, Gond and other tribes invoke . depictions of the Moon and the Sun prominently implying -. their significance in daily life. UE ERE DINO ELETES sculpture uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 A \ | R \\ \ \ \ \ , I\ \ | Chapter 1l.indd 184 6/28/2025 6:06:24 PM \ \ \ \ F \ p \ \ | Chapter 11 Keeping Time with the sues) 11.4 Why Do We Launch Artificial Satellites in Space? The Moon is Earth s natural satellite, orbiting our planet. Besides the Moon, man-made satellites sent by various countries also orbit the Earth. These artificial satellites appear as tiny specks moving in the night sky. Most orbit about 800 km above Earth s surface and take roughly 100 minutes to complete one orbit. These satellites help us in many ways like communication, navigation, weather monitoring, disaster management, and scientific research. The Indian Space Research Organisation (ISRO) has launched many satellites that support these activities. When I look at the night sky in early evening, I see some moving stars. What are they? Is their motion also periodic? Our scientific heritage The Cartosat series ofsatellites, launched by ISRO, capture high-quality images of the Earth to improve maps, plan cities, and handle natural disasters in India. One such mapping platform, Bhuvan, uses these images to show terrain, soil, land use, vegetation, and more. AstroSat, another ISRO mission, makes scientific observations of stars and other celestial objects. India s other space missions include Chandrayaan 1, 2, and 3 to the Moon; Aditya L1 to study the Sun; and Mangalyaan to Mars. ISRO also lets Indian students build and launch small satellites, such as AzaadiSat, InspireSat-1, and Jugnu. AstroSat Cartosat | Activity 11.4: Let us identify e Spotting an artificial satellite is a night sky watching activity like we have done previously. Just before sunrise or after sunset, go to a location, accompanied by an adult, that has a clear view of the sky, without any obstruction of trees or tall buildings. Chapter 1l.indd 185 6/28/2025 6:06:36 PM e To identify satellites in the sky, look for any moving object in the sky that appears as a point of light with steady or flickering brightness and is moving very fast across the sky. You