measures of time based: (i) day (ii) month (iii) year? C Discover, design, and debate e The Moon s crescent always faces towards the Sun (Fig. 11.12). On days when you see the crescent Moon, point your finger towards the Sun, and slowly move it across the sky towards the Moon taking as short a path as you can. Note how your finger always crosses the illuminated part of the Moon first and clearly shows us that we see sunlight reflected off the Moon. The line joining the tips of the crescent would correspond to the diameter of the Moon. Fig. 11.12 e Most of the dates in the Indian National Calendar always map to the same dates in the Gregorian calendar. Can you find out which ones may differ for certain years? e Different states in India celebrate the New Year according to their local cultures. Find out the names of the New Year festival celebrated in any 10 states of India. Also find out whether it is Prepare some questions based on your learnings So far ... | Chapter 1l.indd 188 6/28/2025 6:06:58 PM Chapter 1l.indd 189 based on the lunar calendar or the solar calendar or the lunisolar calendar. Collect Gregorian calendars (the regular calendar you use every day) for the last five years with the help of your family members or teachers or the internet. For each year, look for the dates on which the festivals Eid-ul-Fitr and Diwali were celebrated and list them year wise in a tabular form. Do you notice that the date of Eid-ul-Fitr moves earlier each year by about 11 days? If you have a corresponding lunar calendar at home or on the internet, check that the month and the day for Eid-ul-Fitr according to the lunar calendar remains the same. Does Diwali follow the same steady pattern, or are there some sudden jumps? Based on your chart, try to guess which year might have included an intercalary month (Adhikamaasa). Obtain a luni-solar calendar and confirm if there is an intercalary month between Diwali in the previous year and that year. Every morning on your way to school, notice the direction in which the Sun rises. Decide on a spot and look towards east, with trees, poles, or buildings acting as markers. Sketch the eastern horizon in your notebook. For the next one year, at the start of each month, stand at the same spot and mark the Sun s position on your sketch. Label it with the name of the month. At the end of the year analyse your sketch. Do you find that the positions of sunrise shift in particular direction? Can you identify it with the Uttarayaan and Dakshinayaan that our ancestors noticed? (Refer the A step further box on page 181). Reflect on the questions framed by your friends and try to answer... A step further If you visit a place near the sea, you may notice that water levels rise and fall. The rise and fall