1600 and 2000. These careful corrections keep the calendar closely matched with the seasons over long periods of time! A step further As we learnt earlier, seasons are caused by the Earth s revolution around the Sun and its movement from the spring equinox to winter equinox and back. The time between successive spring equinoxes is called the tropical year. Gregorian calendar is based upon tropical year. We have also learnt earlier that the stars that rise at sunset change throughout the year due to the Earth s revolution around the Sun. The time duration required for the same stars to rise again at sunset is called the sidereal year, and it can also be used to define a solar calendar. The sidereal year is longer than the tropical year by a mere 20 minutes, and so it takes a long time before the differences between the two calendars become noticeable. In modern times, astronomers use the sidereal year to keep track of the Earth s position in its orbit around the Sun. uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 A \ | R \\ \ \ \ \ , I\ \ | Chapter 1l.indd 180 6/28/2025 6:05:48 PM Chapter 1l.indd 181 \ . \ , \ \ \ F \ kp \ | \ [ Chapter 11 Keeping Time with the ses) 181 Our scientific heritage For thousands of years, people including those in India have been observing the sky and developing calendars. People in ancient times did not know that Earth revolves around the Sun, and lacked modern instruments. Yet through years of careful sky observations, they noticed patterns and cycles in natural events. Hence, they could determine that the length of the year was approximately 365 days allowing Path of Sun on une solstice Sun rises exactly in the East and sets exactly in the west on equinoxes Path of Sun on December solstice them to create calendars. For example, careful observation reveals that the Sun does not always rise exactly in the East. In summer, it rises a little northward of East and in winter a little southward of East. These extremes happen on the solstices, around June 21 and December 21 each year. The Sun s apparent northward movement from December to June is called Uttarayan, and its apparent southward movement from June to December is Dakshinayan. This cycle repeats every year and is closely linked to the changing seasons. The Taittirtya Samhita records it in the verse 6.5.3: TEATS ST: TATA sharers SALT | Thus the Sun moves southwards for six months and northwards for six months. In the past, the equinoxes and solstices were also tracked by identifying the stars that rose at sunset. Ancient Indian texts like the Surya Siddhanta noted that the pattern of stars, Capricorn (called Makar in India), would be in the background of the Sun around the winter solstice during those ancient times. HHHaET TAA TAT TATA ShAVTAAT 11911 Translation: From the moment of the Sun s entrance