becomes illuminated (Fig. 11.3). The other half facing away from the Sun does not receive sunlight and remains non-illuminated. The Moon revolves around the Earth and, only one Fig. 11.3: Sunlight falling on half of the Moon always faces the Earth. However, the the Moon portion of the Moon facing the Earth is not always its illuminated part. We can only see the illuminated portion ofthe Moon from Earth. Sometimes, the entire illuminated portion of the Moon faces the Earth, and at other times only a part of it. At such times the illuminated portion of the Moon that we see is not a full circle. On New Moon day, we do not see the illuminated portion of the Moon at all, as only the non-illuminated portion of the Moon faces the Earth. Therefore, the Moon appears different on different days. Let us do an activity to understand how the illuminated portion of the Moon, as seen by us, changes when its position changes with respect to the Sun. Illuminated = nonilluminated stonns Why does the illuminated portion of the Moon seen 4 from the Earth decrease when it appears closer to the Sun? | Activity 11.2: Let us explore e Take a small soft ball and insert a stick into it (Fig. 11.4a). This represents the Moon. e Go to a dark open place (at night), and ask a teacher or guardian to shine a torchlight towards you from about 3 m to represent light coming from the Sun or stand near an electric lamp. Your head represents the Earth. e Now hold the ball at arm s length in one hand such that it is slightly above your head as shown in Fig. 11.4b. Keep the ball at position E towards the direction of the lamp. Does the portion Fig. 11.4: (a) Ball with stick Of the ball facing you appear to be illuminated or not? e Turn around slowly, in the anti-clockwise direction, with your arm outstretched as shown in Fig. 11.4b and keep looking at the ball. Does the shape of the illuminated portion change? Is the line separating the illuminated and non-illuminated portions of the ball curved? e Was your observation similar to the changing shape of the illuminated portion of ball shown in Fig. 11.4c? The shape of the illuminated portion of the ball, as seen by you, changes depending on where the ball is with respect to the lamp. uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 A \ | R \\ \ \ \ \\ R I\ i | Chapter 1l.indd 174 6/28/2025 6:04:51 PM Chapter 1l.indd 175 (c) Fig. 11.4: (b) A student using a ball and stick to understand phases of Moon; (c) The ball as seen by the student at different positions When the ball is held opposite to the direction of the lamp (at A), you are facing the entire illuminated portion of the ball, just like the full Moon day. On the other hand, when the ball is