due to its revolution around the Sun define Cycle of Sun returning to its highest position in the sky due to Earth s rotation defines a day Fig. 11.8: The Earth goes around the Sun, and the Moon revolves around the Earth in regular intervals of time. In ancient times, people had noticed that during one cycle of seasons, one can fit nearly 12 cycles of the phases of the moon, that is, 12 lunar months. This is how lunar calendars came into being, with the day as the shortest unit, a month of nearly 29.5 days, and a lunar year consisting of 12 lunar months. The phases of the Moon thus gave an easy and a perfectly sound way to track the passage of time. However, in a lunar calendar the seasons do not remain synchronised to the same lunar months in successive lunar years. The reason is that the seasons repeat in approximately 365 days while the lunar year is 354 days long. 6/28/2025 6:05:43 PM 11.2.2 Solar calendars It was important to know the arrival of seasons for agricultural purposes. This need for a year to synchronise with seasons led to the creation of solar calendars. The Gregorian calendar, widely used today, is a solar calendar. The months in solar calendars are adjusted to add up to 365 days. That is why in Gregorian calendars, some months have 30 days, others 31, and February has only 28 days. On top of the 365 days, the Earth takes nearly an extra quarter of a day to complete one revolution around the Sun. These extra hours add up to approximately one day every four years. To adjust for this, solar calendars add an extra day every four years using the concept of a leap year. In the Gregorian calendar, if a year is divisible by four, then an extra leap day is added. So ina leap year, February has 29 days, which keeps the calendar well synchronised with the seasons. A step further The Earth takes slightly less time than 365 and a quarter day to go from one spring equinox to the next spring equinox. Adding a day every four years helps to synchronise with the seasons, but it actually adds a little too much over time. To fix this, leap years are skipped every 100 years like in 1700, 1800, and 1900. But skipping all of them would make the calendar lag slightly behind. So every 400 years, a leap year is again added back like in 1600 and 2000. These careful corrections keep the calendar closely matched with the seasons over long periods of time! A step further As we learnt earlier, seasons are caused by the Earth s revolution around the Sun and its movement from the spring equinox to winter equinox and back. The time between successive spring equinoxes is called the tropical year. Gregorian calendar is based upon tropical year. We have also learnt earlier that the stars that rise at sunset change