\ \\ R I\ i | Chapter 1l.indd 174 6/28/2025 6:04:51 PM Chapter 1l.indd 175 (c) Fig. 11.4: (b) A student using a ball and stick to understand phases of Moon; (c) The ball as seen by the student at different positions When the ball is held opposite to the direction of the lamp (at A), you are facing the entire illuminated portion of the ball, just like the full Moon day. On the other hand, when the ball is held towards the direction of the lamp (at E), you are facing the non-illuminated portion of the ball, and cannot see the illuminated portion of the ball at all. This is similar to the new Moon day. Notice how in other cases, the line separating the illuminated and non-illuminated portions of the ball appears curved (Fig. 11.4c), similar to the shape of the illuminated portion of the Moon viewed from the Earth on other days. Using our observations of Activity 11.2, let us now try to understand the phases of Moon. Fig. 11.5a shows the positions of the Moon corresponding to the different positions of the ball in Fig. 11.4b. Also shown are the Earth and the sunrays. As shown in Fig. 11.5a, the Moon revolves once around the Earth from position A to H and back to position A in about one month. The side of the Moon that faces the Sun is illuminated. 6/28/2025 6:05:10 PM The portion of the Moon that faces the Earth is marked by the orange dashed lines and arrows. The illuminated portion of only this part of the Moon can be seen from the Earth. At positions B and H, more than half of the illuminated portion, called the gibbous phase, can be seen. At positions D and F, less than half of the illuminated portion, called the crescent phase, can be seen. The change in the fraction of the illuminated portion of the Moon seen from Earth causes phases of the Moon. The phases that will be seen from the Earth at different positions of the Moon are shown in Fig. 11.5b. From A to C to E, we see the waning phase, and from E to G and back to A, we see the waxing phase. Since the rotation period of the Earth of one day is much smaller compared to the revolution period of the Moon which is nearly a month, on a given day, people on different parts of the Earth see nearly the same phase. As can be seen in Fig. 11.5a, on the New Moon day, the Moon appears closest to the Sun and it appears farthest on the Full Moon day. Is this not what we also observed in Activity 11.1? Half of the illuminated portion of Moon can be seen $ ert Less than half of the S More than half of the uy. rs illuminated portion illuminated portion re Day 22 e f Moon can be seen of Moon can be seen /_ Day