boost tourism in India, schemes like Swadesh Darshan 2.0, Vibrant Village Programme, PRASHAD (Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual Heritage Augmentation Drive), Paryatan Mitra, etc. have been started. Tourism also promotes national integration, provides support to local handicrafts and cultural pursuits. It also helps in the development of international ag feet free go aa 4 fafa & fee aa SIF are Faehret st ee are Ta Mik 20 vitro aa & 1 ae Fe, areal Aas ara civil A fathers zt : WF at wien Gat of or faafaa taf at uae et safe sre ae den aerated at aa we Gs FH ti ai on aa ae fami G, wt wa se G1 seer HO a afer aunt att teat Toei ane Fe arated goed yt wad art ae eh -afameit ait a | Spar ag t fe fait fee ana aed ore zal are den A ora Z 1 z ty7ei ee fateh A agi tae ore fafa ir aor & fee ama @1 SSA ez mal T understanding about our culture and heritage. Foreign tourists visit India for heritage tourism, eco tourism, adventure tourism, cultural tourism, medical tourism and business tourism. There is a vast potential for development of tourism in all parts of the country. Efforts are being made to promote different types of tourism for this upcoming industry. Activity On the map of India show important tourist places of your State/UT and its connectivity with other parts of the country by railways/ roadways/airways. Discuss in the class: What type of tourism may be developed in your state/UT and why? Which areas in your state/UT you find more attractive for development of tourism and why? How tourism may be helpful for the economic development of a region adopting sustainable development approach? Biswanath Ghat best tourism village of India curd fafa area wer fafa Kangkan Kalita / TNN / Sep 23, 2023, 11:26 ak ara 4 oer a ed of fate A feed Is serait sik tee Assam's Biswanath Ghat has been named the Best Tourism Village of India 2023. The village, located on the northern bank of the Brahmaputra, is known for its cluster Prepare a project on the heritage tourism in India. . -.Read More LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY EXERCISES 1. Multiple choice questions. (i) Which two of the following extreme locations are connected by the eastwest corridor? (a) Mumbai and Nagpur (c) Mumbai and Kolkata (b) Silchar and Porbandar (d) Nagpur and Siligudi (ii) Which mode of transportation reduces trans-shipment losses and delays? (a) Railways (c) Pipeline (b) Roadways (d) Waterways (iii) Which one of the following states is not connected with the H.VJ. pipeline? (a) Madhya Pradesh (c) Gujarat (b) Maharashtra (d) Uttar Pradesh (iv) Which one of the following ports is the deepest land-locked and wellprotected port along the east coast? (a) Chennai (c) VO. Chidambaranar (Tuticorin) (b) Paradwip (d) Vishakhapatnam (v) Which one of the following is the most important modes of transportation in India? (a) Pipeline (c) Roadways (b) Railways (d) Airways