78 ANGLADESH Wy i \ 9 ap LO. ilehare BENGAL \ A Port Blair Fil yohchirappalli C) ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS ANTE (INDIA) BN) 8 N Railway line has been extended from Banihal to Baramula in the Kashmir Valley. Locate these two towns on the map of India. Fig. 7.5: Inland waterways widely used in north-eastern states e The Ganga river between Prayagraj and Haldia (1620 km)-N.W. No.1 e The Brahmaputra river between Sadiya and Dhubri (891 km)-N.W. No.2 The West-Coast Canal in Kerala (Kottapurma-Kollam, Udyogamandal and Champakkara canals205 km) N.W. No.3 e Specified stretches of Godavari and Krishna rivers along with Kakinada Puducherry stretch of canals (1078 km) - N.W. No.4 e Specified stretches of river Brahmani along with Matai river, delta channels of Mahanadi and Brahmani rivers and East Coast Canal (588 km) N.W. No.5 There are some other inland water ways on which substantial transportation takes place. These are Mandavi, Zuari and Cumberjua, Sunderbans, Barak and backwaters of Kerala. Apart from these, India s trade with foreign countries is carried from the ports located along the coast. 95 per cent of the country s trade volume (68 per cent in terms of value) is moved by sea. Major Sea Ports With a long coastline of 7,516.6 km, India is dotted with 12 major and 200 notified nonmajors (minor/intermediate) ports. These major ports handle 95 per cent of India s foreign trade. Deendayal Port (Kandla) in Kuchchh was the first port developed soon after Independence to ease the volume of trade on the Mumbai port, in the wake of loss of Karachi port to Pakistan after the Partition. Deendayal Port, is a tidal port. It caters to the convenient handling of exports and imports of highly productive granary and industrial belt stretching across UT of Jammu and Kashmir, and the states of Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and Gujarat. Fig. 7.6: Trucks being driven into the vessel at Mumbai port Mumbai is the biggest port with a spacious natural and well-sheltered harbour. The Jawaharlal Nehru port was planned with a view to decongest the Mumbai port and serve as a hub port for this region. Mormugao port (Goa) is the premier iron ore exporting port of the country. This port accounts for about fifty per cent of India s iron ore export. New Mangalore port, located in Karnataka caters to the export of iron ore concentrates from Kudremukh mines. Cochin is the extreme south-western port, located at the entrance of a lagoon with a natural harbour. Fig. 7.7: Tanker discharging crude oil at New Mangalore port Moving along the east coast, you would see the extreme south-eastern port of V.O. Chidambaranar (Tuticorin), in Tamil Nadu. This port has a natural harbour and rich hinterland. Thus, it has a flourishing trade handling of a large variety of cargoes to even LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY our neighbouring countries like Sri Lanka, Maldives, etc. and the coastal regions of India. Chennai is one of the oldest artificial ports of the country.