Tanker discharging crude oil at New Mangalore port Moving along the east coast, you would see the extreme south-eastern port of V.O. Chidambaranar (Tuticorin), in Tamil Nadu. This port has a natural harbour and rich hinterland. Thus, it has a flourishing trade handling of a large variety of cargoes to even LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY our neighbouring countries like Sri Lanka, Maldives, etc. and the coastal regions of India. Chennai is one of the oldest artificial ports of the country. It is ranked next to Mumbai in terms of the volume of trade and cargo. Vishakhapatnam is the deepest landlocked and well-protected port. This port was, originally, conceived as an outlet for iron ore exports. Paradwip port located in Odisha, specialises in the export of iron ore. Shyama Prasad Mookerjee, Kolkata is an inland riverine port. This port serves a very large and rich hinterland of Ganga- Brahmaputra basin. Being a tidal port, it requires constant dredging of Hoogly. Haldia port was developed as a subsidiary port, in order to relieve growing pressure on the Kolkata port. =S Fig. 7.8: Handling of oversize cargo at VO. Chidambaranar (Tuticorin) port Airways The air travel, today, is the fastest, most comfortable and prestigious mode of Why is air travel prefered in the north-eastern states? Fig. 7.9 transport. It can cover very difficult terrains Slike high mountains, dreary deserts, dense forests and also long oceanic stretches with CONTEMPORARY INDIA II great ease. Think of the north-eastern part of the country, marked with the presence of big rivers, dissected relief, dense forests and frequent floods and international frontiers, etc. in the absence of air transport. Air travel has made access easier. Pawanhans Helicopters Ltd. provides helicopter services to Oil and Natural Gas Corporation in its off-shore operations, to inaccessible areas and difficult terrains like the north-eastern states and the interior parts of Jammu and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh and Uttarakhand. Do you Know? UDAN (Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik) is a firstof-its kind scheme globally, designed to jump-start the regional aviation market. Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS)- UDAN was conceived by the Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA), Government of India, to promote regional connectivity by making fly affordable for the common citizen. The central idea of the scheme is to encourage airlines to operate flights on regional and remote routes through enabling policies and extending incentives. Communication Ever since humans appeared on the earth, they have used different means of communication. But, the pace of change, has been rapid in modern times. Long distance communication is far easier without physical movement of the communicator or receiver. Personal communication and mass communication including television, radio, press, films, etc. are the major means of communication in the country. The Indian postal network is the largest in the world. It handles parcels as well as personal written communications. Cards and envelopes are considered first-class mail and are airlifted between stations covering both land and air. The second-class mail includes book packets, registered newspapers and periodicals. They are carried by