regional and local languages for various categories of people, spread over different parts of the country. Doordarshan, the national television channel CONTEMPORARY INDIA II of India, is one of the largest terrestrial networks in the world. It broadcasts a variety of programmes from entertainment, educational to sports, etc. for people of different age groups. India publishes a large number of newspapers and periodicals annually. They are of different types depending upon their periodicity. Newspapers are published in about 100 languages and dialects. Did you know that the largest number of newspapers published in the country are in Hindi, followed by English and Urdu? India is the largest producer of feature films in the world. It produces short films; video feature films and video short films. The Central Board of Film Certification is the authority to certify both Indian and foreign films. International Trade The exchange of goods among people, states and countries is referred to as trade. The market is the place where such exchanges take place. Trade between two countries is called international trade. It may take place through sea, air or land routes. While local trade is carried in cities, towns and villages, state level trade is carried between two or more states. Advancement of international trade of a country is an index to its economic prosperity. It is, therefore, considered the economic barometer for a country. As the resources are space bound, no country can survive without international trade. Export and import are the components of trade. The balance of trade of a country is the difference between its export and import. When the value of export exceeds the value of imports, it is called a favourable balance of trade. On the contrary, if the value of imports exceeds the value of exports, it is termed as unfavourable balance of trade. India has trade relations with all the major trading blocks and all geographical regions of the world. The commodities exported from India to other countries include gems and jewellery, chemicals and related products, agriculture and allied products, etc. The commodities imported to India include petroleum crude and products, gems and jewellery, chemicals and related products, base metals, electronic items, machinery, agriculture and allied products. India has emerged as a software giant at the international level and it is earning large foreign exchange through the export of information technology. Tourism as a Trade Tourism in India has grown remarkably over the past two decades, with government initiatives, infrastructure development, and global branding contributing to this success. To boost tourism in India, schemes like Swadesh Darshan 2.0, Vibrant Village Programme, PRASHAD (Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual Heritage Augmentation Drive), Paryatan Mitra, etc. have been started. Tourism also promotes national integration, provides support to local handicrafts and cultural pursuits. It also helps in the development of international ag feet free go aa 4 fafa & fee aa SIF are Faehret st ee are Ta Mik 20 vitro aa & 1 ae Fe, areal Aas ara civil A fathers zt :