far easier without physical movement of the communicator or receiver. Personal communication and mass communication including television, radio, press, films, etc. are the major means of communication in the country. The Indian postal network is the largest in the world. It handles parcels as well as personal written communications. Cards and envelopes are considered first-class mail and are airlifted between stations covering both land and air. The second-class mail includes book packets, registered newspapers and periodicals. They are carried by surface mail, covering land and water transport. To facilitate quick delivery of mails in large towns and cities, six mail channels have been introduced recently. They are called Rajdhani Channel, Metro Channel, Green Channel, Business Channel, Bulk Mail Channel and Periodical Channel. 68 E 72 AFGHANISTAN 36 N INDIA MAJOR PORTS AND SOME PAKISTAN i f INTERNATIONAL AIRPORTS 32 us uy! &sritcuru Ram DasJee international Airport, AmfitsarS, ANG N . pei vast ote ca Mewes oe wv Ss Delhi % Indira Gandhi;|nterffational OOOO eee eeetesenwsnenaneceusnasanc, + Vetaji Ss Vee ARABIAN { A ae BAY OF nail BENGAL Hyderabad 7 wees Mormugao 12 New Mangalore e v Port Blair . * ; . id ina ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS NDA) 2 3 (INDIA) 5 8 N e 3 Thiruvananthapura INDIAN a, 12 76 92 E Q India: Major Ports and Some International Airports (Source: Annual Report, 2023-24, Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, Govt. of India.) LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY Do you know? Digital India is an umbrella programme to prepare India for a knowledge based transformation. The focus of Digital India Programme is on being transformative to realise IT (Indian Talent) + IT (Information Technology)=IT (India Tomorrow) and is on making technology central to enabling change. saa Fig.7.10 : Emergency call box on NH-48 India has one of the largest telecom networks in Asia. Excluding urban places more than two-thirds of the villages in India have already been covered with Subscriber Trunk Dialling (STD) telephone facility. In order to strengthen the flow of information from the grassroot to the higher level, the government has made special provision to extend twentyfour hours STD facility to every village in the country. There is a uniform rate of STD facilities all over India. It has been made possible by integrating the development in space technology with communication technology. Mass communication provides entertainment and creates awareness among people about various national programmes and policies. It includes radio, television, newspapers, magazines, books and films. All India Radio (Akashwani) broadcasts a variety of programmes in national, regional and local languages for various categories of people, spread over different parts of the country. Doordarshan, the national television channel CONTEMPORARY INDIA II of India, is one of the largest terrestrial networks in the world. It broadcasts a variety of programmes from entertainment, educational to sports, etc. for people of different age groups. India publishes a large number of newspapers and periodicals annually. They are of different types depending upon their periodicity. Newspapers are published in about 100 languages