arrival on the transportation map of India. In the past, these were used to transport water to cities and industries. Now, these are used for transporting crude oil, petroleum products and natural gas from oil and natural gas fields to refineries, fertilizer factories and big thermal power plants. Solids can also be transported through a pipeline when converted into slurry. The far inland locations of refineries like Barauni, Mathura, Panipat and gas based fertilizer plants could be thought of only because of pipelines. Initial cost of laying pipelines is high but subsequent running costs are minimal. It rules out trans-shipment losses or delays. There are three important networks of pipeline transportation in the country. e From oil field in upper Assam to Kanpur (Uttar Pradesh), via Guwahati, Barauni and Prayagraj. It has branches from Barauni to Haldia, via Rajbandh, Rajbandh to Maurigram and Guwahati to Siliguri. e From Salaya in Gujarat to Jalandhar in Punjab, via Viramgam, Mathura, Delhi and Sonipat. It has branches to connect Koyali (near Vadodara, Gujarat) Chakshu and other places. e The first 1,700 km long Hazira-VijaipurJagdishpur (HVJ) cross country gas pipeline, linked Mumbai High and Bassein gas fields with various ferilizer, power and industrial complexes in western and northern India. Overall, India s gas pipeline infrastructure has expanded from 1,700 km to 18,500 km of cross-country pipelines. Waterways Since the ancient period, India was one of the seafaring countries. Its seamen sailed far and near, thus, carrying and spreading Indian commerce and culture. Waterways are the cheapest means of transport. They are most suitable for carrying heavy and bulky goods. It is a fuel-efficient and environment friendly mode of transport. India has inland navigation waterways of 14,500 km in length. In order to create wide waterways network and to promote inland water transport in the country as an economical environment friendly supplementary mode of transport to rail and road, 111 inland waterways (including 5 National Waterways declared earlier) were declared as National Waterways (NWs) by the National Waterways Act, 2016. (Source: Annual ls Report, Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways, Government of India, 2022-23). LIFELINES OF NATIONAL ECONOMY 68 E 72 AFGHANISTAN 36 N ( Jammu ra Amritsar? & Bhatinda PAKISTAN Be Anup! ar ps ON) fre7 ( Jaisalmer Jodhpur i Barmer Munabo Sn. 7 % A$ . Thiruvananthapuram INDIAN BE 76 Activity CONTEMPORARY INDIA II Kanniyakumari t Ambala 5 Grd SJ Dehradun Ay ie JA sortie \ X ol : Selek Dangort aes i as . BY kaiar t Dhubri Guwahaly nap AA) Se 78 ANGLADESH Wy i \ 9 ap LO. ilehare BENGAL \ A Port Blair Fil yohchirappalli C) ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS ANTE (INDIA) BN) 8 N Railway line has been extended from Banihal to Baramula in the Kashmir Valley. Locate these two towns on the map of India. Fig. 7.5: Inland waterways widely used in north-eastern states e The Ganga river between Prayagraj and Haldia (1620 km)-N.W. No.1 e The Brahmaputra river between Sadiya and Dhubri (891 km)-N.W. No.2 The