Unity in Diversity, or
 Many in the One 

Oh, grant me my prayer, that I may never lose the bliss of
the touch of the one in the play of the many.

 Rabindranath Tagore

... The principle of unity in diversity which has always
been normal to [India] and its fulfilment the fundamental
course of her being and its very nature, the Many in

the One, would place her on the sure foundation of her
Swabhava and Swadharma.

 Sri Aurobindo

Reprint 2025-26

| chapter8.indd 125 Co 03502:2025 cents

Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions

Exploring Society: India and Beyond

S|

chapter8.indd 126

A Rich Diversity

If you travel through India by train, you will notice not
only changing landscapes but also many different types of
dresses and food; you will hear different languages, familiar
and unfamiliar, and see different scripts on the way. Even
within your own region, you will often come across people
from other parts of India with different customs and
traditions. This is India s rich diversity, and it is usually the
first thing that strikes visitors to our country.

With over 1.4 billion inhabitants (about 18 percent of the
world s population), such diversity is not surprising! In the
late 20" century, the Anthropological Survey of India, a
national organisation, conducted a massive survey called
 People of India project of 4,635 communities across all
States of the country. It counted 325 languages using 25
scripts; it also observed that many Indians may be called
migrants, in the sense of people not living near their
birthplace or with their original community.

LET'S EXPLORE

As a class activity, make lists of (1) the birthplaces of at least 5
classmates and the birthplaces of their parents; (2) the students 
mother tongues and other languages known to them. Discuss
the results in terms of diversity.

While diversity is indeed beautiful, making sense of it is not
so easy. Over a century ago, the British historian Vincent
Smith wondered,

 How, in the face of such bewildering diversity, can a
C C history of India be written? ... The answer to the query
is found in the fact that India offers unity in diversity. 

What is meant by unity in diversity ? How shall we perceive
and express this unity, or the Many in the One ? To answer
this question, we will explore a few dimensions of Indian life.

Reprint 2025-26

& 03-02-2025 05:04:12 |

| chapter8.indd 127

Food for All

Some of you will have eaten food from different regions of
India. The number of different dishes and preparations you
can taste in India must be in their thousands, if not lakhs!
Yet certain food grains are common to almost every part
of the country cereals such as rice, barley and wheat;
millets such as pearl millet (bajra), sorghum (jowar), finger
millet (ragi); and pulses such as various kinds of dals and

&

rajma

rajma

ate,

white lobia

0) basmati ww
moong 
dal masoor dal ww

rice :
~ chana dal @ hs

@ mnitet @
 chickpea wfaize @

arhardal

arhar dal

jawar

ww
&

millet

kollam rice

Fig. 8.1. A few examples of cereals and pulses from different regions of India

Reprint 2025-26

 

(2
&) yeon pea

8 - Unity in Diversity, or Many in the One 

 

03-02-2025 05:04:20 |

Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions

Exploring Society: India and Beyond

SS

chapter8.indd 128

grams. All these are called staple grains because they
are the basic food for most Indians (Fig. 8.1 on page 127).
Similarly, some common spices such as turmeric, cumin,
cardamom and ginger, are also used throughout the
country. We could continue this list with some common
vegetables, common oils etc.

So we see how the same ingredients (unity) can be used in
a number of combinations (diversity) to prepare an endless
variety of dishes!

LET'S EXPLORE

> Asaclass activity, make a list of ingredients (grains, spices,
etc.) that are used in your home.

> Take any one vegetable and think of the number of different
dishes you can prepare with it.

Textiles and Clothing

Every region and community in
India has developed its own styles of
clothing and dresses. Yet, we notice
a commonality in some traditional
Indian dresses, irrespective of the
material used. An obvious example
is the plain length of cloth called
the sari, a type of clothing worn in
most parts of India and made from
different fabrics mostly cotton or
silk, but nowadays synthetic fabrics
too. Banarasi, Kanjivaram, Paithani,
Patan Patola, Muga or Mysore are some
of the famous types of silk saris. There
Fig. 8.2. Stone relief of a are many more kinds of cotton saris.
woman ina sari from Altogether, this unstitched piece of cloth

Vaishali (today in Bihar) . . oo.
comes in hundreds of varieties. They are

Reprint 2025-26

 

03-02-2025 05:04:20 |

chapter8.indd 129

produced by different methods
of weaving (Fig. 8.3 on the
right) and designing. Some
designs are part of the cloth,
while others are printed after
the cloth is woven. Finally,
there are endless variations
in the colours, which are
produced from many kinds
of pigments.

The sari has a long history.
This stone relief (Fig. 8.2 on
page 128) from Vaishali (today
in Bihar) goes back a few
centuries BCE.

LET'S EXPLORE

Explain how the example of
the sari reflects both unity and
diversity (in 100-150 words).

< DON'T MISS OUT Indian textiles.
For a very long time, India produced the finest cotton in the
world and Indian textiles were exported as far away as Europe.
One beautiful type of printed cotton called chintz became so
popular in 17"-century Europe that the sale of some European
dresses dropped sharply. Eventually, to protect their own
products, England and France decided to ban the import of
chintz from India!

There are many ways of wearing the sari, as they vary from
one region to another or from one community to another.
In fact, new ways of draping it are still being invented. But
in the end, it is a single dress the sari. In past centuries,

Reprint 2025-26

 

Fig. 8.3. A few specimens of colourful traditional

Relief:

A design
that stands
out from
the surface
of a panel
(which may

be of stone,

wood,
ceramic or
another
material).

8 - Unity in Diversity, or Many in the One 

 

03-02-2025 05:04:21 |

Exploring Society: India and Beyond

Fig. 8.4. Women often
put the sari to many
uses beyond that ofa
dress (pictures

from south India).

several travellers to India marvelled at its simplicity,
economy, and the diverse ways in which it is worn. In
addition, women often put the sari to many uses beyond
that of a dress; the six pictures in Fig. 8.4 above illustrate a
few such creative uses.

LET'S EXPLORE
> In the above pictures, can you recognise what a sari has
been used for?

> Are you aware of, or can you imagine, more uses for the
sari?

Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions

 

| chapter8.indd 130

Reprint 2025-26

 

03-02-2025 05:04:25 |

| chapter8.indd 131

> Following the example of the sari, make a list of different
styles you have seen for the dhoti both as regards the
fabric and the uses the dhoti can be put to. What conclusion
can you draw?

There is an immense variety of festivals in India. You may
have noticed that a few common ones are celebrated across
India almost at the same time, though they have different
names. We will take just one example Makara Sankranti,
which marks the beginning of the harvest season in many

Reprint 2025-26

 

8 - Unity in Diversity, or Many in the One 

@

03-02-2025 05:04:29 |

parts of India on or around January 14. The map shows the
different names of similar festivals across India about the
same date.

Shishur
Saenkraat

Makar
Sankraat

Uttarayan

Fig. 8.5. Different names of similar festivals across India about the same date

LET'S EXPLORE

> What is your favourite festival and how is it celebrated in
your region? Do you know whether it is celebrated in any
other part of India, maybe under a different name?

|

Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions

Exploring Society: India and Beyond

 

Reprint 2025-26

| chapter8.indd 132 & 03-02-2025 05:04:22 |

chapter8.indd 133

> During October-November, many major festivals take
place in India. Make a list of the few main ones and their
various names in different parts of the country.

An Epic Spread

Literature offers us another fine illustration of unity in
diversity. Indian literatures are extremely diverse (and
among the most abundant in the world). Over centuries,
despite differences in language, technique, etc., they have
shared important themes and concerns. Who has not
heard of the Pafichatantra, for example? This collection
of delightful stories, with animals as the main characters,
teaches us important life skills. The original Sanskrit text is
at least 2,200 years old, but its stories have been adapted in
almost every Indian language. In fact, they have travelled
well beyond India, all the way to Southeast Asia, the Arab
world and Europe, inspiring new collections of stories on
the way it is estimated that about 200 adaptations of
the Pafichatantra exist in more than 50 languages! This
illustrates how one collection of stories has become many .

The most striking case, however, is that of India s two epics
 the Ramayana and the Mahabharata.

These two long Sanskrit poems, which together might fill
some 7,000 pages in their original versions, narrate the
stories of heroes who fight to re-establish dharma. In the
Mahabharata, the Pandavas, with Krishna s help, fight
their own cousins, the Kauravas, to recover their kingdom.
In the Ramayana, Rama, with the help of his brother
Lakshmana and of Hanuman, defeats the demon Ravana,
who had kidnapped his wife Sita. These stories contain
many shorter ones that focus on values, and constantly
ask questions about what is right and what is wrong.

Reprint 2025-26

 

Epic:

Along poem
generally
narrating the
adventures
of heroes and
other great
figures of the
past.

8 - Unity in Diversity, or Many in the One 

 

03-02-2025 05:04:32 |

Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions

Exploring Society: India and Beyond

 

chapter8.indd 134

Fig. 8.6. A painting depicting a major episode from the Ramayana
(18 century, Himachal Pradesh)

LET'S EXPLORE

In a class discussion, try to identify the episode depicted in
the painting shown in Fig. 8.6 above and important details
associated with it.

For more than two millenniums, these two epics have been
translated or adapted into regional literatures in India
and beyond. In addition, there are countless folk versions
of them. A few years ago, a scholar conducted a survey in
Tamil Nadu alone and counted about a hundred versions
[of the Mahabharata] that have come down to us in folklore
forms. Imagine what the number might be for the whole

of India!

In fact, many communities have their own versions of the
Ramayana and the Mahabharata. They have also preserved
legends connecting their own history with these epics. This
is especially true of tribal communities in many parts of

Reprint 2025-26

 

03-02-2025 05:04:32 |

India, such as the Bhils, the Gonds, the
Mundas and many more. Most tribes
of India s northeast and Himalayan
regions, including Kashmir, have
had their own version of one or the
other of the two epics, or both. These
tribal adaptations are transmitted
orally, along with legends on how
the heroes of the Ramayana and the
Mahabharata (generally any or all of
the five Pandavas, their wife Draupadl,
but also sometimes their cousin and
adversary Duryodhana) visited the Fig. 8.7, Paftcha Pandavar 

tribes respective regions. a carved stone in a forest of the
. . . Nilgiris, Tamil Nadu, depicting the
The anthropologist K.S. Singh directed five Pandava brothers. The shrine

the People of India project we referred Sr rUle(EMe commemorate

to earlier (see page 126). In the case of the Pandavas passing through

the Mahabharata, he observed, There the area. 
is hardly a place in the country which

the epic heroes such as the Pandavas, did not visit according

to folklores. And the same may be said of the Ramayana.

Over the centuries, perhaps more than any other texts,

these two epics created a dense web of cultural interactions

across India and many parts of Asia. Another example of

unity in diversity.

To further illustrate the theme of this chapter, we could
have continued our journey and turned to more facets
of Indian culture. For instance, in India s classical arts,
including classical architecture, both diversity and unity
are easily noticeable. (You will study these fields through
the Art Curricular Area.)

In the end, we should remember that Indian culture
celebrates diversity as an enrichment, but never loses sight
of the underlying unity which nourishes that diversity.

8 - Unity in Diversity, or Many in the One 

 

Reprint 2025-26

chapter8.indd 135 & 03-02-2025 05:04:22 |

wn
c
 
=
To
 
=
Ee
oO
[=]
xo}
a)
=
(o)
Cc
<
To
Cc
 
oO
[o))
tC)
xr
 
. aa
P=)
=}
oO
S
fo)

Exploring Society: India and Beyond
chapter8.indd 136

Before we move on...

>

>

>

India offers immense diversity in its landscapes, people,
languages, dresses, foods, festivals and customs.

Diversity is easy to perceive in many fields, but there is also an
underlying unity.

India s unity celebrates diversity because diversity does not
divide it enriches.

Questions, activities and projects

1.

Conduct a class discussion on the two quotations at the start of
the chapter.

Select a few stories from the Pafichatantra and discuss how their
message is still valid today. Do you know of any similar stories
from your region?

Collect a few folk tales from your region and discuss their
message.

Is there any ancient story that you have seen being depicted
through a form of art? It could be a sculpture, a painting, a
dance performance, a movie ... Discuss with your classmates.

Discuss in class the following quotation by India s first prime
minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, when he travelled to many parts of
India before Independence:

ee Everywhere I found a cultural background which had

exerted a powerful influence on their lives. ... The old epics
of India, the Ramayana and the Mahabharata and other
books, in popular translations and paraphrases, were widely
known among the masses, and every incident and story and
moral in them was engraved on the popular mind and gave
a richness and content to it. Illiterate villagers would know
hundreds of verses by heart and their conversation would
be full of references to them or to some story with a moral,
enshrined in some old classic. 

Reprint 2025-26

 

03-02-2025 05:04:32 |