India s Cultural Roots

That which cannot be stolen; that which cannot be
confiscated by rulers; ... that which is not a burden as it
does not weigh anything; that which, though it is used,
only grows every day that is the greatest wealth of all,
the wealth of true knowledge. 

 Subhashita (Wise Saying)

A rishi (from Hampi, Karnataka) | The Buddha
(from Bhutan) | Mahavira (from Bihar)

| chapter7_310125.indd 105

Reprint 2025-26

@)

0681CHO7

03702-2025 05:04534 |

Spiritual:
Concerned
with the spirit
or soul (atman
in Sanskrit and
many Indian
languages).
Spirituality is
the search for a
deeper or higher
dimension
beyond

our current
personality.

Seeker:

Someone who
seeks the truths
of this world.
This could

be a sage, a
saint, a yogi, a
philosopher, etc.

Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions

Exploring Society: India and Beyond

S

chapter7_310125.indd 106

Indian culture, by any estimate, is several millenniums old.
Like any ancient tree, it has many roots and many branches.
The roots nurture a common trunk. And from the trunk
emerge many branches, which are different manifestations
of Indian culture, yet united by a common trunk.

Some of these branches are about art, literature, science,
medicine, religion, the art of governance, martial arts, and
so on. There are also schools of thought , by which we mean
groups of thinkers or spiritual seekers who share similar
ideas about human life, the world, etc.

Many archaeologists and scholars have pointed out that
some of India s cultural roots go all the way to the Indus
or Harappan or Sindhu-Sarasvati civilisation (which we
visit in Chapter 6). Later on, over time, hundreds of schools
of thought emerged in India. We will see here a few early
schools, which have shaped India into a country with a
unique personality. By understanding them and their roots,
we can understand India, that is Bharat better.

The Vedas and Vedic Culture

a. What are the Vedas?

The word Veda comes from the Sanskrit vid which
means knowledge (hence vidyd, for instance). We briefly
mentioned the Rig Veda in earlier chapters. In fact, there
are four Vedas the Rig Veda, the Yajur Veda, the Sama
Veda and the Atharva Veda. They are the most ancient texts
of India, and indeed among the most ancient in the world.

The Vedas consist of thousands of hymns prayers in the
form of poems and songs that were recited orally, not
written. Those hymns were composed in the Sapta Sindhava
region (which we visit in Chapter 5). It is difficult to say
when exactly the Rig Veda, the most ancient of the four,
was composed; experts have proposed dates ranging from

Reprint 2025-26

 

03-02-2025 05:04:34 |

the 5 to the 2"? millennium BCE. So, for anything between UNESCO:

100 and 200 generations, these texts have been committed ee

to memory through rigorous training and passed on orally | United Nations

with hardly any alterations! Educational,
Scientific

and Cultural

Organization .

It promotes

This meticulous transmission over thousands of years = dialogue

DON'T MISS OUT

; ; ; ; bet
explains why, in 2008, UNESCO recognised Vedic chanting as a Be ople - d
masterpiece of the oral and intangible heritage of humanity . nations

through

The Vedic hymns were composed by rishis (male seers or | education,
sages) and rishikas (female ones) in an early form of the Pa Sy
Sanskrit language. They were addressed in poetical form

to many deities (gods or goddesses), such as Indra, Agni, Cosmos:

Varuna, Mitra, Sarasvati, Ushas, and many more. Together | [Ne worldor
the universe as

with the seers, these deities sustained ritam, or truth and an ordered and

order in human life and in the cosmos . harmonious
system.

The early rishis and rishikas saw those gods and goddesses 
as one, not separate beings. As one famous hymn puts it,
. fo}

In this worldview, some values were especially important, | Worldview: =
: : : : A certain 5
beginning with Truth , which was often another name for | \,.., < z
God. The last mantras (verses) of the Rig Veda alsocallfor | under- rs
unity among people: standing of 8
y peop the world, its |
origin, orits 

workings. 107)

Reprint 2025-26

chapter7_310125.indd 107 & 03-02-2025 05:04:36 |

Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions

Exploring Society: India and Beyond
| chapter7_310125.indd 108

b. Vedic society

Early Vedic society was organised in different janas or
 clans , that is, larger groups of people. The Rig Veda alone
lists over 30 such janas for instance, the Bharatas, the
Purus, the Kurus, the Yadus, the Turvashas etc. Each clan
was associated with a particular region of the northwest
part of the Subcontinent.

Births of Buddha
and Mahavira

Upanishads

Vedic schools of thought

Reprint 2025-26

 

03-02-2025 05:04:36 |

Not much is known of how these janas governed their
society. The Vedas only give us a few clues through words
like raja (a king or ruler), sabha and samiti, both of which

refer to a collective gathering or assembly. eal
ealer:

Many professions are mentioned in the Vedic texts, such | Someone who
as agriculturist, weaver, potter, builder, carpenter, healer, | US s traditional

. practices to
dancer, barber, priest, etc. relieve or heal

diseases.
LET'S EXPLORE

Do you know the term for a society where people select their
leaders? How do you think people can benefit from such a
situation? What could happen if they live under leaders that
they did not choose? (Hint: Think back to what you re learning
in the theme Governance and Democracy !) Write your thoughts
in a paragraph of 100-150 words.

c. Vedic schools of thought 

Vedic culture also developed many rituals (yajfia, often
read as yagya ) directed towards various deities (gods or
goddesses) for individual or collective benefit and wellbeing.
Daily rituals were generally in the form of prayers and
offerings to Agni, the deity associated with fire, but those
rituals became more and more complex in the course of
time.

A group of texts known as Upanishads built upon Vedic
concepts and introduced new ones, such as rebirth (taking
birth again and again) and karma (our actions or their
results). According to one school of thought, generally
known as Vedanta , everything human life, nature and
the universe is one divine essence called brahman (not
to be confused with the god Brahma) or sometimes just tat
( that ). Two well-known mantras express this in a simple
but profound way:

7 India s Cultural Roots

 

Reprint 2025-26

chapter7_310125.indd 109 & 03-02-2025 05:04:36 |

The Upanishads also introduced the concept of atman or
Self the divine essence that resides in every being but
is ultimately one with brahman. It follows that everything
in this world is connected and interdependent. This
explains a common prayer that begins with sarve bhavantu
sukhinah, or May all creatures be happy , and goes on to
wish them all to be free from disease and sorrow.

Y THINK ABOUT IT

Consciousness:
The quality
or state of
being
aware, for
instance of
something
within
oneself.

Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions

Exploring Society: India and Beyond

chapter7_310125.indd 110

Have you heard or read any other story that conveyed an
important message? What values did it teach you?

Early in the 1% millennium BCE, several more schools of
thought grew out of the Vedas. One of them was Yoga, which
developed methods intended to achieve the realisation
of brahman in one s consciousness. Together, these schools
of thought became the foundations for what we call
 Hinduism today.

Buddhism

Other schools of thought also emerged, which did not
accept the authority of the Vedas and developed their own
systems. One of them is Buddhism.

About two-and-a-half millenniums ago, a young prince
named Siddhartha Gautama was born in Lumbini (today in

Reprint 2025-26

 

03-02-2025 05:04:37 |

chapter7_310125.indd 111

Many stories from the Upanishads tell us the importance of
asking questions, whether these questions come from men,
women or children.

Shvetaketu and the seed of reality
(Chhandogya Upanishad)

Rishi Uddalaka Aruni sent his
son, Shvetaketu, toa gurukula
to learn the Vedas. When
Shvetaketu returned 12 years
later, his father realised he
had become very proud of
his learning. So Uddalaka
tested him with questions on
the nature of brahman, which
Shvetaketu could not answer.

Uddalaka proceeded to explain how brahman, though invisible,
is everywhere, just as the seed of a banyan fruit seems empty
when you open it, but already contains the future banyan tree;
or just as all kinds of different pots can be made out of the same
clay. Similarly, everything around us has emerged from the
same essence brahman. He concluded his teaching with these
words, Everything consists of this subtle essence. ... You are
That, Shvetaketu. 

Nachiketa and his quest
(Katha Upanishad)

Once, a man was giving away all his possessions in a ritual. As his
son Nachiketa kept asking him which god he would be offered
to, the father became angry and answered, I give you to Yama 
 that is, to the god of death.

Nachiketa, then, proceeded to Yama s world and, after a long
wait, met the mighty god. One question was on his mind What

Reprint 2025-26

 

7 India s Cultural Roots

 

03-02-2025 05:04:38 |

Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions

Exploring Society: India and Beyond

SS

chapter7_310125.indd 112

happens after the death of
the body? Yama tried to
avoid answering, but the
boy persisted. Pleased, Yama
explained that the dtman,
or self, is hidden within
all creatures. It is neither
born, nor does it die; it is
immortal. Having acquired
this profound knowledge,
Nachiketa returned to his
father, who welcomed him
joyfully.

The debate of Gargi and Yajnavalkya

(Brihadaranyaka Upanishad)

Once, the wise king Janaka announced a prize for the winner

of a philosophical debate. Yajhavalkya, arenowned rishi, came

to the king s court and defeated many scholars until Gargl,

a rishika, asked him a series of questions on the nature of
(f *

Reprint 2025-26

 

the world, and finally on the
nature of brahman. At that
point, Yajfavalkya asked
her to stop asking further
questions. Later, however,
Gargi resumed her questions
and Yajfiavalkya went on
to explain how brahman
is what makes the world,
the seasons, the rivers and
everything else possible.

03-02-2025 05:04:40 |

Nepal). Depending on the sources they use, scholars have
come up with widely different conclusions as regards the
precise year of his birth. In Chapter 4, we chose 560 BCE as
an approximate year. In any case, it makes no difference to
our story here.

As the story goes, then, Siddhartha Gautama grew up living

a protected life in the palace. One day, at the age of 29, he

asked to be driven through the city in a chariot, and for the Ascetic:

first time in his life came across an old man, a sick man, and ome os

a dead body. He also saw an ascetic, who appeared to be ina Gre:
happy and at peace. Following this experience, Siddhartha discipline to
decided to give up his palace life, leaving behind his wife | QD higher
and son. Travelling on foot as an ascetic, meeting other

ascetics and scholars, he searched for the root cause Attachment:
of suffering in human life. After meditating for many [Ne condition of

; j ; having a bond
days under a pipal tree at Bodh Gaya (today in Bihar), he with someone

attained enlightenment; he realised that avidya (ignorance) or something, , 
, t
and attachment are the source of human suffering and sentimentar

conceived a method to remove these two causes. habit.

Siddhartha, then, became
known as the Buddha , which
means the enlightened or
 awakened one.

The Buddha started teaching
what he had realised, including
the idea of ahimsa, which is
generally translated as nonviolence , but originally means
 non-hurting or non-injuring .
He also insisted on a sincere
inner discipline. The following
saying of his expresses this
simply:

7 India s Cultural Roots

The Buddha teaching
(Ajanta caves)

 

Reprint 2025-26

chapter7_310125.indd 113 & 03-02-2025 05:04:40 |

vers]. But one is pure in whom truth and.
 dharma reside. 3
~ Conquering oneself is greater than
conquering a thousand men on the
attlefield a thousand times. E

= 3 ee

a=

Monk: 2

Aman who,
giving up the
usual life in the
world, dedicates The Buddha founded the Sangha, a community of bhikshus

himself to or monks (and, later, bhikshunis or nuns) who dedicated
religious or .. . : : .
spiritual pursuits. themselves to practising and spreading his teachings. His
A monk usually influence on India, and indeed the whole of Asia, was
@& takes vows,

that is, commits enormous, as we will discover later; it is still perceptible

himself to follow today.
strict rules fora

disciplined life.
Nun:
The female _ A mae ,
equivalent rie. Bee Be Se et A AE das
/ ~ AAbhs 0

of a monk. - Es tet, RePr i eee

Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions

Exploring Society: India and Beyond

This stone panel, some 1,800 years old, shows the Buddha teaching.
Reprint 2025-26

| chapter7_310125.indd 114 & 03-02-2025 05:04:41 |

LET S EXPLORE

> Discuss the way the Buddha is depicted in the above panel.

> Can you name some states of India or some other countries
where Buddhism is a major religion even today? Try to plot
these on a world map.

Jainism

Jainism is another important school
of thought that became widespread
at the same time, although its roots
are said to be much more ancient.
Just like Siddhartha Gautama, Prince
Vardhamana was born into a royal
family in the early 6" century BCE.
His birthplace was near the city of
Vaishali, in modern-day Bihar. At
the age of 30, he decided to leave his
home and go in search of spiritual
knowledge. He practised an ascetic
discipline and, after 12 years, achieved
 infinite knowledge or supreme wisdom.
He became known as Mahavira , or
 great hero , and started preaching what
he had realised.

A traditional painting of Mahavira

 , DON'T MISS OUT

The word Jain or jaina comes from jina, meaning conqueror .
This does not refer to the conquest of territory or enemies, but
to the conquest of ignorance and attachments, so as to reach
enlightenment.

Jain teachings include ahimsa, anekdantavada and
aparigraha. These ideas, shared to a large extent with
Buddhism and the Vedantic school of thought, are central

7 India s Cultural Roots

 

Reprint 2025-26

chapter7_310125.indd 115 & 03-02-2025 05:04:42 |

Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions

Exploring Society: India and Beyond

chapter7_310125.indd 116

to Indian culture. The first may be illustrated by this saying
of Mahavira:

Let us define the last two in simple terms:

= Anekdantavada means not just one aspect or
perspective. That is, the truth has many aspects and
cannot be fully described by any single statement.

= Aparigraha means non-possession and advises
detachment from material possessions, limiting
oneself to what is truly necessary in life.

Jainism also insists on the interconnectedness and
interdependence of all creatures, from humans to invisible
organisms, as they support each other and cannot live
without one another. Scientists studying nature, flora and
fauna, have again and again confirmed this deep truth.

The Jataka tales, which have delighted generations of Indian 
sguilaren and adults, tell stories of the Buddha s former births
and express in simple terms the Buddhist values.

a a well-known tale, the Buddha was the king of a large J

Ss troop of monkeys. They lived near a huge tree which bore >

= = ae a ee . sacle canal teeta mae i

fruit of divine fragrance and taste. Despite the monkey all

a __ king s instructions that no fruit should escape, one day aripe 
, fruit fell into the stream below. Carried by the current, it was

Reprint 2025-26

 

03-02-2025 05:04:43 |

chapter7_310125.indd 117

caught in a net and taken to the palace. The king was so enchanted by
its taste that he ordered his soldiers to locate the tree it came from.

After a long search, they found the tree and the monkeys enjoying
the tree s fruits. The soldiers attacked
the monkeys. The only way for the
monkey-king to save his monkeys
was to help them cross the stream,
but they could not do so on their own.
Being much larger than them, the
monkey-king caught hold of a tree on
the other bank and let them use his
body as a bridge to cross the stream,
although he was severely bruised in
the process and eventually died.

The king, who watched the scene from
a distance, was greatly moved by the

 : A stone panel (at Bharhut in
monkey-king s selfless sacrifice. He Madhya Pradesh) depicting the

thought about the role of a king with story of the monkey-king
respect to his subjects.

A Jain story

Rohineya was an extraordinarily skilled burglar who evaded all
attempts to catch him. On his way to a city, he accidentally heard
a few sentences from a sermon that Mahavira was giving about
achieving liberation from the ordinary life of ignorance. Reaching
the city, Rohineya was recognised and arrested. He pretended to be
a simple farmer. A minister devised a clever plan to force him to
confess his identity. But Rohineya, remembering Mahavira s words,
was able to detect the minister s plan and defeat it.

Feeling remorseful, Rohineya approached Mahavira, confessed his
crimes, returned the stolen treasures, and asked for forgiveness. He
became a monk, realised the illusion he was living in and focused on
acquiring higher knowledge.

The story illustrates the importance of right action and right
thinking, and also illustrates the fact that everyone should have a
second chance.

Reprint 2025-26

 

7 India s Cultural Roots

e

03-02-2025 05:04:44 |

LET'S EXPLORE

Observe the above panel (from a Jain temple in New Delhi).
What is striking about it? What messages does it carry?

@ vy THINK ABOUT IT @

In both Buddhism and Jainism, ahimsa means much more
than refraining from physical violence against a person or
an animal. It also means refraining from violence in thought,
such as having ill feelings towards anyone. If we observe
ourselves carefully, we may notice such negative thoughts and
learn to turn them into positive ones. Sometimes such negative
thoughts are even directed at ourselves!

In both Buddhism and Jainism, monks, and sometimes
nuns too, began travelling across the land to spread their
respective teachings far and wide. Some of them created
new monasteries in faraway places, while others led ascetic
lives in caves cut in the rock. Archaeological findings have
revealed many traces of those monasteries, sometimes even
the names of the monks who lived in the rock-cut caves and
slept on the stone beds!

Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions

Exploring Society: India and Beyond

Reprint 2025-26

| chapter7_310125.indd 118 & 03-02-2025 05:04:44 |

Caves cut into the rock at Ellora (Maharashtra) between the 6" and the 10" centuries CE.
Some of the caves are Hindu, others are Buddhist and Jain.

YW THINK ABOUT IT

In English, Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism are often
labelled religions . You may notice that we have avoided this
term, preferring schools of thought and (later in this chapter)
 belief systems . This is because there are many aspects to
those schools and systems, which we will explore gradually 
a philosophical aspect, a spiritual aspect, a religious aspect, an
ethical aspect, a social aspect, to name a few. Many scholars
agree that the word religion is too limiting in the context of
the Indian civilisation.

There were yet other schools of thought at the time. For
example, one of them, known as the Charvaka school
(sometimes also Lokayata ), believed that this material
world is the only thing that exists, and therefore there can
be no life after death. This school does not seem to have
gained much popularity and it disappeared with time.
We mention it to show that there was a wide diversity of
intellectual or spiritual belief systems; people were free to
choose what suited them.

Reprint 2025-26

chapter7_310125.indd 119 &

7 India s Cultural Roots

 

03-02-2025 05:04:44 |

Exploring Society: India and Beyond
Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions

SS

chapter7_310125.indd 120

Although the Vedic, Buddhist and Jain schools had important
differences, they also shared some common concepts,
such as dharma, karma, rebirth, the search for an end to
suffering and ignorance, and many important values. This
is the trunk of the tree we started this chapter with.

Folk and Tribal Roots

The cultural roots we have seen so far are well documented
in many texts. India has also had rich oral traditions , that
is, teachings or practices transmitted through everyday
practice, without written texts (this is the case of the
Vedas). Among them are numerous folk traditions, that
is, transmitted by common people, and tribal traditions,
transmitted by tribes.

What is a tribe?

There are many definitions for this social entity. Today,
anthropologists usually consider a tribe to be a group of
families or clans sharing a tradition of common descent, a
culture and a language, living as a close-knit community
under a chief and holding no private property.

Interestingly, ancient India did not have a word for tribe 
 tribes were just different janas that lived in a specific
environment, such as forests or mountains. The Constitution
of India uses the terms tribes and tribal communities in
English, and janjati in Hindi.

According to official figures, in 2011 India had 705 tribes
spread over most States, amounting to a population of about
104 million people more than the populations of Australia
and the United Kingdom together!

In the 19" century, anthropologists studying tribes often
described them as primitive or inferior to civilised people.
With deeper studies of tribal communities and their rich and
complex cultures, such biased judgments have been mostly
abandoned.

Reprint 2025-26

 

03-02-2025 05:04:44 |

There has been a constant interaction
between folk and tribal traditions, and
the leading schools of thought such as
those we mentioned in this chapter.
Deities, concepts, legends and rituals
have been freely exchanged in both
directions. For instance, according to
tradition, Jagannath, worshipped at Puri
(Odisha), was originally a tribal deity;
this is also the case with various forms of
the mother-goddess worshipped across
India. Some tribes, on the other hand,
adopted Hindu deities long ago, and possess their own
versions of the Mahabharata and the Ramayana this has
been well documented from India s northeastern States, all
the way to Tamil Nadu.

ar |

How have such interactions taken place for so
long and so naturally? It is, in the end, because
folk, tribal and Hindu belief systems have
many similar concepts. For instance, in all
three, elements of nature such as mountains,
rivers, trees, plants and animals, and some
stones too, are regarded as sacred, because
there is consciousness behind all of them.
Indeed, tribes generally worship many deities
associated with those natural elements. For the
Toda tribals of the Nilgiris of Tamil Nadu, for
instance (one of them is pictured in the image on the right),
over thirty peaks of this mountain range are residences of
a god or a goddess; those peaks are so sacred that the Todas
avoid pointing to them with a finger.

But despite this multiplicity of deities, as with Hinduism,
many tribal groups have a concept of a higher divinity or
supreme being. For example, several tribes of Arunachal
Pradesh worship Donyipolo, a combined form of the Sun and

7 India s Cultural Roots

 

Reprint 2025-26

chapter7_310125.indd 121 & 03-02-2025 050446 |

the Moon who later rose to the higher status of a supreme god.
This is also the case of the god Khandoba in parts of central
India. In eastern India, the Munda and Santhal tribals, among
others, worship Singbonga, a supreme deity who created this
whole world. There are many more such examples.

The Indian sociologist Andr B teille summed up this
situation in these words:

 The thousands of castes and tribes on the Indian

religious beliefs and practices since the beginning of

C C subcontinent have influenced each other in their

Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions

Exploring Society: India and Beyond

 

chapter7_310125.indd 122

history and before. That the tribal religions have been
influenced by Hinduism is widely accepted, but it is
equally true that Hinduism, not only in its formative
phase but throughout its evolution, has been influenced
by tribal religions. 

Clearly, the result of this long interaction has been mutual
enrichment. In this manner, folk and tribal beliefs and
practices also count among India s cultural roots. We will
further develop this point in the next chapter.

Before we move on ...

> The Vedas, India s earliest texts, gave rise to several schools
of thought. Vedanta and Yoga are among the best known.

> Buddhism and Jainism departed from the authority of
the Vedas and laid emphasis on some specific values and
practices.

> Although these schools had different principles and
methods, they also shared some important concepts; they
were all looking for the cause of suffering and the means
of removing ignorance.

> Tribal belief systems and art have interacted for
millenniums with Hinduism. There was free borrowing
and giving from every side. Tribal belief systems generally
regard the land and its features as sacred; they often have,
at the same time, a higher concept of divinity.

Reprint 2025-26

 

03-02-2025 05:04:45 |

Questions, activities and projects

1.

If you were Nachiketa, what questions would you like to ask
Yama? Write them down in 100-150 words.

. Explain a few central ideas of Buddhism. Briefly comment

upon them.

. Discuss in class the quotation of the Buddha which begins with

 Not by water is one made pure, though many people may
bathe here [in sacred rivers] to make sure that its meaning
has been understood by all.

. Explain a few central ideas of Jainism. Briefly comment upon

them.

. Consider and discuss in class Andr B teille s thought (see

page 122).

. Make a list of popular gods and goddesses in your region

and the festivals they are associated with.

. As a class activity, list two or three tribal groups from your

region or State. Document some of their art and belief systems.

True or false

1.
be
3.

The Vedic hymns were written on palm-leaf manuscripts.
The Vedas are India s oldest texts.

The Vedic statement ekam sat vipra bahudha vadanti reflects a
belief in the unity of cosmic powers.

. Buddhism is older than the Vedas.
. Jainism emerged as a branch of Buddhism.

. Both Buddhism and Jainism advocated for peaceful

coexistence and the avoidance of harm to all living beings.

. Tribal belief systems are limited to belief in spirits and minor

deities.

Class activity

1.

Stage a small play with Yama, god of death, surrounded by
several Nachiketas asking him questions about life.

Reprint 2025-26

chapter7_310125.indd 123 &

7 India s Cultural Roots

 

03-02-2025 05:04:45 |

The banyan tree is an apt illustration for the themes in Chapters 7 and 8,
and a fine symbol for Indian civilisation. With its deep root system,
massive trunk and branches spreading in all directions, it can extend to

a vast area and last for many centuries. It shelters a variety of flora and
fauna and encourages its branches, though united at the trunk, to throw
fresh roots of their own. Indeed, Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism regard

the banyan tree as sacred.

_s