Grassroots Democracy - Part 3
Local Government in
Urban Areas

I desire that ... a full-fledged local body should be immediately
formed, ... so that people may know really what is an
administration, what are the franchise, what are the powers,
what are the rights and what are the privileges in a small
sphere, in their own town, in their own villages.

 Rustom K. Sidhwa, Member, Constituent Assembly
(during the Constituent Assembly Debates, 13 October 1949)

Fig. 12.1. The Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai
(originally Bombay Municipal Corporation ) was created in 1865.

SEES ay Sain

O66 1CHI2

Reprint 2025-26

| chapter12.indd| 173 (0380232025 secs |

Exploring Society: India and Beyond

Governance and Democracy

SS

chapter12.indd 174

Introduction

Earlier chapters have shown us how,
in a democracy, good governance
aims to empower the citizens so they
may actively participate in their
country s functioning, whether it is
at the rural, regional, urban, state
or national level. This is the broader
concept of participatory democracy.

We saw the basics of the system in
a rural context. Let us now see how
it works in an urban scenario. Since
the latter is generally more complex

and diverse than the former, it is understandable that the
urban governance system needs to be more complex too.
We will however limit ourselves here to its basic principles.

LET'S EXPLORE

> Whyisacity like Kolkata, Chennai or Mumbai more complex
and diverse than a village or a town?

> With your classmates, make a list of diverse communities
residing in any city that you are familiar with. How many
were you able to list? What else do you observe in the list?

Before we explore governance and administration in
urban areas, it helps to take an overall look at the Indian
system of governance, from rural to national, as depicted in
Fig. 12.2 on page 175. The base of the pyramid is the local
level, closer to the people, while the top is the national level.
In Chapter 11, we explored the left side of the pyramid; we
will now take a look at the right side.

Reprint 2025-26

 

03-02-2025 05:03:05 |

chapter12.indd 175

UNION
GOVERNMENT
AT THE
NATIONAL LEVEL

STATE
GOVERNMENT

LOCAL
GOVERNMENT

RURAL - URBAN PANCHAYATI URBAN LOCAL
RA] INSTITUTIONS BODIES

ZILA MUNICIPAL
PANCHAYAT CORPORATION OR
MUNICIPAL COUNCIL
OR CITY COUNCIL
(NAGAR PANCHAYAT)

PANCHAYAT
SAMITI

WARD COMMITEE
GRAM PANCHAYAT

GRAM SABHA PEOPLE OF THE WARD

Fig. 12.2

LET'S EXPLORE

In Fig. 12.2 above, what similarities and differences do you
notice between the Panchayati Raj system and the urban local
government?

Urban Local Bodies

Local government structures in urban areas are called
 urban local bodies . They are decentralised, which means
that instead of operating under a central authority at the

Reprint 2025-26

 

12 Grassroots Democracy - Part 3

 

03-02-2025 05:03:05 |

Exploring Society: India and Beyond
Governance and Democracy
| chapter12.indd 176

top, the local communities have a direct say on how their
areas are managed or the issues they face. It is amechanism
for citizens living in an area to come together and take
decisions about what is best for them.

Cities and towns are divided into smaller units called
 wards , and the ward committees facilitate activities
such as conducting health camps, organising a campaign
against the use of single-use plastics, and so on. They also
keep an eye on anything that might go wrong a water
leak, a blocked drain, a damaged road, etc. and report
such problems to the authorities. However, the precise
functioning of wards differs from State to State, depending
on the rules they make.

oun

Altogether, urban local bodies are responsible for a range
of functions helping take care of the infrastructure,
maintaining the burial ground, garbage collection and
disposal, checking the implementation of government
schemes, collecting local taxes and fines, and so on. They
also have some role in planning for the area s economic
and social development. However, for these bodies to be

Reprint 2025-26

 

03-02-2025 05:03:06 |

chapter12.indd 177

able to perform their functions efficiently, people living in
the city must also perform their duties, which means that
they must show care and concern for their area (remember,
this is a participatory democracy). For instance, if people
carefully follow instructions regarding waste segregation,
garbage collection becomes easier; or if they notice a water
leakage in a street, reporting it promptly will prevent
further wastage of precious water.

LET'S EXPLORE

Can you think of four or five more actions that responsible
citizens might take to help their area of the city?

Fig. 12.3. The Madras Corporation

The Madras Corporation (now Greater Chennai Corporation),
established on 29 September 1688, is the oldest municipal
institution in India. The East India Company issued a charter
the previous year constituting the town of Fort St. George and
all territories within 16 km from the Fort into a corporation. A
Parliamentary Act of 1792 gave the Madras Corporation power
to levy municipal taxes in the city, which is when the municipal
administration properly began.

Reprint 2025-26

 

12 Grassroots Democracy - Part 3

 

03-02-2025 05:03:07 |

| chapter12.indd 178

SERVICES UNDER THE INDORE MUNICIPAL CORPORATION

SOLID WASTE BUSINESS,
MANAGEMENT HOARDINGS,
TRADE LICENSES

CRM* MARRIAGE | CRM FIRE CRM VARIOUS CRM WATER
CERTIFICATE SERVICES LICENSES TANKER, DEBRIS
CLEARANCE

TREE CUTTING & TREE TRANSPORTATION
CRM SERVICES ON REQUEST

a S|
Water Tanker | Septic Tanker Mobile Toilet | Ambulance

*CRM: Citizen Relationship Management.
(The list of services offered by the Indore Municipal Corporation is simplified here.)

&

Fig. 12.4. Services under the Indore Municipal Corporation

Reprint 2025-26

& 03-02-2025 05:03:14 |

Y THINK ABOUT IT

chapter12.indd 179

Indore in Madhya Pradesh has been awarded the cleanest
city in India under the Swachh Survekshan government
scheme for seven years in a row. What could have been the
role of Indore citizens in this achievement?

As we see, Chennai and Indore have a Municipal Corporation at the top of their urban bodies. Only cities with a
population above 10 lakhs have a Municipal Corporation
(also called Mahanagar Nigam ) as their highest body.
Between 1 and 10 lakhs, the highest body is a Municipal
Council (also called Nagar Palika ). Cities and towns with
smaller populations have a Nagar Panchayat.

LET'S EXPLORE

> Select a few cities, from your State and from a few
neighbouring States. These may include the city you
live in or the city nearest to your town or village. How will
you find out if they have a Nagar Panchayat, Municipal
Council or Municipal Corporation? Draw a table with the
names of the cities and the type of urban local body each
of them has.

> How do urban local bodies fund their activities? (Hint:
Look carefully at the pictures of the functions performed by
Indore Municipal Corporation in Figure 12.4 on page 178.)
Are some of them paid services?

Sameer: Hello! I haven t seen you
around here before. Are you new to
this village?

Anita: Hello! Yes, I m visiting my grandparents who live nearby. Iam from the
city. It's quite different from here!
Sameer: Oh, really? What's it like in
the city?

Reprint 2025-26

 

12 Grassroots Democracy - Part 3

03-02-2025 05:03:15 |

Exploring Society: India and Beyond
Governance and Democracy

2 |

chapter12.indd 180

Anita: Well, it s busy and crowded, with tall buildings everywhere.
There are so many people rushing around all the time, and it s
noisy compared to the quietness here. Also, people are more
independent and often don't even know their neighbours.

Sameer: Wow! Here, everyone knows everyone else and
pitches in to help each other out we work together in the
fields, celebrate festivals together, and even make decisions as
a community.

Anita: Well, there s still some sense of
community in the city. Just the other
day, following heavy rains, a house
collapsed two streets away. Dozens of
people gathered from all over the place
to help clear the rubble and make sure
no one was trapped inside.

Sameer: Doesn't the local government
help in such cases?

Anita: Yes, it does. In fact, we have
local bodies and elected representatives who represent us and
our interests.

Sameer: Well, it sounds like our village Panchayat, only bigger.
Members are elected, too, but because they all know each other,
a lot more people can participate and discuss all kinds of issues
that concern the village. Sometimes, even us kids can get heard.

Anita: Really? You are not making that up?

Reprint 2025-26

 

03-02-2025 05:03:15 |

chapter12.indd 181

Sameer: Not at all! The other day a few kids noticed that an
electricity wire was hanging dangerously low, almost touching
the roof of a building. Not only did we report it, but we explained
to one of our Gram Sabha members that an electric post should
be shifted a little. And it was done!

Anita: Great! I suppose that s how democracy should work. It
seems more complicated in the city, but the idea is the same 
everyone's voice matters.

Sameer: Yes, it does! Sorry, I must make a move. My mother needs
my help for a little shopping. Thanks for telling me about the city.

Anita: And thanks for telling me about your village! I am definitely
going to look around.

Sameer: Well, maybe we'll meet again sometime. Bye!

Before we move on...

+ Inurban areas, decentralised governance works
through different urban local bodies, which fulfil
various functions affecting the citizens lives.

 As with the rural context, urban local bodies have elected
members who represent the local citizens.

 The citizens also have duties to ensure that the local bodies
are able to perform their functions efficiently.

Questions, activities and projects

1. On your way to school, you and your friends notice that
a water pipe is leaking. A lot of water is being wasted on
account of the leak. What would you and your friends do
in such a situation?

2. Invite amember of an urban local body near you to your
class. Discuss with them their role and responsibilities.
Prepare a set of questions to ask them so that the meeting
is fruitful.

Reprint 2025-26

 

12 Grassroots Democracy - Part 3

 

03-02-2025 05:03:16 |

3. Discuss with adult members of your family and neighbourhood, and make a list of their expectations from the
urban local bodies.

4. Make a list of characteristics of a good urban local body.

What are the similarities and differences between the
Panchayati Raj system in rural areas and the urban local
bodies?

Noodles

Exploring Society: India and Beyond
Governance and Democracy

 

*'Noodles is our abbreviation for Notes and Doodles !

Reprint 2025-26

chapter12.indd 182 & 03-02-2025 05016 |