Landforms and Life

CHAPTER

Free from the burden of human beings, may the Earth
with many heights, slopes and great plains, bearing plants
endowed with varied powers, spread out for us and show
us her riches! ... The Earth is my mother and I am her
child.

 Atharva Veda, Bhumi Stkta ( Hymn to the Earth )

 1. What are the major eso
The Big ] Jor types of

Questions @

chapter3_161224 indd 44

landforms and their significance

to life and culture?

What are the challenges and *
opportunities of life associated 0681003
with each landform?

Introduction

Humans, like most mammals, live on land. Land, as you may
have noticed, has many forms and features; its appearance
changes a lot from one region to another. Suppose that you
are travelling by road from the region known as Chhota
Nagpur in Jharkhand, reach Prayagraj in Uttar Pradesh,
and go on to Almora in Uttarakhand. On the way, you will
see very different landscapes. In fact, you will encounter
three major landforms, which we will now explore.

LET'S EXPLORE

> Asa class activity, form groups of four or five students
and observe the school s surroundings. What kind of
landscape do you see? Will the landscape change a few
kilometres away? Or within some 50 kilometres? Compare
with other groups.

nitude: > In the same groups, discuss a journey that any of you
ofan object has made through a region of India. List the different
above landscapes seen on the way. Compare with other groups. 
sea level.
Examples:

the altitude | A landform is a physical feature on the surface of our

nountan planet Earth. Landforms take shape over millions of years

the altitude | and have a significant connection with the environment

or plane in and life. They can broadly be divided into three categories
flight, the | mountains, plateaus and plains (Fig. 3.1).
antuce ee These landforms have different climates and are home to

a variety of flora and fauna. Humans have adapted to all
landforms, but the number of people living on different
kinds of landforms varies throughout the world.

Mountains

Mountains are landforms that are much higher than the
surrounding landscape. They can be recognised by a broad
base, steep slopes and a narrow summit. Depending on
their height, some mountains are covered with snow. At
lower altitudes, the snow melts every summer and turns

India and the World: Land and the People

Exploring Society: India and Beyond

Reprint 2025-26

chapter3_161224.indd 42 & 03-02-2025 04:57:22 |

into water that feeds rivers. At high altitudes, the snow
may never melt, leaving the mountain permanently snow
Fig. 3.1. This drawing illustrates three landforms mountains in the
background (two of them snow-capped), a plateau on the left and a plain in
the foreground, with a river emerging from the mountains.

capped.

Other highlands with a lower height, less steep slopes and

rounded tops are called hills.

Wy THINK ABOUT IT

chapter3_161224.indd 43

What is snow? Unless you live in a Himalayan region (such
as Kashmir, Ladakh, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand,
Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh), you may never have seen
snow! In the rest of India, most precipitation is in the form
of rain and hail. But at higher altitudes, if it is cold enough,
snow will fall, covering the landscape in a soft and beautiful
white blanket. Snow and hailstones are nothing but
precipitation of water in a solid state.

Reprint 2025-26

 

Precipitation:
Water

from the
atmosphere
reaching the
ground in any
form rain,
snow and

hail are the
most common
forms of
precipitation.

3 - Landforms and Life

03-02-2025 04:57:23 |

Mount Aconcagua

Reprint 2025-26

| chaptersmt612240indd a4 ey 103702 2025 il

Most of the world s mountains are grouped in mountain
ranges, such as the Himalayas in Asia, the Alps in Europe
and the Andes in South America. Some of these ranges
stretch for thousands of kilometres.

Fig. 3.3. A sketch showing the relative heights of six mountains of the world

Fig. 3.2 shows pictures of six mountains of the world.
Fig. 3.3 brings them together to give a visual impression of
their relative heights from top to bottom. Mount Everest
(between Tibet (China) and Nepal) and Kanchenjunga
(between Nepal and the Indian state of Sikkim) are the two
highest peaks of the Himalayan range. Mount Aconcagua
(in South America) is the highest peak of the Andes. Mount
Kilimanjaro in eastern Africa is an isolated mountain that
is not part of any range. Mont Blanc in Western Europe
is the highest mountain of the Alps. Anamudi (in Kerala,
also known as Anai Peak ) is the highest mountain in south
India.

3 - Landforms and Life

Reprint 2025-26

chapter3_161224.indd 45 & 03-02-2025 04:57:29 |

Montane forest:
A type of forests
that grows in
mountainous
regions.

Moss:

A small green
plant without
flowers or true
roots, often
spreading in

a cushion-like
cover.

Lichen:

A plant-like
organism
that
generally
clings to
rocks, walls
or tree.

Mountains with tall and sharp peaks, like the Himalayas,
are relatively young , which means that they were formed
recently in the Earth s history but that is still millions
of years ago! Shorter and more rounded mountains and
hills, like the Aravalli Range, are much older and have been
rounded by erosion. Sometimes, as with the Himalayas,
upliftment as well as erosion continue to this day. (You
will learn more in Science about such processes and their
causes; let us just say here that some mountains of the
world, like the Himalayas, are still growing in height.)

Mountain environment

Mountain slopes are often covered with a type of forest
called montane forest, where conifer trees such as pines,
firs, spruce and deodar are common. These conifer trees
grow tall and cone-shaped, with thin, pointed leaves. At
higher altitudes, the trees give way to grasses, mosses and
lichen.

Here are two verses from a long poem by Kalidasa, who lived at least
1,500 years ago and is often considered to be the greatest poet of
ancient India. The poem, Kumarasambhava, begins with an invocation
to the Himalayas. (This is a simplified translation from the Sanskrit.)

In the north rises Himalaya, the Lord of mountains, like a
living god, who measures the Earth and stretches from the
western to the eastern oceans. ...

From it the wind comes down, carrying spray from descending
Ganga, shaking the deodar trees, opening the peacocks tail
feathers and cooling the mountain people after they hunt deer.

Discuss the verses and the following questions in class.

= What are the western to the eastern oceans ? Can you locate
them as well as the Lord of mountains on Fig. 5.2?
= Why is Ganga mentioned? (Hint: There could be several reasons.)

India and the World: Land and the People

Exploring Society: India and Beyond

Reprint 2025-26

chapter3_161224.indd 46

 

03-02-2025 04:57:32 |

_ = 5 % << n
Leopard | Black bear

we

Fig. 3.4. A few mountain animals } 7 rn

chapter3_161224.indd 47

India and the World: Land and the People

Exploring Society: India and Beyond

chapter3_161224.indd 48

Terrain:

A piece or
stretch of
land, from
the point
of view of
its physical
features.

Deep forests, flowing rivers, lakes, grasslands and caves in
the mountains are home to diverse fauna, for instance, the
golden eagle, the peregrine falcon, the Canadian lynx, the
snow leopard, the ibex, the Himalayan tahr, the mountain
hare, the yak, the grey fox and the black bear (Fig. 3.4).

 DON'T MISS OUT

 Ganga is the Indian name of the largest river originating in
the Himalayas. In English, Ganges is also used. Nearly 2,500 km
long, this river has numerous tributaries (that is, other rivers
joining it). Some of them, like the Yamuna and the Ghagara, also
originate in the Himalayas. Others, like the Son or Sone, originate
from the Vindhya Range to the south of the Ganga plain.

age ? a

Fig. 3.5. Terrace farming in north India

Life in the mountains

The mountain terrain is usually rugged or rough, and has
steep slopes. This means that regular farming can only be
practised in some valleys. Cultivation is practised on the

Reprint 2025-26

& 03-02-2025 04:57:41 |

slopes by cutting steps into the slope (Fig. 3.5). This is called Valley:

A lower area

terrace farming. In many mountainous regions of the world, between hills
herding is the preferred occupation over agriculture. or mounreins,
wi
Tourism is often an important source of income for the a river or
. . . . . . . s ream
people living in the mountains. The crisp mountain air flowing
and scenic beauty attract many tourists. Some tourists through it.

also go to the mountains for sports such as skiing, hiking,
mountaineering and paragliding. For many centuries,
people have also travelled to these uplands for pilgrimages
to holy sites. But an excessive inflow of visitors can also
put the fragile mountain environment under pressure; it is
often difficult to find the right balance.

<) DON'T MISS OUT

 Bachendri Pal started climbing mountains from a young
age and led many women s climbing expeditions. She
was the first Indian woman to climb Mount Everest in cy
1984 and was awarded Padma Shri the same year (and
Padma Bhushan in 2019).

 Arunima Sinha lost a leg in an accident when she
was 22. With Bachendri Pal s encouragement and
training, she managed to climb Mount Everest in 2013,
and went on to climb the highest peak of every continent,
including Mount Vinson in Antarctica! She was awarded
Padma Shri in 2015.

LET'S EXPLORE

These images (Fig. 3.6 on page 50) depict a few challenges
that people living in the mountains may face. Discuss them
in groups in the class and write one paragraph on each. Also
discuss why, despite many such challenges, people still choose

3 - Landforms and Life

to live in the mountains.

 

Reprint 2025-26

chapter3_161224.indd 49 & 03-02-2025 04:57:41 |

Flash flood:
A sudden
local flood,
often
caused bya
cloudburst.

Landslide:

The sudden

collapse of a

mass of earth

or rock froma

mountainside.
 

The sudden fall .
of snow, ice or
rocks froma
mountainside;
often occurs
when the snow
starts melting.

Cloudburst:
A sudden
violent
rainstorm.

India and the World: Land and the People

Exploring Society: India and Beyond

Fig. 3.6. Life in the mountains has definite positives, from pure air to the
beautiful scenery. It also involves potential challenges, both natural and
human-made, seme of which are depicted in these pictures.

chapter3_161224.indd 50

LN

 4 DON'T MISS OUT

Many traditional communities around the world consider
mountains to be sacred places and worship them. Mount
Everest, the highest mountain in the world at 8,849 m, has
many names. Tibetans call it Chomolungma , which means
 Mother Goddess of the World and worship the mountain as
such. Nepalis call it Sagarmatha , meaning Goddess of the Sky .
Similarly, Mount Kailash in Tibet is held sacred by followers
of Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Bon (an ancient Tibetan
religion). Such reverence for mountain summits is also found
elsewhere in India, as well as in other parts of the world.

Plateaus

A plateau is a landform that rises up from the surrounding
land and has a more or less flat surface; some of its sides
are often steep slopes. Like mountains, plateaus can be
young or old in terms of the Earth s history. Two examples
of plateaus are the Tibetan Plateau, the largest and highest
plateau in the world, and the Deccan Plateau. The height
of plateaus can vary from a few hundred metres to several
thousand metres.

 _ DON'T MISS OUT

 The Tibetan Plateau has an average altitude of 4,500 m,
which explains why it has been nicknamed the Roof of
the World ! From east to west, it is nearly 2,500 km long
 the distance from Chandigarh to Kanyakumari.

 The Deccan Plateau of central and south India is one of

the oldest plateaus in the world, formed through volcanic
activity millions of years ago.

Like mountains, plateaus are rich in mineral deposits; they
have been called storehouses of minerals . As a result,
mining is a major activity on plateaus, where many of the
world s largest mines are found. For example, the East

Reprint 2025-26

chapter3_161224.indd 51 &

3 - Landforms and Life

03-02-2025 04:57:49 |

India and the World: Land and the People

Exploring Society: India and Beyond

Fig.

chapter3_161224.indd 52

African Plateau is famous for gold and diamond mining. In
India, huge reserves of iron, coal and manganese are found
in the Chhota Nagpur Plateau.

The plateau environment is very diverse across the world.
Many plateaus have a rocky soil, which makes them less
fertile than plains (see next section) and therefore less
favourable to farming. An exception is that of lava plateaus
(that is, formed through volcanic activity), as they often
have a rich black soil.

Plateaus are also home to many spectacular waterfalls.
The Victoria Falls on the Zambezi River in southern Africa,
the Hundru Falls on the Subarnarekha River in the Chhota
Nagpur Plateau and the Jog Falls on the Sharavati River in
the Western Ghats are a few such waterfalls. The Nohkalikai
Falls (Fig. 3.7) drop down 340 metres from the Cherrapunji
Plateau (in Meghalaya).

3.7. The Nohkalikai Falls emerging from the Cherrapunji Plateau

Reprint 2025-26

 

03-02-2025 04:57:50 |

Plains The average
Plains are landforms that have an extensive flat or gently level ove
undulating surface. They do not have any large hills or deep the oceans,
valleys. They are generally not more than 300 metres above also called
sea level. level .
Floodplains are one type of plains formed by rivers
originating in mountain ranges, where they collect
particles of rock, sand and silt called sediments . These
sediments are carried all the way to the plains, where
the rivers deposit them, making the soil very fertile. As a
result, these plains are ideal for growing crops of all kinds,
and agriculture is a major economic occupation in this
landform. Plains also support a variety of flora and fauna. |

Alaska

Himalaya

Q

Yangtze

q
QO |
Ly

iS

Y African

Ganga
& Brahmaputra

 
a

o OP
Patagonian 2

Plateau Ml
River Plain
Mountain Range ||

&

Fig. 3.8. This world map shows a few major mountain ranges,
plateaus and plains.

LET'S EXPLORE

chapter3_161224.indd

Use the colour code in Fig. 3.8 to add a landform to each
name. For instance, Tibetan plateau , Rocky range , Nile
plain . (You do not have to remember the names in this map.)
Reprint 2025-26

 

3 - Landforms and Life

 

03-02-2025 04:57:50 |

India and the World: Land and the People

Exploring Society: India and Beyond

chapter3_161224.indd 54

Fig. 3.9. A satellite view of the Ganga plain

LET S EXPLORE

The picture in Fig. 3.9 has been taken from a satellite. It
captures a portion of north India from a high altitude. Observe
and discuss the image as a class activity.

> Which colour is the Ganga plain?
> What does the white expanse represent?

> What does the brown expanse at the bottom left of the
image represent?

Life in the plains

Thousands of years ago, the first civilisations developed
around rivers in fertile plains. In our times too, a large part
of the world s population lives in plains.

About 40 crore people, more than one-fourth of the total
Indian population, live in India s Ganga plain (often called
the Gangetic plain ). As with many other plains of the

Reprint 2025-26

 

03-02-2025 04:57:50 |

world, the major occupations of people in this region
include river fishing and agriculture. Food crops such as
rice, wheat, maize, barley and millets are grown. Fibre
crops such as cotton, jute and hemp are also grown in the
Gangetic plain. Traditional agriculture has been mostly
rainfed (that is, watered through rainfall). In recent
decades, however, agriculture has turned to irrigation,
with water brought to the fields through networks of
canals or pumped from groundwater. While irrigation has
increased agricultural production, it has also contributed to
the depletion (or decrease) of groundwater. This presents a
challenge for the future of agriculture in the region. Some
of the other problems affecting the Ganga plains include
high population and pollution.

Whether in mountain ranges or plains, rivers around the

world have carried immense cultural value. In particular,

many communities have considered a river s source and

its confluence with one or two other rivers to be sacred. @
In India, numerous festivals, ceremonies and rituals are

conducted at such locations.

Because plains have a gentle slope, river navigation is easy
and supports a lot of economic activities. In earlier days,
people also used rivers extensively to travel from one place confluence:
to another. Even today (Fig. 3.10 on page 56), there are The meeting
stretches along the Ganga where people prefer to use boats point of two

or more
to move around! rivers.

LET'S EXPLORE

> Can you give examples of river sources or confluences from
your region that are regarded sacred by any community?

> Visit a nearby river and observe all activities there, whether
economic or cultural. Note them down and discuss with
your classmates.

3 - Landforms and Life

 

Reprint 2025-26

chapter3_161224.indd 55 & 03-02-2025 04:57:50 |

> Name some popular tourist destinations in India and
identify the category of landform they are associated with.

Resilience:
The capacity
to meet
challenges
and
difficulties,
adapt to
them or
overcome
them.

India and the World: Land and the People

Exploring Society: India and Beyond

| chapter3_161224.indd 56

Fig. 3.10. River transportation on the Ganga

In this chapter, we explored the three main landforms.
But its surface is very complex and experts often define a few
more landforms. One such landform is the desert. Deserts
are considered to be large and dry expanses with very little
precipitation. Their flora and fauna are also unique. Some
deserts are hot, like the Sahara Desert in Africa or the Thar
Desert in the northwest of the Indian Subcontinent. Others
are cold, like the Gobi Desert in Asia. (Some experts also
describe the Antarctica continent as a desert.)

Despite harsh living conditions, humans have adapted to
most of the deserts. In India, communities living in the Thar
Desert, or migrating through it, hold rich cultural traditions,
such as folk songs and legends, related to the desert.

The diverse ways in which humans have made alllandforms
their home is a testimony to our adaptability and resilience.

Reprint 2025-26

 

03-02-2025 04:57:51 |

The five tinais of ancient Tamil Sangam poetry are five
landscapes associated with certain specific deities, lifestyles,
moods or emotions (such as love, longing, separation, quarrel,
etc.). This table only lists the characteristics of the five
landscapes and the main human occupations in each:

Tinat Landscape Main occupation
kurifji mountainous regions hunting and gathering
Mullai grassland and forests cattle rearing
Marudam | fertile agricultural plains farming
Neydal coastal regions fishing and seafaring
Palai arid, desert-like regions | journeying and fighting

These five tinais constitute a different classification of
landforms than the one we have seen, but they reflect a keen
awareness of the diverse regions and their characteristics.
They also illustrate the deep connection between humanity
and the natural environment. (You do not need to remember
the details of the tinais, but the concepts they reflect need to be
understood.)

Before we move on...

>

chapter3_161224.indd 57

Landforms are classified into three main types 
mountains, plateaus and plains. They have very

different physical characteristics and environments.
Throughout history, people s lives and activities have been
much impacted by the type of landform they have lived in.
These landforms are an integral part of culture across the
world. Indian culture, in particular, has celebrated them in
diverse ways.

Each landform offers different challenges as well

as opportunities.

Reprint 2025-26

 

3 - Landforms and Life

03-02-2025 04:57:51 |

Questions, activities and projects

1. In what type of landform is your town / village / city
located? Which features mentioned in this chapter do
you see around you?

2. Let us go back to our initial trip from Chhota Nagpur to
Prayagraj and Almora. Describe the three landforms you
came across on the way.

3. List afew famous pilgrimage spots in India along with the
landforms in which they are found.

4. State whether true or false 
> The Himalayas are young mountains with rounded tops.
> Plateaus usually rise sharply at least on one side.

+> Mountains and hills belong to the same type
of landform.

Vv

Mountains, plateaus and rivers in India have the same
types of flora and fauna.

Ganga is a tributary to the Yamuna. 
Deserts have unique flora and fauna.

Melting snow feeds rivers.

Vvvv

Sediments from rivers deposited in the plains makes
the land fertile.

> All deserts are hot.

Match words in pairs:

Gangetic plains
Mount Kilimanjaro tributary

Yamuna climbing

India and the World: Land and the People

Exploring Society: India and Beyond

Reprint 2025-26

chapter3_161224.indd 58 & 03-02-2025 04:57:51 |