Similarly, the final velocity of the car, v= 60 km h'! =50/3ms. Therefore, the initial kinetic energy of the car, = 9% 1500 kg x (25/3 m s1)? = 156250/3 J. The final kinetic energy of the car, kf E,. = 5 * 1500 kg x (50/3 m s !)? = 625000/3 J. Thus, the work done = Change in kinetic energy = Ey Ey = 156250 J. SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 uestions 1. What is the kinetic energy of an object? 2. Write an expression for the kinetic energy of an object. 3. The kinetic energy of an object of mass, m moving with a velocity of 5m s" is 25d. What will be its kinetic energy when its velocity is doubled? What will be its kinetic energy when its velocity is increased three times? 10.2.3 POTENTIAL ENERGY Activity 10.8 Take a rubber band. Hold it at one end and pull from the other. The band stretches. Release the band at one of the ends. What happens? The band will tend to regain its original length. Obviously the band had acquired energy in its stretched position. How did it acquire energy when stretched? Activity 10.9 Take a slinky as shown below. Ask a friend to hold one of its ends. You hold the other end and move away from your friend. Now you release the slinky. What happened? How did the slinky acquire energy when stretched? Would the slinky acquire energy when it is compressed? Activity id1:. 1 0 Take a toy car. Wind it using its key. Place the car on the ground. Did it move? From where did it acquire energy? Does the energy acquired depend on the number of windings? How can you test this? WorK AND ENERGY Activity id21:'.L e Lift an object through a certain height. The object can now do work. It begins to fall when released. e This implies that it has acquired some energy. If raised to a greater height it can do more work and hence possesses more energy. e From where did it get the energy? Think and discuss. In the above situations, the energy gets stored due to the work done on the object. The energy transferred to an object is stored as potential energy if it is not used to cause a change in the velocity or speed of the object. You transfer energy when you stretch a rubber band. The energy transferred to the band is its potential energy. You do work while winding the key of a toy car. The energy transferred to the spring inside is stored as potential energy. The potential energy possessed by the object is the energy present in it by virtue of its position or configuration. Activity <id: 122 e Take a bamboo stick and make a bow as shown in Fig. 10.6. e Place an arrow made of a light stick on it with one end supported by the stretched string. e Now stretch the string and release the arrow.