is the law of conservation of energy. According to this law, energy can only be converted from one form to another; it can neither be created or destroyed. The total energy before and after the transformation remains the same. The law of conservation of energy is valid in all situations and for all kinds of transformations. Consider a simple example. Let an object of mass, mbe made to fall freely froma _ height, h. At the start, the potential energy is mgh and kinetic energy is zero. Why is the kinetic energy zero? It is zero because its velocity is zero. The total energy of the object is thus mgh. As it falls, its potential energy will change into kinetic energy. If vis the velocity of the object at a given instant, the kinetic energy would be Yemv . As the fall of the object continues, the potential energy would decrease while the kinetic energy would increase. When the object is about to reach the ground, = 0 and vwill be the highest. Therefore, the kinetic energy would be the largest and potential energy the least. However, the sum of the potential energy and kinetic energy of the object would be the same at all points. That is, potential energy + kinetic energy = constant or (10.7) mgh + 3 mv = constant. The sum of kinetic energy and potential energy of an object is its total mechanical energy. We find that during the free fall of the object, the decrease in potential energy, at any point in its path, appears as an equal amount of increase in kinetic energy. (Here the effect of air resistance on the motion of the object has been ignored.) There is thus a continual transformation of gravitational potential energy into kinetic energy. Reprint 2025-26 Activity s 10.15 e An object of mass 20 kg is dropped from a height of 4m. Fillin the blanks in the following table by computing the potential energy and kinetic energy in each case. Height at | Potential Kinetic which object | energy energy is located (E = mgh) |(E, = mv?/2) J J 2 Just above the ground e For simplifying the calculations, take the value of gas 10 ms . 10.3 Rate of Doing Work Do all of us work at the same rate? Do machines consume or transfer energy at the same rate? Agents that transfer energy do work at different rates. Let us understand this from the following activity: _ 10.16 Consider two children, say A and B. Let us say they weigh the same. Both start climbing up a rope separately. Both reach a height of 8 m. Let us say A takes 15 s while B takes 20 s to accomplish the task. e What is the work done by each? The work done is the same. However, A has taken less time than B to do the work. e Who has done more work in a given time, say in 1 s?