a toy car. The energy transferred to the spring inside is stored as potential energy. The potential energy possessed by the object is the energy present in it by virtue of its position or configuration. Activity <id: 122 e Take a bamboo stick and make a bow as shown in Fig. 10.6. e Place an arrow made of a light stick on it with one end supported by the stretched string. e Now stretch the string and release the arrow. e Notice the arrow flying off the bow. Notice the change in the shape of the bow. e The potential energy stored in the bow due to the change of shape is thus used in the form of kinetic energy in throwing off the arrow. Fig.10.6: An arrow and the stretched string on the bow. Reprint 2025-26 10.2.4 POTENTIAL ENERGY OF AN OBJECT AT A HEIGHT An object increases its energy when raised through a height. This is because work is done on it against gravity while it is being raised. The energy present in such an object is the gravitational potential energy. The gravitational potential energy of an object at a point above the ground is defined as the work done in raising it from the ground to that point against gravity. It is easy to arrive at an expression for the gravitational potential energy of an object at a height. CT a I I I I I I I l h I I I I I I I I Ground Fig. 10.7 Consider an object of mass, m. Let it be raised through a height, 4 from the ground. A force is required to do this. The minimum force required to raise the object is equal to the weight of the object, mg. The object gains energy equal to the work done on it. Let the work done on the object against gravity be W. That is, work done, W = force x displacement =mgxh = mgh Since work done on the object is equal to mgh, an energy equal to mgh units is gained by the object. This is the potential energy (E,) of the object. E, =mgh (10.6) The potential energy of an object at a height depends on the ground level or the zero level you choose. An object in a given position can have a certain potential energy with respect to one level and a different value of potential energy with respect to another level. = ae =) i?) = = It is useful to note that the work done by gravity depends on the difference in vertical heights of the initial and final positions of the object and not on the path along which the object is moved. Fig. 10.8 shows a case where a block is raised from position A to B by taking two different paths. Let the height AB = h. In both the situations the work done on the object is mgh. Path 1 h Path 2 Fig. 10.8