is the energy required to do 1 joule of work. Sometimes a larger unit of energy called kilo joule (kJ) is used. 1 kJ equals 1000 J. 10.2.1 FORMS OF ENERGY Luckily the world we live in provides energy in many different forms. The various forms include mechanical energy (potential energy + kinetic energy), heat energy, chemical energy, electrical energy and light energy. Think it over ! How do you know that some entity is a form of energy? Discuss with your friends and teachers. SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 10.2.2 KINETIC ENERGY Activity Activity Take a heavy ball. Drop it on a thick bed of sand. A wet bed of sand would be better. Drop the ball on the sand bed from height of about 25 cm. The ball creates a depression. Repeat this activity from heights of 50 cm, 1m and 1.5 m. Ensure that all the depressions are distinctly visible. Mark the depressions to indicate the height from which the ball was dropped. Compare their depths. Which one of them is deepest? Which one is shallowest? Why? What has caused the ball to make a deeper dent? Discuss and analyse. Set up the apparatus as shown in Fig. 10.5. Place a wooden block of known mass in front of the trolley at a convenient fixed distance. Place a known mass on the pan so that the trolley starts moving. WorK AND ENERGY Fig. 10.5 e The trolley moves forward and hits the wooden block. e Fix a stop on the table in such a manner that the trolley stops after hitting the block. The block gets displaced. e Note down the displacement of the block. This means work is done on the block by the trolley as the block has gained energy. From where does this energy come? e Repeat this activity by increasing the mass on the pan. In which case is the displacement more? e In which case is the work done more? In this activity, the moving trolley does work and hence it possesses energy. A moving object can do work. An object moving faster can do more work than an identical object moving relatively slow. A moving bullet, blowing wind, a rotating wheel, a speeding stone can do work. How does a bullet pierce the target? How does the wind move the blades of a windmill? Objects in motion possess energy. We call this energy kinetic energy. A falling coconut, a speeding car, a rolling stone, a flying aircraft, flowing water, blowing wind, a running athlete etc. possess kinetic energy. In short, kinetic energy is the energy possessed by an object due to its motion. The kinetic energy of an object increases with its speed. How much energy is possessed by a moving body by virtue of its motion? By definition, we say that the kinetic energy ofa body moving with a certain velocity is equal to the work done on it to make it acquire that velocity. Reprint 2025-26 Let us now express the