energy of an object of mass, m raised through a height, from the earth s surface is given by m g h. According to the law of conservation of energy, energy can only be transformed from one form to another; it can neither be created nor destroyed. The total energy before and after the transformation always remains constant. Energy exists in nature in several forms such as kinetic energy, potential energy, heat energy, chemical energy etc. The sum of the kinetic and potential energies of an object is called its mechanical energy. Power is defined as the rate of doing work. The SI unit of power is watt. 1 W = 1 J/s. Exercises 1. Look at the activities listed below. Reason out whether or not work is done in the light of your understanding of the term work . Suma is swimming in a pond. A donkey is carrying a load on its back. e A wind-mill is lifting water from a well. A green plant is carrying out photosynthesis. An engine is pulling a train. SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 Work AND ENERGY 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. Food grains are getting dried in the sun. A sailboat is moving due to wind energy. An object thrown at a certain angle to the ground moves in a curved path and falls back to the ground. The initial and the final points of the path of the object lie on the same horizontal line. What is the work done by the force of gravity on the object? A battery lights a bulb. Describe the energy changes involved in the process. Certain force acting on a 20 kg mass changes its velocity from 5 ms! to 2 ms. Calculate the work done by the force. A mass of 10 kg is at a point A ona table. It is moved toa point B. If the line joining A and B is horizontal, what is the work done on the object by the gravitational force? Explain your answer. The potential energy of a freely falling object decreases progressively. Does this violate the law of conservation of energy? Why? What are the various energy transformations that occur when you are riding a bicycle? Does the transfer of energy take place when you push a huge rock with all your might and fail to move it? Where is the energy you spend going? A certain household has consumed 250 units of energy during a month. How much energy is this in joules? An object of mass 40 kg is raised to a height of 5 m above the ground. What is its potential energy? If the object is allowed to fall, find its kinetic energy when it is half-way down. What is the work done by the force of gravity on a satellite moving round the earth? Justify your answer. Can there be displacement of an object in the absence of any force acting on it? Think. Discuss this question with your friends and