second floor of a building just to see the landscape from there. You may even climb up a tall tree. If we apply the scientific definition, these activities involve a lot of work. In day-to-day life, we consider any useful physical or mental labour as work. Activities like playing in a field, talking with friends, humming a tune, watching a movie, attending a function are sometimes not considered to be work. What constitutes work depends on the way we define it. We use and define the term work differently in science. To understand this let us do the following activities: Activity 10.1 e We have discussed in the above paragraphs a number of activities which we normally consider to be work Reprint 2025-26 in day-to-day life. For each of these activities, ask the following questions and answer them: (i) What is the work being done on? (ii) What is happening to the object? (iii) Who (what) is doing the work? 10.1.2 SCIENTIFIC CONCEPTION OF WORK To understand the way we view work and define work from the point of view of science, let us consider some situations: Push a pebble lying on a surface. The pebble moves through a distance. You exerted a force on the pebble and the pebble got displaced. In this situation work is done. A girl pulls a trolley and the trolley moves through a distance. The girl has exerted a force on the trolley and it is displaced. Therefore, work is done. Lift a book through a height. To do this you must apply a force. The book rises up. There is a force applied on the book and the book has moved. Hence, work is done. A closer look at the above situations reveals that two conditions need to be satisfied for work to be done: (i) a force should act on an object, and (ii) the object must be displaced. If any one of the above conditions does not exist, work is not done. This is the way we view work in science. A bullock is pulling a cart. The cart moves. There is a force on the cart and the cart has moved. Do you think that work is done in this situation? Activity e Think of some situations from your daily life involving work. List them. e Discuss with your friends whether work is being done in each situation. e Try to reason out your response. e If work is done, which is the force acting on the object? e What is the object on which the work is done? e What happens to the object on which work is done? Activity 10.3 e Think of situations when the object is not displaced in spite of a force acting on it. e __ Also think of situations when an object gets displaced in the absence of a force acting on it. e List all the situations that you can think of for each. e Discuss with your friends whether work is