done in this case? Fig. 10.3 Consider another situation in which the force and the displacement are in the same direction: a baby pulling a toy car parallel to the ground, as shown in Fig. 10.4. The baby has exerted a force in the direction of displacement of the car. In this situation, the work done will be equal to the product of the force and displacement. In such situations, the work done by the force is taken as positive. WorK AND ENERGY Fig. 10.4 Consider a situation in which an object is moving with a uniform velocity along a particular direction. Now a retarding force, F, is applied in the opposite direction. That is, the angle between the two directions is 180 . Let the object stop after a displacement s. In such a situation, the work done by the force, Fis taken as negative and denoted by the minus sign. The work done by the force is Fx (-s) or (Fx s). It is clear from the above discussion that the work done by a force can be either positive or negative. To understand this, let us do the following activity: Activity 10.4 Lift an object up. Work is done by the force exerted by you on the object. The object moves upwards. The force you exerted is in the direction of displacement. However, there is the force of gravity acting on the object. e Which one of these forces is doing positive work? e Which one is doing negative work? Give reasons. Work done is negative when the force acts opposite to the direction of displacement. Work done is positive when the force is in the direction of displacement. Example 10.2 A porter lifts a luggage of 15 kg from the ground and puts it on his head 1.5 m above the ground. Calculate the work done by him on the luggage. Solution: Mass of luggage, m = 15 kg and displacement, s= 1.5m. Reprint 2025-26 Work done, W Fxs=mgxs 15kgx 10ms?x 1.5m 225kgms?m = 225Nm= 225J Work done is 225 J. uestions 1. When do we say that work is done? 2. Write an expression for the work done when a force is acting on an object in the direction of its displacement. 3. Define 1J of work. 4. A pair of bullocks exerts a force of 140N on a plough. The field being ploughed is 15 m long. How much work is done in ploughing the length of the field? 10.2 Energy Life is impossible without energy. The demand for energy is ever increasing. Where do we get energy from? The Sun is the biggest natural source of energy to us. Many of our energy sources are derived from the Sun. We can also get energy from the nuclei of atoms, the interior of the earth, and the tides. Can you think of other sources of energy? Activity 10.5 e A few sources of energy are listed above. There are many other sources of energy.