is the object on which the work is done? e What happens to the object on which work is done? Activity 10.3 e Think of situations when the object is not displaced in spite of a force acting on it. e __ Also think of situations when an object gets displaced in the absence of a force acting on it. e List all the situations that you can think of for each. e Discuss with your friends whether work is done in these situations. 10.1.3 WORK DONE BY A CONSTANT FORCE How is work defined in science? To understand this, we shall first consider the case when the force is acting in the direction of displacement. Let a constant force, F act on an object. Let the object be displaced through a distance, s in the direction of the force (Fig. 10.1). Let Wbe the work done. We define work to be equal to the product of the force and displacement. Work done = force x displacement W =Fs (10.1) < _ s _> F Fig. 10.1 Thus, work done by a force acting on an object is equal to the magnitude of the force multiplied by the distance moved in the direction of the force. Work has only magnitude and no direction. In Eq. (10.1), if F= 1 N and s= 1m then the work done by the force will be 1 N m. Here the unit of work is newton metre (N m) or joule (J). Thus 1 J is the amount of work SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 done on an object when a force of 1 N displaces it by 1 m along the line of action of the force. Look at Eq. (10.1) carefully. What is the work done when the force on the object is zero? What would be the work done when the displacement of the object is zero? Refer to the conditions that are to be satisfied to say that work is done. Example 10.1 A force of 5 N is acting on an object. The object is displaced through 2 m in the direction of the force (Fig. 10.2). If the force acts on the object all through the displacement, then work done is5Nx2m =10Nmor 10J. 2m CT 5 N > Fig. 10.2 uestion 1. A force of 7N acts on an object. The displacement is,say 8m, in the direction of the force (Fig. 10.3). Let us take it that the force acts on the object through the displacement. What is the work done in this case? Fig. 10.3 Consider another situation in which the force and the displacement are in the same direction: a baby pulling a toy car parallel to the ground, as shown in Fig. 10.4. The baby has exerted a force in the direction of displacement of the car. In this situation, the work done will be equal to the product of the force and displacement. In such situations, the work done by the force is taken as positive.