light of the lamp I sat there like a stone image in the flesh. 8. I felt then the great presence of the creator of this world and this universe. God was there. Suppose I said something and he did not like it I tried in my imagination to write in bright letters outside my little heart the words, O God . There was some pain in my left arm. It was as ifa thick leaden rod no, a rod made of molten fire was slowly but powerfully crushing my arm. The arm was beginning to be drained of all strength. What could I do? 9. At my slightest movement the snake would strike me! Death lurked four inches away. Suppose it struck, what was the medicine I had to take? There were no medicines in the room. I was but a poor, foolish and stupid doctor. I forgot my danger and smiled feebly at myself. It seemed as if God appreciated that. The snake turned its head. It looked into the mirror and saw its reflection. I do not claim that it was the first snake that had ever looked into a mirror. But it was certain that the snake was looking into the mirror. Was it admiring its own beauty? Was it trying s 58 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 10. = Perhaps it wanted to enjoy its reflection at closer quarters. to make an important decision about growing a moustache or using eye shadow and mascara or wearing a vermilion spot on its forehead? I did not know anything for certain. What sex was this snake, was it male or female? I will never know; for the snake unwound itself from my arm and slowly slithered into my lap. From there it crept onto the table and moved towards the mirror. Perhaps it wanted to enjoy its reflection at closer quarters. I was no mere image cut in granite. I was suddenly a man of flesh and blood. Still holding my breath I got up from the chair. I quietly went out through the door into the veranda. From there I leapt into the yard and ran for all I was worth. Phew ! Each of us heaved a sigh of relief. Somebody asked, Doctor, is your wife very fat? . No, the doctor said. God willed otherwise. My life companion is a thin reedy person with the gift of a sprinter. Someone else asked, Doctor, when you ran did the snake follow you? The Snake and the Mirror / 59 # Reprint 2025-26 12. Il. This story about a frightening incident is narrated in a humorous way. What makes it humorous? (Think of the contrasts it presents between dreams and The doctor replied, I ran and ran till I reached a friend s house. Immediately I smeared oil all over myself and took a bath. I changed into fresh clothes. The next morning at about eight-thirty I took my friend and one or two others to my