basis of the following points. the tense of narration (past and present tense) short, incomplete sentences sentence length Which of these translations do you like? Give reasons for your choice. s 64 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 ds e A Legend of the Northland x This poem narrates the legend of an old lady who angered Saint Peter because of her greed. Away, away in the Northland, Where the hours of the day are few, And the nights are so long in winter That they cannot sleep them through; Where they harness the swift reindeer To the sledges, when it snows; And the children look like bear s cubs In their funny, furry clothes: They tell them a curious story I don t believe tis true; And yet you may learn a lesson If I tell the tale to you. Once, when the good Saint Peter Lived in the world below, And walked about it, preaching, Just as he did, you know, He came to the door of a cottage, In travelling round the earth, Where a little woman was making cakes, And baking them on the hearth; And being faint with fasting, For the day was almost done, He asked her, from her store of cakes, To give him a single one. Reprint 2025-26 So she made a very little cake, But as it baking lay, She looked at it, and thought it seemed Too large to give away. Therefore she kneaded another, And still a smaller one; But it looked, when she turned it over, As large as the first had done. Then she took a tiny scrap of dough, And rolled and rolled it flat; And baked it thin as a wafer But she couldn t part with that. For she said, My cakes that seem too small When I eat of them myself Are yet too large to give away. So she put them on the shelf. Then good Saint Peter grew angry, For he was hungry and faint; And surely such a woman Was enough to provoke a saint. And he said, You are far too selfish To dwell in a human form, To have both food and shelter, And fire to keep you warm. Now, you shall build as the birds do, And shall get your scanty food By boring, and boring, and boring, All day in the hard, dry wood. Then up she went through the chimney, Never speaking a word, And out of the top flew a woodpecker, For she was changed to a bird. s 66 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 She had a scarlet cap on her head, And that was left the same; But all the rest of her clothes were burned Black as a coal in the flame. And every country schoolboy Has seen her in the wood, Where she lives in the trees till this very day, Boring and boring for food. PHOEBE CARY A ballad is a song narrating a story in short stanzas. Ballads are a part