is facilitated by the fact that humans are not the natural prey of any venomous snake. We are a bit large for them to swallow whole and they have no means of chopping us up into bite-size pieces. Nearly all snakebites in humans are the result of a snake defending itself when it feels threatened. In general snakes are shy and will simply leave if you give them a chance. * pe Writing 1. Try to rewrite the story without its humour, merely as a frightening incident. What details or parts of the story would you leave out? 2. Read the description given alongside this sketch from a photograph in a newspaper (Times of India, 4 September 1999). Make up a story about what the monkey is thinking, or why it is looking into a mirror. Write a paragraph about it. ae THE FAIREST OF THEM ALL A monkey preens itself using a piece of mirror, in the Delhi ridge. (To preen oneself means to spend a lot of time making oneself look attractive, and then admiring one s appearance. The word is used in disapproval.) The Snake and the Mirror / 63 # Reprint 2025-26 re Bag a &% Translation The text you read is a translation of a story by a well-known Malayalam writer, Vaikom Muhammad Basheer. In translating a story from one language to another, a translator must keep the content intact. However, the language and the style differ in different translations of the same text. Here are two translations of the opening paragraphs of a novel by the Japanese writer, Haruki Murakami. Read them and answer the questions given below. A When the phone rang I was in the kitchen, boiling a potful of spaghetti and whistling along with an FM broadcast of the overture to Rossini s The Thieving Magpie, which has to be the perfect music for cooking pasta. I wanted to ignore the phone, not only because the spaghetti was nearly done, but because Claudio Abbado was bringing the London Symphony to its musical climax. B I'm in the kitchen cooking spaghetti when the woman calls. Another moment until the spaghetti is done; there I am, whistling the prelude to Rossini s La Gazza Ladra along with the FM radio. Perfect spaghetti-cooking music! I hear the telephone ring but tell myself, Ignore it. Let the spaghetti finish cooking. It s almost done, and _ besides, Claudio Abbado and the London Symphony Orchestra are coming to a crescendo. Compare the two translations on the basis of the following points. the tense of narration (past and present tense) short, incomplete sentences sentence length Which of these translations do you like? Give reasons for your choice. s 64 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 ds e A Legend of the Northland x This poem narrates the legend of an old lady who angered Saint Peter because of her greed. Away, away in the Northland, Where the hours of the day are few, And the nights are so long