Thinking about Language I. Here are some sentences from the text. Say which of them tell you, that the author: (a) was afraid of the snake, (b) was proud of his appearance, (c) had a sense of humour, (d) was no longer afraid of the snake. 1. I was turned to stone. I was no mere image cut in granite. The arm was beginning to be drained of strength. I tried in my imagination to write in bright letters outside my little heart the words, O God . I didn t tremble. I didn t cry out. I looked into the mirror and smiled. It was an attractive smile. BwN I was suddenly a man of flesh and blood. I was after all a bachelor, and a doctor too on top of it! OC ONO The fellow had such a sense of cleanliness...! The rascal could have taken it and used it after washing it with soap and water. 10. Was it trying to make an important decision about growing a moustache or using eye shadow and mascara or wearing a vermilion spot on its forehead. Il. Expressions used to show fear Can you find the expressions in the story that tell you that the author was frightened? Read the story and complete the following sentences. 1. I was turned 2. I sat there holding 3. In the light of the lamp I sat there like III. In the sentences given below some words and expressions are italicised. They are variously mean that one e is very frightened. e is too scared to move. is frightened by something that happens suddenly. makes another feel frightened. Match the meanings with the words/expressions in italics, and write the appropriate meaning next to the sentence. The first one has been done for you. 1. I knew a man was following me, I was scared out of my wits. (very frightened) The Snake and the Mirror / 61 # Reprint 2025-26 * by I got a fright when I realised how close I was to the cliff edge. He nearly jumped out of his skin when he saw the bull coming towards him. You really gave me a fright when you crept up behind me like that. Wait until I tell his story it will make your hair stand on end. Paralysed with fear, the boy faced his abductors. NO a Bw The boy hid behind the door, not moving a muscle. IV. Reported questions Study these sentences: His friend asked, Did you see the snake the next day, doctor? His friend asked the doctor whether/if he had seen the snake the next day. The little girl wondered, Will I be home before the TV show begins? The little girl wondered if/whether she would be home before the TV show began. Someone asked, Why has the thief left the vest behind? Someone asked why the thief had left the vest behind. The words if/whether are used to report questions which begin with: do, will,