Mirror / 59 # Reprint 2025-26 12. Il. This story about a frightening incident is narrated in a humorous way. What makes it humorous? (Think of the contrasts it presents between dreams and The doctor replied, I ran and ran till I reached a friend s house. Immediately I smeared oil all over myself and took a bath. I changed into fresh clothes. The next morning at about eight-thirty I took my friend and one or two others to my room to move my things from there. But we found we had little to carry. Some thief had removed most of my things. The room had been cleaned out! But not really, the thief had left behind one thing as a final insult! What was that? I asked. The doctor said, My vest, the dirty one. The fellow had such a sense of cleanliness...! The rascal could have taken it and used it after washing it with soap and water. Did you see the snake the next day, doctor? The doctor laughed, I ve never seen it since. It was a snake which was taken with its own beauty! taken with: attracted by Vaikom MUHAMMAD BASHEER [translated from the Malayalam by V. Abdulla] * HR Thinking about the. Text I. Discuss in pairs and answer each question below in a short paragraph (30-40 words). 1. The sound was a familiar one. What sound did the doctor hear? What did he think it was? How many times did he hear it? (Find the places in the text.) When and why did the sounds stop? 2. What two important and earth-shaking decisions did the doctor take while he was looking into the mirror? 3. I looked into the mirror and smiled, says the doctor. A little later he says, I forgot my danger and smiled feebly at myself. What is the doctor s opinion about himself when: (i) he first smiles, and (ii) he smiles again? In what way do his thoughts change in between, and why? reality. Some of them are listed below.) 1. (i) The kind of person the doctor is (money, possessions) (ii) The kind of person he wants to be (appearance, ambition) s 60 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 ds e 2. (i) The person he wants to marry (ii) The person he actually marries 3. (i) His thoughts when he looks into the mirror (ii) His thoughts when the snake is coiled around his arm Write short paragraphs on each of these to get your answer. * H Thinking about Language I. Here are some sentences from the text. Say which of them tell you, that the author: (a) was afraid of the snake, (b) was proud of his appearance, (c) had a sense of humour, (d) was no longer afraid of the snake. 1. I was turned to stone. I was no mere image cut in granite. The arm was beginning to be drained of strength. I tried in my imagination to write in bright letters outside