the snake the next day, doctor? His friend asked the doctor whether/if he had seen the snake the next day. The little girl wondered, Will I be home before the TV show begins? The little girl wondered if/whether she would be home before the TV show began. Someone asked, Why has the thief left the vest behind? Someone asked why the thief had left the vest behind. The words if/whether are used to report questions which begin with: do, will, can, have, are etc. These questions can be answered yes or no . Questions beginning with why/when/where/how/which/what are reported using these same words. The reporting verbs we use in questions with if/whether/why/when etc. are: ask, inquire and wonder. Remember that in reported speech, the present tense changes to past tense here, today, tomorrow, yesterday etc. change to there, that day, the next day, the day before, etc. I/you change to me/him/he, etc., as necessary. Example: He said to me, I don t believe you. He said he did not believe me. e She said to him, I don t believe you. She told him that she did not believe him. Report these questions using if/ whether or why/when/where/how/which/ what. Remember the italicised verbs change into the past tense. 1. Meena asked her friend, Do you think your teacher will come today? David asked his colleague, Where will you go this summer? He asked the little boy, Why are you studying English? She asked me, When are we going to leave? ak wo N Pran asked me, Have you finished reading the newspaper? s 62 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 6. Seema asked her, How long have you lived here? 7. Sheila asked the children, Are you ready to do the work? % Speaking Using some of the expressions given above in exercise III, talk about an incident when you were very scared. You may have a competition to decide whose story was the most frightening. * . . &% Dictation The following paragraph is about the Indian cobra. Read it twice and close your book. Your teacher will then dictate the paragraph to you. Write it down with appropriate punctuation marks. The Indian cobra is the common name for members of the family of venomous snakes, known for their intimidating looks and deadly bite. Cobras are recognised by the hoods that they flare when angry or disturbed; the hoods are created by the extension of the ribs behind the cobras heads. Obviously the best prevention is to avoid getting bitten. This is facilitated by the fact that humans are not the natural prey of any venomous snake. We are a bit large for them to swallow whole and they have no means of chopping us up into bite-size pieces. Nearly all snakebites in humans are the result of a snake defending itself when it feels threatened. In general snakes are shy and will simply leave if you give them a chance. * pe Writing 1. Try to rewrite the story without