of the Earth While rotating on its own axis, the Earth also revolves around the Sun as we learnt in Grade 6. This movement is different from rotation. Revolution is the motion of an object around another object. Earth, Moon, and the Sun 4/3/2025 4:57:18 PM The path an object takes while revolving around another object is called its orbit. If viewed from the top (Fig. 12.8), the orbit of the Earth around the Sun is nearly circular. (In the figure of the Solar System given in chapter Beyond Earth in the Grade 6 Science textbook Curiosity, the orbit appeared elongated because it was a side view of the orbit). The Earth completes one revolution around the Sun in about 365 days and 6 hours. 12.2.1 Changing view of night sky from the Earth Every evening the Sun sets in the westward direction and the night sky becomes visible. We know that this occurs due to the Earth s rotation. As the Earth also revolves around the Sun continuously, the stars seen in the night sky after sunset gradually change over a year as we look in different directions, as shown in Fig. 12.8. Stars that rise at sunset June A led i December Stars that set.at ; Different stars sunrise rise at sunset in different months September Fig. 12.8: Revolution of the Earth around the Sun leads to changing view of the night sky throughout the year (The sizes and distances are not to scale) You can also notice this change by looking at the pattern of stars (such as those that you learnt about in Grade 6), at a fixed time of the night, on days separated by a month. FASCINATING FACTS The Bhil and Pawara are indigenous communities from the Tapi Valley in western India, who used the appearance of certain patterns of stars in the sky as markers for the arrival of monsoon rain. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 Chapter 12.indd 176 4/3/2025 4:57:19 PM 12.2.2 Seasons on the Earth I have noticed that we go through a cycle of seasons I have also noticed that days are longer in summer than in winter. every year. Is it related to the revolution of the Earth around the Sun in some way? Earth, Moon, and the Sun The Earth s axis of rotation is not upright with respect to the orbit, but is tilted. The Earth maintains this tilt as it orbits around the Sun (Fig. 12.9). The tilt of the Earth s axis and the spherical shape of the Earth gives rise to seasons. Let us find out, how. North Pole North Pole North Pole , Winter in Northern Hemisphere Summer in Northern Hemisphere y North Pole December September Fig. 12.9: Different positions of the Earth while revolving around the Sun (The Earth s orbit appears elongated because this is a side view and not the top view. The sizes and distances are not to scale) In June, the Northern Hemisphere is tilted