When the Northern Hemisphere tilts towards the Sun, it is &) closer to the Sun. .) + The orbit of the Earth is an oval with the Sun slightly displaced from its centre so the Earth is at different distances from the Sun over the year. However, the difference in distances in either of these cases is very small and these are not the reasons why seasons occur on the Earth. In fact, the Earth is closest to the Sun in January. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 Chapter 12.indd 178 4/3/2025 4:57:22 PM Chapter 12.indd 179 In the Northern Hemisphere, the longest day occurs around 21 June this is known as summer solstice. After the summer IVE night becomes longer. The shortest day and longest night in this _ Hemisphere occur around 22 December known as the winter ) ; solstice. Around 21 March and 23 September, the daytime lasts for 12 hours. In the Northern Hemisphere, these days are called the spring and the autumn equinox, respectively. FASCINATING FACTS At the North Pole, the Sun rises in the East direction on the equinox day 21 March, and remains continuously in the sky for six months. The Sun sets on 22 September. The South Pole experiences the opposite behaviour. The polar regions thus experience continuous sunshine for six months followed by a six-month period of darkness. On the equator, there is always 12 hours of sunlight and 12 hours of darkness. There is little difference in the intensity of the sunrays falling on the equator in different months. Thus, for the southern states of India that lie close to the equator, the effect of seasons is not very prominent. Other effects, such as local geographical features and proximity to oceans or seas, can also influence these broader patterns seen in the two hemispheres, as you have learnt in social science. 12.3 Eclipses Day and night cycle, seasons, the life on the Earth... so much is dependent upon the Sun. Could the light from the Sun get blocked by the two planets which are revolving between the Earth and the Sun? The planets Mercury and Venus appear very small compared to the Sun, and never block the entire light from the Sun reaching us. However, you may be surprised to know that the Moon can do that. Do you remember studying in Grade 6 that the Moon isa natural satellite of the Earth and it revolves around the Earth as the Earth revolves around the Sun? solstice, the duration of a day becomes shorter while that of a EEPER } Earth, Moon, and the Sun 4/3/2025 4:57:23 PM 12.3.1 Solar eclipse At certain times, the Moon can come in between the Sun and the Earth in a way that obstructs the light from the Sun from reaching us. This is known as a solar eclipse. You may wonder how the Moon, which is smaller than the Sun, blocks the light coming from the Sun that we see in