started to disappear from my view to the left from the West. The stars will now become visible in the night sky. 1. 1am facing North and my back is to the South. The morning Sun appears in my view to my right in the East. Fig. 12.6: A girl on the rotating Earth viewing the Sun from the Equator Due to the rotation of the Earth, the Sun appears to rise in the eastward direction, move across the sky from the East to the West and set in the westward direction (Fig. 12.6). Then the night begins and the stars become visible in the sky. FASCINATING FACTS In an earlier chapter Measurement of Time and Motion , you learnt how the scientist Galileo discovered an important property of a pendulum, and in the seventeenth century, another scientist, Huygens, used that property to make pendulum clocks that measured time. In the middle of nineteenth century, another scientist, Leon Foucault, used a long pendulum to give the first simple demonstration of the Earth s rotation. The pendulum, known as a Foucault pendulum in his honour, consists of a long string with a heavy bob, suspended from a high ceiling. A Foucault pendulum with a length of 22 metres has been hung from a skylight in the Constitution Hall of the new Parliament building in New Delhi, India. It symbolises the integration of the idea of India with the vastness of the cosmos. Chapter 12.indd 173 4/3/2025 4:57:16 PM Since the Earth is rotating, shouldn t the stars also appear to move in the sky like the Sun? Yes, indeed! Let us look at the stars in the night sky to see the effect of Earth s rotation. [Activity 12.3: Let us explore { + On an early evening between March and May, identify the Big Dipper (Saptarishi), and the Pole Star (Dhruva Tara), if visible, as you did in the chapter Beyond Earth in the Grade 6 Science textbook Curiosity. + Notedownyour location and date of your night sky observations. PAM 2411 PM The activity must be carried out 2 AM Lp 9 PM on the same night. y ) > Draw the orientation of the Big 5 AM SS Dipper in the sky with respect r\ 7PM to the Pole Star (or a fixed * tree/building on the ground Northwest North in a direction towards the Big ats % Northeast . . Dipper if you cannot see the ; > Pole Star). Mark the time of your Fig. 12.7: Illustrative sketch of Big Dipper (for activity 12.3) by a student located in Pune on the night of 1-2 April observation along with your sketch as shown in Fig. 12.7. > After two hours, observe the Big Dipper again. Has it moved? Again, draw its orientation and note down the time. * Repeat the above step after two hours. Do you observe that the Big Dipper appears to move around the Pole Star (notice just the movement even if you cannot