and the spherical shape of the Earth gives rise to seasons. Let us find out, how. North Pole North Pole North Pole , Winter in Northern Hemisphere Summer in Northern Hemisphere y North Pole December September Fig. 12.9: Different positions of the Earth while revolving around the Sun (The Earth s orbit appears elongated because this is a side view and not the top view. The sizes and distances are not to scale) In June, the Northern Hemisphere is tilted towards the Sun while the Southern Hemisphere is tilted away from the Sun (Fig. 12.9). As seen in Fig. 12.10a, a given amount of sunrays are spread in a smaller area in the Northern Hemisphere as compared to the Southern Hemisphere due to the spherical shape of the Earth s surface. So that area is heated more. Further, the Northern Hemisphere receives sunlight for more than 12 hours in June (Fig. 12.11a). So, the Northern Hemisphere experiences more intense sunlight, which lasts for a longer time, causing the summer season. In December, the situation is opposite in the Northern Hemisphere and it experiences winter season with sunlight for shorter time (Fig. 12.10b and Fig. 12.11b). Chapter 12.indd 177 4/3/2025 4:57:21 PM North Pole # / North Pole Sunrays Same amount of sunrays are spread in a smaller area in this hemisphere, hence are K | more intense. Same amount of sunrays are spread in a larger area in this hemisphere, hence are less intense. i i (a) * June (b) * December Fig. 12.10: (a) More intense sunlight in the Northern Hemisphere and less intense sunlight in the Southern Hemisphere in June (b) The opposite situation happens in December. ___ << ee a The North Pole receives sunlight for The North Pole is in darkness for all 24 hours in June all 24 hours in December U Places in this hemisphere receive sunlight for more than 12 hours during the 24 hour rotation of the Earth. Places in this hemisphere are in darkness for more than 12 hours during the 24 hour rotation of the Earth. / (a) June Sunrays (b) 4 December Fig. 12.11: In the Northern Hemisphere (a) Longer daytime in June (b) Shorter daytime in December The seasons and length of daytime are reversed in the Southern Hemisphere as compared to the Northern Hemisphere. There, it is winter in June and summer in December (Fig. 12.10 and Fig. 12.11). IVE Two incorrect reasons often given to explain why seasons occur on the Earth are: EEPER | * When the Northern Hemisphere tilts towards the Sun, it is &) closer to the Sun. .) + The orbit of the Earth is an oval with the Sun slightly displaced from its centre so the Earth is at different distances from the Sun over the year. However, the difference in distances in either of these cases is very small and these are not the reasons why seasons occur on the Earth. In fact, the Earth is closest to the Sun