think lunar eclipses can be seen from a large part of the Earth when they happen, but total solar eclipse can be seen by only a small part of the Earth? 12. If the Earth s axis were not tilted with respect to the axis of revolution, explain what would be the effect on seasons? Exploratory Projects (Cpa m eed bal) + Repeat Activity 12.2 but replace the torch with an electric lamp. Then place the globe at different positions on a circle around the lamp while maintaining the tilt of the globe. Disciplinary Histo 7 (i) Note down your observations regarding how much of the Northern and Southern hemispheres of the globe are illuminated at different positions. Geography @ Society (ii) Rotate the globe and take a note of the length of the day and night on different parts of the globe. (iii) Repeat (ii) for different positions of globe on the circle. + The Earth goes around the Sun in an oval-shaped path. Technology Economy Draw two circles with the same centre, one with a radius of 14.7 cm, and another one with a radius of 15.2 cm. If 1 cm corresponds to 10 million km, the two circles represent the closest and farthest distances from the Sun. Note how small is the difference between these two distances. >, ~ Suppose the tilt of the Earth s axis of rotation increases. Will X it cause more extreme seasons? Find out if the tilt of Uranus is more than the Earth and about the seasons there. Write an interesting article for a newspaper or your school magazine about it. IVE In reality, the planets move around a special point in EEPER ) the solar system, which is very close to the Sun but not exactly at its centre! The Sun also moves around C) the same point a little instead of staying perfectly still. Scientists use such tiny wobbles in the movement of other stars to discover exoplanets around them! Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 ~eS< Chapter 12.indd 186 4/3/2025 4:57:32 PM | Chapter 12.indd 187 It's Still Not the End, My Friend! a Ne th hhh ii i tail And once again, we ve reached the last page of this book, and as we said earlier, it is certainly not the end of our curiosity our jigyasa. We hope you ve enjoyed the activities and experiments as you journeyed through the chapters. More importantly, we hope you asked a lot of questions! Now it is our time to ask you one. | Have you looked closely at the front and back covers of , this science textbook? At first, they may just look like regular | scenes from a playground or a running track, but if you observe carefully, you'll find tiny hidden science clues connected to different chapters in the book! Take a closer look maybe you will spot something related to what we discussed about motion or light, or maybe even about plants