sketch of Big Dipper (for activity 12.3) by a student located in Pune on the night of 1-2 April observation along with your sketch as shown in Fig. 12.7. > After two hours, observe the Big Dipper again. Has it moved? Again, draw its orientation and note down the time. * Repeat the above step after two hours. Do you observe that the Big Dipper appears to move around the Pole Star (notice just the movement even if you cannot see the Pole Star)? The Earth s axis of rotation points very close to the Pole Star in the Northern Hemisphere. Therefore, the Pole Star appears nearly stationary in the sky from the Earth. All the stars appear to move around it. Just like the Sun, the Moon also appears to rise in the eastward direction and set in the westward direction because the Earth rotates from West to East. FASCINATING FACTS Astrophotographers take long exposure photographs, keeping the camera s shutter open for a long time. In such a photograph, the apparent motion of the stars is recorded as arcs of a circle, known as star trails. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 (Picture taken from Mahuli, Maharashtra) Chapter 12.indd 174 4/3/2025 4:57:17 PM Chapter 12.indd 175 FASCINATING FACTS Ancient Indian astronomers, including Aryabhata, had also noticed the daily apparent motion of the celestial objects, such as the Sun, Moon, planets and stars. Aryabhata was a famous mathematician and astronomer of ancient India who wrote an important treatise, Aryabhatiya, around the fifth century CE. The apparent motion of the stars due to the rotation of the Earth is explained in Verse 9, Golapada, Aryabhatiya. Sea: Warr fairer asc | Sra Al ded ae ASA I Just as aman ina boat moving forward sees stationary objects as moving backwards, so also the stars that are stationary are seen by people of Lanka as moving towards the west. Aryabhata s stated value for the time taken by the Earth to complete one full rotation about its axis is around 23 hours 56 minutes 4.1 seconds (in modern units). This value is impressively close to the currently accepted value. I have seen that the stars and constellations that appear in the East at sunset change during different months. Yes. Maybe that is why we were told to look for certain stars and constellations at certain times of the year in Grade 6. But, why do different stars appear in the night sky over the course of a year? 12.2 Revolution of the Earth While rotating on its own axis, the Earth also revolves around the Sun as we learnt in Grade 6. This movement is different from rotation. Revolution is the motion of an object around another object. Earth, Moon, and the Sun 4/3/2025 4:57:18 PM The path an object takes while revolving around another object is called its orbit. If viewed from the top (Fig. 12.8), the orbit of the Earth around the Sun is nearly circular. (In the