eclipse. The shadow of the Moon falls on a small area on the surface of the Earth as seen in Fig. 12.13. This area is in total darkness, and no part of the Sun can be seen from there. The observers in this area witness a total solar eclipse he 12.14a). -* Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 ~ [ ee S ~_ Chapter 12.indd 180 4/3/2025 4:57:24 PM Earth s orbit ~> ra ~~ \ Moon s Totalsolar / Partial * ~ sun . ~. s solar eclipse ~{fo Earth, Moon, and the Sun Fig. 12.13: Geometry of solar eclipse (The sizes and distances are not to scale) In areas where the Moon partially blocks out only some regions of the Sun, the observers see a partial solar eclipse (Fig. 12.13 and Fig. 12.14b). During a total solar eclipse, for a few minutes it turns dark during the day as no sunlight reaches the Earth. Due to the Earth s rotation and the motion of the Moon in its orbit, the Moon s shadow moves across the surface of the Earth. Thus, the total solar eclipse is visible only for a few minutes. As the Moon begins to move away from the front of the Sun (Fig. 12.14c), we see a partial solar eclipse and daylight begins to return. (a) Total solar eclipse Safe Viewing of a Solar Eclipse /\ Caution During a solar eclipse, one might be tempted to look at the Sun, thinking that it wouldn t be strong enough to cause harm to our eyes. However, even during the eclipse, the Sun is intense enough to damage the eyes and cause blindness. Thus, directly viewing solar eclipse must be strictly avoided. Also, do not viewit through sunglasses, binoculars, or telescopes. (b) Partial solar eclipse Usually, astronomy organisations, such as planetaria and astronomy clubs hold eclipse viewing events during a solar eclipse (Fig. 12.15). Participating in such events is the best way to observe a solar )A diamond ring seen eclipse since the organisers not er 4 total solar eclipse, : de just when the Moon starts only provide specialised eye to move away protection for solar viewing, but also offer scientific explanations. Fig. 12.14: Solar eclipse Fig. 12.15: A public solar eclipse viewing organised in Ooty, Tamil Nadu Chapter 12.indd 181 4/3/2025 4:57:26 PM This activity, similar to Activity 11.5, is to be set up by your teacher. A mirror can be used to project an image of the IVE Sun onto a wall. However, holding it at the correct angle EEPER ) throughout a solar eclipse can be difficult. To solve this, make as a movable stand for the mirror. Use a hollow ball with a small hole, half-fill it with sand (to keep it stable), and attach a small mirror (such as an embroidery mirror) to it. Place the ball on a circular ring, like an adhesive tape ring, so it can be turned around easily. Adjust it until the Sun s