duration of a day becomes shorter while that of a EEPER } Earth, Moon, and the Sun 4/3/2025 4:57:23 PM 12.3.1 Solar eclipse At certain times, the Moon can come in between the Sun and the Earth in a way that obstructs the light from the Sun from reaching us. This is known as a solar eclipse. You may wonder how the Moon, which is smaller than the Sun, blocks the light coming from the Sun that we see in the sky. [ Activity 12.4: Let us explore | > Ask your friend to stand in front of you at a distance of about 5 metres. Consider his head to be the Sun. ** Now close one eye and show a thumbs up with your outstretched hand towards your friend as shown in Fig. 12.12. Are you able to cover the entire head of your friend with your thumb? You can cover the entire head of your friend with the help of your thumb, even though your thumb is much smaller than the actual size of your friend s head. How could it be? The size of any object as seen by your eye also known as apparent size depends upon both its actual physical size and its distance from you. The thumb being much closer to you as compared to oO your friend, the apparent sizes of your thumb and Fig. 12.12: Trying to cover a your friend s head as seen by you in Activity 12.4 friend s head with the thumb are similar. The apparent sizes of the Moon and the Sun in the sky are similar when viewed from the Earth. This is so because though the Moon is much smaller in physical size than the Sun, the Moon is much closer to us compared to the Sun. Therefore, the Moon can appear to cover the entire Sun as viewed from the Earth. IVE Though the planets Mercury and Venus are much larger than EEPER ) the Moon in size, they are also much farther from the Earth as compared to the Moon. Thus, their apparent sizes are very much _ smaller than the Sun and they cannot block the Sun. For example, @) when Venus passes between the Sun and the Earth, it appears as a tiny black dot passing against the bright face of the Sun. This event, known as a Transit of Venus, is a rare event. Figure 12.13 shows the arrangement of the Sun, the Moon, and the Earth during a solar eclipse. The shadow of the Moon falls on a small area on the surface of the Earth as seen in Fig. 12.13. This area is in total darkness, and no part of the Sun can be seen from there. The observers in this area witness a total solar eclipse he 12.14a). -* Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 ~ [ ee S ~_ Chapter 12.indd 180 4/3/2025 4:57:24 PM Earth s orbit ~> ra ~~ \ Moon s