of lunar eclipse (The sizes and distances are not to scale in the figure) When the Moon is completely in the Earth s shadow, it is called a total lunar eclipse. The bright disc of the Moon starts to appear dark red in colour and stays that way until the Moon moves out of the shadow of the Earth. When part of the Moon is in the Earth s shadow and the rest of the Moon is visible, it is called a partial lunar eclipse. Unlike the Sun, we can safely watch the eclipsed full Moon with our naked eye. SCIENCE AND SOCIETY Using the computer version of Stellarium app, which is free, you may get information about the upcoming solar and lunar eclipses (if any) which may be visible from your location. FASCINATING FACTS The Kodaikanal Solar Observatory is located in the beautiful Palani range of hills in southern India. It was * (established in 1899 and has i provided data about the Sun for fover 100 years. It is operated by the Indian Institute of Astrophysics (IIA), Bengaluru. Chapter 12.indd 183 4/3/2025 4:57:29 PM KNOW A SCIENTIST M.K. Vainu Bappu is known as the father of modern Indian astronomy. He led efforts in setting up many instruments and telescopes in India, such as the telescopes at Manora Peak near Nainital (Uttarakhand) and Kavalur (Tamil Nadu). The observatory at Kavalur has been named after him. g He mainly studied stars and even discovered a (y comet. He also travelled to different parts of the world to study solar eclipses. In a Nutshell (Op eee ) The Earth rotates on its own axis in about 24 hours. The Earth s rotation from West to East causes day and night as well as the apparent motion of the Sun, the Moon, and the stars. The Earth revolves around the Sun and takes nearly 1 year to complete a revolution. The Earth s axis of rotation is not upright with respect to the orbit, but is tilted. Seasons occur because of the tilt of the Earth s axis of rotation and its spherical shape. A solar eclipse occurs when the Moon is in the path of the Sun as seen from the Earth, and sunlight is blocked from reaching the Earth. A lunar eclipse occurs when the Earth comes in between the Sun and the Moon, blocking sunlight from reaching the Moon. >, >, + >, ~ >, ~ >, ~ >, ~ >, ~ Let Us Enhance Our Learning NP J Oa ed eg 1. In Fig. 12.17, how many hours of sunlight do the North Pole and the South Pole receive during one rotation of the Earth? 2. Fill in the blanks (i) Stars rise in the and set in the (ii) Dayandnight are caused bythe Earth s SP (iii) When the Moon fully covers the Sun from our view, it is Pig. 12.17 called a solar eclipse. Ds -* Ss oO mo] (= 1U] ao 13) < o uu