However, holding it at the correct angle EEPER ) throughout a solar eclipse can be difficult. To solve this, make as a movable stand for the mirror. Use a hollow ball with a small hole, half-fill it with sand (to keep it stable), and attach a small mirror (such as an embroidery mirror) to it. Place the ball on a circular ring, like an adhesive tape ring, so it can be turned around easily. Adjust it until the Sun s image appears on a wall or screen. Fig. 12.15 shows this set-up where the mirror is fixed to a green ball. Caution This activity should be performed strictly under supervision of a teacher. Take care not to direct the reflected light beam in anyone s eyes. People have observed eclipses and maintained records since ancient times. When the reasons for eclipses were not known, they feared the occurrence of eclipses. As you can imagine, something blocking the Sun, the main source of heat and light on the Earth, even for a brief period of time, would have been extremely concerning. Many superstitions were attached to solar eclipses in various parts of the world related to the activities that could not be carried out during eclipses such as eating, cooking, or going out of home. But now that we know the reason why a solar eclipse occurs, we need not fear these events as long as we do not look at the Sun directly. In fact, scientists go around the world to observe the eclipses from wherever these are observable. The eclipses provide them an opportunity to study phenomena that cannot be observed otherwise. FASCINATING FACTS Aneclipse is knownas grahanin Sanskrit andin many Indian languages. Many ancient Indian astronomical texts provide calculations to predict eclipses. The best known and most referred text is the Surya Siddhanta, which is written in the classical Sanskrit poetry tradition in rhythmic shlokas. 12.3.2 Lunar eclipse As the Moon revolves around the Earth, sometimes the Earth can block the sunlight from reaching the Moon. This is known as a lunar eclipse. On such days, we see the Earth s shadow falling on the full disc of the Moon. Fig. 12.16 shows the arrangement of the Sun, the Earth, and the Moon during a lunar eclipse. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 Chapter 12.indd 182 4/3/2025 4:57:27 PM Partial lunar lipse lunar Moon eclipse <= ~ ~~ Partial lunar Sun 7 eclipse Earth, Moon, and the Sun \ Moon s orbit ~ Fig. 12.16: Geometry of lunar eclipse (The sizes and distances are not to scale in the figure) When the Moon is completely in the Earth s shadow, it is called a total lunar eclipse. The bright disc of the Moon starts to appear dark red in colour and stays that way until the Moon moves out of the shadow of the Earth. When part of the Moon is in the Earth s shadow and the rest of the Moon is visible, it is