3 F
ci 0968CHO4
CLIMATE

the landforms and the drainage of

our country. These are the two of the three
basic elements that one learns about the natural
environment of any area. In this chapter you
will learn about the third, that is, the
atmospheric conditions that prevail over our
country. Why do we wear woollens in December
or why it is hot and uncomfortable in the month
of May, and why it rains in June - July? The
answers to all these questions can be found out
by studying about the climate of India.

Climate refers to the sum total of weather
conditions and variations over a large area for
a long period of time (more than thirty years).
Weather refers to the state of the atmosphere
over an area at any point of time. The elements
of weather and climate are the same, i.e.
temperature, atmospheric pressure, wind,
humidity and precipitation. You may have
observed that the weather conditions fluctuate
very often even within a day. But there is some
common pattern over a few weeks or months,
i.e. days are cool or hot, windy or calm, cloudy
or bright, and wet or dry. On the basis of the
generalised monthly atmospheric conditions,
the year is divided into seasons such as winter,
summer or rainy seasons.

The world is divided into a number of
climatic regions. Do you know what type of
climate India has and why it is so? We will
learn about it in this chapter.

Do You Know! e The word monsoon is
derived from the Arabic word mausim which
literally means season.

e Monsoon refers to the seasonal reversal in the
wind direction during a year.

I: the last two chapters you have read about

The climate of India is described as the
 monsoon type. In Asia, this type of climate
is found mainly in the south and the southeast.
Despite an overall unity in the general pattern,
there are perceptible regional variations in
climatic conditions within the country. Let us
take two important elements temperature and
precipitation, and examine how they vary from
place to place and season to season.

In summer, the mercury occasionally
touches 50 C in some parts of the Rajasthan
desert, whereas it may be around 20 C in
Pahalgam in Jammu and Kashmir. On a winter
night, temperature at Drass in Jammu and
Kashmir may be as low as minus 45 C.
Thiruvananthapuram, on the other hand, may
have a temperature of 22 C.

Do.You Know: In certain places there is a

wide difference between day and night
temperatures. In the Thar Desert the day
temperature may rise to 50 C, and drop down
to near 15 C the same night. On the other hand,
there is hardly any difference in day and night
temperatures in the Andaman and Nicobar
islands or in Kerala.

Let us now look at precipitation. There are
variations not only in the form and types of
precipitation but also in its amount and the
seasonal distribution. While precipitation is
mostly in the form of snowfall in the upper parts
of Himalayas, it rains over the rest of the
country. The annual precipitation varies from
over 400 cm in Meghalaya to less than 10 cm
in Ladakh and western Rajasthan. Most parts
of the country receive rainfall from June to
September. But some parts like the Tamil Nadu

Reprint 2025-26

coast gets a large portion of its rain during
October and November.

In general, coastal areas experience less
contrasts in temperature conditions. Seasonal
contrasts are more in the interior of the
country. There is decrease in rainfall generally
from east to west in the Northern Plains. These
variations have given rise to variety in lives of
people in terms of the food they eat, the
clothes they wear and also the kind of houses

they live in.
Fi nd out

 Why the houses in Rajasthan have thick
walls and flat roofs?

 Why is it that the houses in the Tarai region and
in Goa and Mangalore have sloping roofs?
 Why houses in Assam are built on stilts?

Cimwatic CONTROLS

There are six major controls of the climate of
any place. They are: latitude, altitude,
pressure and wind system, distance from
the sea (continentality), ocean currents and
relief features.

Due to the curvature of the earth, the
amount of solar energy received varies
according to latitude. As a result, air
temperature generally decreases from the
equator towards the poles. As one goes from
the surface of the earth to higher altitudes,
the atmosphere becomes less dense and
temperature decreases. The hills are therefore
cooler during summers. The pressure and
wind system of any area depend on the
latitude and altitude of the place. Thus it
influences the temperature and rainfall
pattern. The sea exerts a moderating influence
on climate: As the distance from the sea
increases, its moderating influence decreases
and the people experience extreme weather
conditions. This condition is known as
continentality (i.e. very hot during summers
and very cold during winters). Ocean currents
along with onshore winds affect the climate of
the coastal areas, For example, any coastal
area with warm or cold currents flowing past
it, will be warmed or cooled if the winds are
onshore.

CLIMATE

Find Out
 Why most of the world s deserts are
located in the western margins of continents in the
subtropics?

Finally, relief too plays a major role in
determining the climate ofa place. High mountains
act as barriers for cold or hot winds; they may
also cause precipitation if they are high enough
and lie in the path of rain-bearing winds. The
leeward side of mountains remains relatively dry.

Factors AFFECTING INDIA s CLIMATE

Latitude

The Tropic of Cancer passes through the middle
of the country from the Rann of Kuchchh in the
west to Mizoram in the east. Almost half of the
country, lying south of the Tropic of Cancer,
belongs to the tropical area. All the remaining
area, north of the Tropic, lies in the sub-tropics.
Therefore, India s climate has characteristics of
tropical as well as subtropical climates.

Altitude

India has mountains to the north, which have
an average height of about 6,000 metres. India
also has a vast coastal area where the
maximum elevation is about 30 metres. The
Himalayas prevent the cold winds from Central
Asia from entering the subcontinent. It is
because of these mountains that this
subcontinent experiences comparatively
milder winters as compared to central Asia.

Pressure and Winds

The climate and associated weather conditions
in India are governed by the following
atmospheric conditions:

e Pressure and surface winds;

 Upper air circulation; and

 Western cyclonic disturbances and
tropical cyclones.

India lies in the region of north easterly
winds. These winds originate from the
subtropical high-pressure belt of the northern
Reprint 2025-26

hemisphere. They blow southwards, get
deflected to the right due to the Coriolis force,
and move towards the equatorial low-pressure
area. Generally, these winds carry little
moisture as they originate and blow over land.
Therefore, they bring little or no rain. Hence,
India should have been an arid land, but it is
not so. Let us see why?

Coriolis force: An apparent force caused by the
earth s rotation. The Coriolis force is responsible for
deflecting winds towards the right in the northern
hemisphere and towards the left in the southern
hemisphere. This is also known as errel s Law .

The pressure and wind conditions over
India are unique. During winter, there is a
high-pressure area north of the Himalayas.
Cold dry winds blow from this region to the
low-pressure areas over the oceans to the
south. In summer, a low-pressure area
develops over interior Asia, as well as, over
northwestern India. This causes a complete
reversal of the direction of winds during
summer. Air moves from the high-pressure
area over the southern Indian Ocean, in a
south-easterly direction, crosses the equator,
and turns right towards the low-pressure areas
over the Indian subcontinent. These are known
as the Southwest Monsoon winds. These winds
blow over the warm oceans, gather moisture
and bring widespread rainfall over the
mainland of India.

THE SEASONS

The monsoon type of climate is characterised
by a distinct seasonal pattern. The weather
conditions greatly change from one season to
the other. These changes are particularly
noticeable in the interior parts of the country.
The coastal areas do not experience much
variation in temperature though there is
variation in rainfall pattern. How many seasons
are experienced in your place? Four main
seasons can be identified in India - the cold
weather season, the hot weather season, the
advancing monsoon and the retreating
monsoon with some regional variations.

The Cold Weather Season (Winter)

The cold weather season begins from midNovember in northern India and stays till
February. December and January are the
coldest months in the northern part of India.
The temperature decreases from south to the
north. The average temperature of Chennai, on
the eastern coast, is between 24 25 Celsius,
while in the northern plains, it ranges between
10 C and 15 Celsius. Days are warm and
nights are cold. Frost is common in the north
and the higher slopes of the Himalayas
experience snowfall.

During this season, the northeast trade
winds prevail over the country. They blow from
land to sea and hence, for most part of the
country, it is a dry season. Some amount of
rainfall occurs on the Tamil Nadu coast from
these winds as, here they blow from sea to land.

In the northern part of the country, a feeble
high-pressure region develops, with light winds
moving outwards from this area. Influenced by
the relief, these winds blow through the Ganga
valley from the west and the northwest. The
weather is normally marked by clear sky, low
temperatures and low humidity and feeble,
variable winds.

A characteristic feature of the cold weather
season over the northern plains is the inflow of
cyclonic disturbances from the west and the
northwest. These low-pressure systems,
originate over the Mediterranean Sea and
western Asia and move into India, along with
the westerly flow. They cause the much-needed
winter rains over the plains and snowfall in the
mountains. Although the total amount of
winter rainfall locally known as mahawat is
small, they are of immense importance for the
cultivation of Tabi crops.

The peninsular region does not have a welldefined cold season. There is hardly any
noticeable seasonal change in temperature
pattern during winters due to the moderating
influence of the sea.

CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

Reprint 2025-26

AFGHANISTAN
pare INDIA
C. ~\ ey ADVANCING MONSOON
& eer 

if
( Srinagar 9
( t
z
ead
i
x
Chandigarh E CHINA
Cit Bel}

PAKISTAN
 DELHI
4 te ad

Sata
wee 5 YS

Lucknow D5, Shillong

D

( ' , pe? 1 June

Nagpur @ J g / ) MYANMAR

ow

ARABIAN

SEA
@ Hyderabad
Bengaluru
& e
Y
9%
 

 

 

?
o
e

: 4 ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS
LAKSHADWEEP (INDIA)
(INDIA) e

8 N &
wee
INDIAN \% Thinuvananthapuram ,
72 E 76 Q

Figure 4.1 : Advancing Monsoon

OO = 29

Reprint 2025-26

The Hot Weather Season (Summer)

Due to the apparent northward movement of
the sun, the global heat belt shifts northwards.
As such, from March to May, it is hot weather
season in India. The influence of the shifting of
the heat belt can be seen clearly from
temperature recordings taken during MarchMay at different latitudes. In March, the highest
temperature is about 38 Celsius, recorded on
the Deccan plateau. In April, temperatures in
Gujarat and Madhya Pradesh are around 42 
Celsius. In May, temperature of 45 Celsius is
common in the northwestern parts of the
country. In peninsular India, temperatures
remain lower due to the moderating influence
of the oceans.

The summer months experience rising
temperature and falling air pressure in the
northern part of the country. Towards the end
of May, an elongated low-pressure area
develops in the region extending from the Thar
Desert in the northwest to Patna and
Chotanagpur plateau in the east and
southeast. Circulation of air begins to set in
around this trough.

Astriking feature of the hot weather season
is the loo . These are strong, gusty, hot, dry
winds blowing during the day over the north
and northwestern India. Sometimes they even
continue until late in the evening. Direct
exposure to these winds may even prove to be
fatal. Dust storms are very common during the
month of May in northern India. These storms
bring temporary relief as they lower the
temperature and may bring light rain and cool
breeze. This is also the season for localised
thunderstorms, associated with violent winds,
torrential downpours, often accompanied by
hail. In West Bengal, these storms are known
as the Kaal Baisalchi .

Towards the close of the summer season,
pre-monsoon showers are common especially,
in Kerala and Karnataka. They help in the early
ripening of mangoes, and are often referred to
as mango showers .
Advancing Monsoon (The Rainy Season)

By early June, the low-pressure condition over
the northern plains intensifies. It attracts, the
trade winds of the southern hemisphere. These
south-east trade winds originate over the
warm subtropical areas of the southern oceans.
They cross the equator and blow in a southwesterly direction entering the Indian peninsula
as the south-west monsoon. As these winds
blow over warm oceans, they bring abundant
moisture to the subcontinent. These winds are
strong and blow at an average velocity of 30
km per hour. With the exception of the extreme
north-west, the monsoon winds cover the
country in about a month.

The inflow of the south-west monsoon into
India brings about a total change in the
weather. Early in the season, the windward
side of the Western Ghats receives very heavy
rainfall, more than 250 cm. The Deccan
Plateau and parts of Madhya Pradesh also
receive some amount of rain in spite of lying
in the rain shadow area. The maximum rainfall
of this season is received in the north-eastern
part of the country. Mawsynram in the
southern ranges of the Khasi Hills receives the
highest average rainfall in the world. Rainfall
in the Ganga valley decreases from the east to
the west. Rajasthan and parts of Gujarat get
scanty rainfall.

Another phenomenon associated with the
monsoon is its tendency to have breaks in
rainfall. Thus, it has wet and dry spells. In
other words, the monsoon rains take place
only for a few days at a time. They are
interspersed with rainless intervals. These
breaks in monsoon are related to the
movement of the monsoon trough. For
various reasons, the trough and its axis keep
on moving northward or southward, which
determines the spatial distribution of rainfall.
When the axis of the monsoon trough lies over
the plains, rainfall is good in these parts. On
the other hand, whenever the axis shifts closer
to the Himalayas, there are longer dry spells
in the plains, and widespread rain occur in
the mountainous catchment areas of the
Himalayan rivers. These heavy rains bring in

CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

Reprint 2025-26

AFGHANISTAN
hm ett
t A
My 70 i ~
r ]
15 Sept. 4 @ Srinagar 9
t
z
Ct 
PAKISTAN ;
 ~
Chandigarh
 7
a

 DELHI

 Ahmedabad

Nagpur @

Mumbai

ARABIAN
SEA
 !
$
LAKSHADWEEP.
(INDIA)

 Thiruvananthapuram

INDIAN

72 E 76 

INDIA
RETREATING MONSOON

d

CHINA
Sette ey al
a | CMS af
 f BHUTAN % P

f
Shillong
> tS em, Imphal 4
A (BANGLADESH J e/
, po fed
be ly
 . I

\n.
i of Cancer

MYANMAR

Bhubaneswar
ubane wa | E
fy

BENGAL

ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS
(INDIA)
 

400 600 km

 o
92 9

Figure 4.2 : Retreating Monsoon

CLIMATE
Reprint 2025-26

their wake, devastating floods causing
damage to life and property in the plains. The
frequency and intensity of tropical
depressions too, determine the amount and
duration of monsoon rains. These
depressions form at the head of the Bay of
Bengal and cross over to the mainland. The
depressions follow the axis of the monsoon
trough of low pressure . The monsoon is
known for its uncertainties. The alternation
of dry and wet spells vary in intensity,
frequency and duration. While it causes heavy
floods in one part, it may be responsible for
droughts in the other. It is often irregular in
its arrival and its retreat. Hence, it sometimes
disturbs the farming schedule of millions of
farmers all over the country.

Retreating/Post Monsoons
(The Transition Season)

During October-November, with the apparent
movement of the sun towards the south, the
monsoon trough or the low-pressure trough
over the northern plains becomes weaker. This
is gradually replaced by a high-pressure
system. The south-west monsoon winds
weaken and start withdrawing gradually. By
the beginning of October, the monsoon
withdraws from the Northern Plains.

The months of October-November form a
period of transition from hot rainy season to
dry winter conditions. The retreat of the
monsoon is marked by clear skies and rise in

Do You Know: Mawsynram, the wettest
place on the earth is also reputed for its
stalagmite and stalactite caves.

temperature. While day temperatures are
high, nights are cool and pleasant. The land
is still moist. Owing to the conditions of high
temperature and humidity, the weather
becomes rather oppressive during the day.
This is commonly known as October heat . In
the second half of October, the mercury begins
to fall rapidly in northern India.
The low-pressure conditions, over northwestern India, get transferred to the Bay of
Bengal by early November. This shift is
associated with the occurrence of cyclonic
depressions, which originate over the
Andaman Sea. These cyclones generally cross
the eastern coasts of India cause heavy and
widespread rain. These tropical cyclones are
often very destructive. The thickly populated
deltas of the Godavari, the Krishna and the
Kaveri are frequently struck by cyclones, which
cause great damage to life and property.
Sometimes, these cyclones arrive at the coasts
of Odisha, West Bengal and Bangladesh. The
bulk of the rainfall of the Coromandel Coast is
derived from depressions and cyclones.

DISTRIBUTION OF RAINFALL

Parts of western coast and northeastern India
receive over about 400 cm of rainfall annually.
However, it is less than 60 cm in western
Rajasthan and adjoining parts of Gujarat,
Haryana and Punjab. Rainfall is equally low
in the interior of the Deccan plateau, and east
of the Sahyadris. Why do these regions receive
low rainfall? A third area of low precipitation
is around Leh in Jammu and Kashmir. The rest
of the country receives moderate rainfall.
Snowfall is restricted to the Himalayan region.

Owing to the nature of monsoons, the
annual rainfall is highly variable from year to
year. Variability is high in the regions of low
rainfall, such as parts of Rajasthan, Gujarat
and the leeward side of the Western Ghats. As
such, while areas of high rainfall are liable to
be affected by floods, areas of low rainfall are
drought-prone (Figure 4.3).

Monsoon as A UNIFYING Bonp

You have already known the way the Himalayas
protect the subcontinent from extremely cold
winds from central Asia. This enables northern
India to have uniformly higher temperatures
compared to other areas on the same latitudes.
Similarly, the Peninsular plateau, under the
influence of the sea from three sides, has
moderate temperatures. Despite such

CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

Reprint 2025-26

INDIA

 
~~ ) 2 ANNUAL RAINFALL
PAKISTAN ~ \ *
32 a
\

CHINA
(TIBET)

ARABIAN
SEA

Above 400
200 - 400
100 - 200
60 - 100
40 - 60

oan Df 20 - 40

wy oe , ie 0-20

LAKSHADWEEP.
(INDIA) -_ A

 S
INDIAN %
76 84 92 E Q

Figure 4.3 : Annual Rainfall

CLIMATE

Reprint 2025-26

ve

I-VIGNI AUVAOdNALNOD

Devastated by deluge

Haze hazard on road Chennai submerged

Hint of
an early
summer

FOG CHECK

Flight operations at Delhi Airport was normal
with the runway visibility at 1,500 metres.
However, thick fog in the NCR made driving
difficult in the early hours.

DELAYED: 17 incoming trains;

departure of six trains was
rescheduled.

 5 oO t Poorva Express from Howrah,
Tuesday: 28.4 C Sampurna Kranti Express from Patna and Rajdhani
+ Special from Mumbai.
HT Correspondent RESCHEDULED: Kashi Vishwanath from New

New Delhi, January 31 Delhi to Varanasi, Lichchivi Express from New

Delhi to Muzaffarpur, Bhupeneshwar Raj from
New Delhi to Bhupeneshwar, Seldah Raj from
New Delhi to Seldah, Sultanpur Express from
Delhi to Sultanpur and Janta Express from Delhi
to Howrah.

THE MERCURY is soaring,
paving the way for what could
be an early onset of summer,
the weatherman has said. It
may touch 30 degrees Celsius
within a couple of days in
Delhi.

The mercury settled at 28.4
degrees Celsius on Tuesday,
nearly six degrees above the
average, breaking a decadeold record.

Cold comfort for
New Year revellers

G.C. Shekhar
Chennai, December 30

IF 2004 was the year of the
tsunami, 2005 turned out to
be the year of rains and
floods in Tamil Nadu. Unlike
the tsunami, which affected a
belt of six coastal districts in
Tamil Nadu and Pondicherry,
the floods wreaked havoc
across the state.

In five furious spells, the last
two being cyclones that weakened before hitting the coast.
the rain gods lashed Tamil
Nadu from October to December with almost every district
drenched and drowned.

Chennai, which was flaunted as an alternative to Bangalore, found itself floating on
water on three occasions. The
rains and floods killed 350

A day Mumbai won't forget

SORAB Ghaswalla
Mumbai, December 30

The rain pi

JULY 26, 2005 started off as just another
soggy day in Mumbai. But, the rainfall was
one of the heaviest Mumbai had seen over
the past century. As citizens went about
their morning chores, they had no inkling
that by dusk the city would be swamped.
By sunset, 435 residents had either

Dadar, Juhu

drowned in their houses or vehicles as rain- | RASHID Ahmad
water started rising with alarming rapidity. |Stinae") . temperature takes normal course
By night, the city and its people were de- | 1pyo, CelS1US UP; cea egmen ewes wares SD

feated. No transport, no electricity and no
place to go. Mumbai was on its knees.

The weather bureau had predicted just
another "normal" rainy day for the city.
But it poured 944.2 m.m. (three feet of rain)

feet in

paper, 
LHUITES.
Kashm fhe porthves
temperatures

your Co 23 degree

Before 26/7, Mumbaiites, used to about
15cm of rain, would tease, "What's a Mumbai monsoon without some days of disruption?" On 26/7, the joke was on them.

degree

The g the minima
the sale i 

Correspondent
TOOM F jew Det, January

Ur ars. par

i i above normal) despite 4 to ee ae ms
over 24 hours, the highest in 100 years. cord ou 2g in ame fart TIMER te it hal
cated t cela a two de- lost its sting. Last three day: e
Your tt cv norsal. vary ed, despite
Poa. ae 1 he thwestern dent. = tua inet Gana
a cripple ee umey cranked up For Thursday
crippl. 5s

ure
Ma pst dropped to perature
that hat Lace ical Neating

icked up at about 1 p.m. Initial.

and Kalina were flooded.

_ | WINTER
saiverinc tom fi BREAK

terly onslaught, 0

ius, The minimum temperature

Celsius (1 degree sowpe next two days. 
 slightly better on

nshine

hh western dis:

crank tne ment forecasts a minimurn

im temperat of 6 degree Celsius

ey sere
apy lay 2) e cel rection of the win Ee :

celsius. TOW
11 umess the water is
warm, said Halima Begum, 45, a

people. Fields were inundated, crops damaged, roads
looked like backwaters. And
this was the city that cried for
water in summers.

The rains showed up the
state's failure to literally tap
the resources as 90 tmc of water flowed into the sea. Irrigation tanks and reservoirs
were breached.The suburbs
were the worst hit as many localities remained under water from October to December.

When the relief efforts began, that brought calamity of
another order. Rush for rations
resulted in one of the most
avoidable tragedies as 48 people were killed in stampedes
outside two relief centres.

This was one rain cloud

Fog is in, get
ready for
disruptions

ly, nobody paid attention. The enormity of A thin blanket of fog

the situation hit Mumbaiites at about 5 enveloped the city in the
p.m. By then, many were dead and the low- early hours of Friday.

lying areas of Kurla, Ghatkopar, Andheri, Visibility was reduced to 500

metres in most areas. There

e e : :
Freezing KAShIMNtr a pate
e

be: siteandt!

ai. from

ie
eae arrival delay was Tel wrt

theasterly or ed era re behind sched

2 degree Celsius. Ambala

afdarjung by 1 todd
h

so 8
father forecast also gree (
ihe minimum on was 42
Wer about de: reco

may hows Saturday, gree Celsius

ANS.

Activity

After 2 days of biting cold, sun shines
Expect a ballistic winter

after western winds are in

HT Correspondent
New Delhi, November 30

ACROSS NORTH India, it s a winter of woes.
Amristar is icy with a minimum temperature of 5 C. Snowfall, of up to 78 cm, has
blanketed Srinagar. In Delhi, it s still a pleasant nip. This mild wintry condition, however,
will definitely not last, says the Met.

In a day or two, winds from Afghanistan,
known as western disturbances, will lash the
Capital. Conditions are perfect for harsh winter ahead, said Met officials, who have declared official winter in Delhi from Thursday.

 Wednesday s morning mist, moisture in
the air, low night temperature and the cold
winds that hit the city by evening are enough
indications for the weather department to declare the onset of winter a day in advance, 
an official said.

Winter may have been delayed in much of
north India by about a fortnight, but it has
set in on time in Delhi, he added.

In vast swathes of north India, the past
week has been colder than average. Winter
trying to make up for the lost time, the
weatherman added in a lighter vein. With
temperatures consistently below the average
for this year, there is a spectre of this year s
winter being colder than usual.

In the ski resort of Gulmarg, there s heavy
snow. Night temperature dipped four degrees

comfortable. Night temperature on Wednes
si day hovered around 10 C.

 The western disturbances are unpre1 dictable. They might hit Delhi within the
next 72 hours or may not for another week.
< But it is time to get your woollens out. Tem
about 7a No tight aenar- D@ratures will drop progressively in the days

, to come, said Delhi Met chief R.D. Singh.
- With mornings getting misty, the dreaded fog

s may not be far behind. And with pollution

levels at a five-year high, the fog this time
may be worse.
Delhi has been colder this fortnight com
 It; Pared to the same period last year. The temnal, perature pattern is similar to the record
So, it s officially winter
in the Capital

Delhi

Max: 25 C, Min: 8 In a day or two, winds from
Afghanistan western disturbances will
lash the Capital. Winter declared from Dec 1.

Srinagar

Max: 8 C, Min: -3 it s a sea of snow there. Like
much of Kashmir, it is experiencing sub-zero
temperatures and bitterly cold weather.

Amritsar

Max: 21 C, Min: 5 The great plains are extremely cold. The coming days will be worse
with expected sub-zero temperatures.

Shimla

Max: 10 C, Min: -4 The Himachal capital is
blanketed in heavy snow. Higher reaches are
even colder.

breaking winter of 2003 the worst in 40
years.

The Met office says it cannot forecast so far
ahead in future. It may not be record breaking winter, but it will definitely be chillier
than an average winter, said a weather official.

The official pointed out that snowfall in
Kashmir and Shimla has been heavier and
earlier than usual. The temperature in Shimla dropped two degrees below normal. Sundernagar at 4.3 C was cold too.

Northerly cold winds have struck Rajasthan, affecting normal life last night with
Churu and Sriganganagar shivering at 5 C
each, about two-three degrees below normal.
Nights in Jodhpur, Bikaner, Ajmer and
Jaipur divisions have become harsh.

(i) On the basis of the news items above, find out the names of places and the seasons described.
(ii) Compare the rainfall description of Chennai and Mumbai and explain the reasons for the difference.
(iii) Evaluate flood as a disaster with the help of a case study.

Reprint 2025-26

moderating influences, there are great
variations in the temperature conditions.
Nevertheless, the unifying influence of the
monsoon on the Indian subcontinent is quite
perceptible. The seasonal alteration of the wind
systems and the associated weather conditions
provide a rhythmic cycle of seasons. Even the
uncertainties of rain and uneven distribution
are very much typical of the monsoons. The
Indian landscape, its animal and plant life, its

entire agricultural calendar and the life of the
people, including their festivities, revolve
around this phenomenon. Year after year,
people of India from north to south and from
east to west, eagerly await the arrival of the
monsoon. These monsoon winds bind the
whole country by providing water to set the
agricultural activities in motion. The river
valleys which carry this water also unite as a
single river valley unit.

EXERCISE

1. Choose the correct answer from the four alternatives given below.
(i) | Which one of the following places receives the highest rainfall in the world?

(a) Silchar

(c) Cherrapunji
(b) Mawsynram
(d) Guwahati

(ii) The wind blowing in the northern plains in summers is known as:

(a) Kaal Baisakhi

(c) Trade Winds

(b) Loo

(d) None of the above

(iii) _ Monsoon arrives in India approximately in:

(a) Early May
(c) Early June
(b) Early July
(d) Early August

(iv) | Which one of the following characterises the cold weather season in India?

(a) Warm days and warm nights

(b) Warm days and cold nights
(c) Cool days and cold nights
(d) Cold days and warm nights

2. Answer the following questions briefly.

(i) What are the controls affecting the climate of India?
(ii) Why does India have a monsoon type of climate?
(iii) Which part of India does experience the highest diurnal range of temperature

and why?

(iv) Which winds account for rainfall along the Malabar coast?
(v) Define monsoons. What do you understand by break in monsoon?
(vi) Why is the monsoon considered a unifying bond?

3. Why does the rainfall decrease from the east to the west in Northern India.

CLIMATE
Reprint 2025-26

1.

2.
4. Give reasons as to why.

(i)

(ii)
(iii)
(iv)

(v)

Seasonal reversal of wind direction takes place over the Indian
subcontinent?

The bulk of rainfall in India is concentrated over a few months.
The Tamil Nadu coast receives winter rainfall.
The delta region of the eastern coast is frequently struck by cyclones.

Parts of Rajasthan, Gujarat and the leeward side of the Western Ghats are
drought-prone.

5. Describe the regional variations in the climatic conditions of India with the help
of suitable examples.

6. Give an account of weather conditions and characteristics of the cold season.
7. Give the characteristics and effects of the monsoon rainfall in India.

Map SKILLS

On an outline map of India, show the following.

(i)
(ii)

(iii)

Areas receiving rainfall over 400 cm.
Areas receiving less than 20 cm of rainfall.
The direction of the south-west monsoon over India.

| Provect / ACTIVITY

(i)

(ii)

FOR DOING IT YOURSELF

Find out which songs, dances, festivals and special food preparations are
associated with certain seasons in your region. Do they have some
commonality with other regions of India?

Collect photographs of typical rural houses, and clothing of people from
different regions of India. Examine whether they reflect any relationship
with the climatic condition and relief of the area.

Figure 1 : Temperature and Rainfall of Delhi

w
o

In Table-I, the average mean monthly
temperatures and amounts of rainfall of 10
representative stations have been given. It
is for you to study on your own and convert
them into temperature and rainfall graphs.
A glance at these visual representations will

help you to grasp instantly the smilarities BS
and differences between them. One such 15 ise
graph (Figure 1) is already prepared for &
you. See if you can arrive at some broad 104 Lio
generalisations about our diverse climatic 
conditions. We hope you are in for a great 54 Ls
joy of learning. Do the following activities.
Re-arrange the 10 stations in two different oJ Z AAPA Aun lo

Jan, Feb, Mar. Apr. May. Jun, Jul, Aug. Sep. Oct. Nov, Dec,
sequences:

CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

Temperature ( Celsius)

Reprint 2025-26

o
bre

nN
St

(i) According to their distance from the equator.

(ii) According to their altitude above mean sealevel.
3. (i) Name two rainiest stations.
(ii) Name two driest stations.

)
)
(iii) Two stations with most equable climate.
)
)

=

(iv) Two stations with most extreme climate.
(v) Two stations influenced by retreating monsoons.
(vi) The two hottest stations in the months of

(a) February (b) April (c) May (d) June
Table I

Temperature ( C) 20.5 | 22.7 | 25.2 | 27.1] 26.7 | 24.2 | 23.0 | 23.0 | 23.1 | 22.9} 18.9} 20.2
Bengaluru 12 58'N 909

Rainfall (cm) 0.7 | 0.9 1.1 4.5 | 10.7} 7.1 | 11.1] 13.7] 16.4] 15.3] 6.1 | 1.3 88.9

Temperature ( C) 24.4 | 24.4 | 26.7 | 28.3] 30.0 | 28.9 | 27.2 | 27.2 | 27.2 | 27.8 | 27.2 | 25.0
Mumbai 19 N 11

Rainfall (cm) 0.2 | 0.2 - = 1.8 | 50.6 | 61.0] 36.9 | 26.9} 4.8 | 10] - 183.4

Temperature ( C) 19.6 | 22.0 | 27.1 | 30.1] 30.4 | 29.9 | 28.9] 28.7 | 28.9 | 27.6 | 23.4] 19.7
Kolkata 22 34' N 6

Rainfall (cm) 12 | 2.8 | 3.4 | 5.1 | 13.4] 29.0 | 33.1] 33.4 | 25.3 | 12.7] 2.7 | 0.4] 162.5

Temperature ( C) 14.4 | 16.7 | 23.3 | 30.0] 33.3 | 33.3 | 30.0 | 29.4 | 28.9 | 25.6] 19.4] 15.6
Delhi 29 N 219

Rainfall (cm) 25) Rs 1.3 1.0 18 | 7.4 | 19.3} 17.8) 11.9] 1.3 | 0.2 | 1.0 67.0

Temperature ( C) 16.8 | 19.2 | 26.6 | 29.8] 33.3 | 33.9 | 31.3] 29.0 | 20.1 | 27.0} 20.1] 14.9
Jodhpur 26 18'N| 224

Rainfall (cm) 0.5 | 06 | 0.3 | 0.3] 10 |] 3.1 | 10.8] 13.1] 5.7 | 08 | 02 ])02}] 36.6

Temperature ( C) 24.5 | 25.7 | 27.7 | 30.4] 33.0 | 32.5 | 31.0} 30.2 | 29.8 | 28.0 | 25.9 | 24.7
Chennai 13 4'N 7

Rainfall (cm) 46 | 13 ] 13 |] 18] 3.8 | 4.5 | 8.7 | 11.3] 11.9 | 30.6} 35.0]/13.9} 128.6

Temperature ( C) 21.5 | 23.9 | 28.3 | 32.7] 35.5 | 32.0 | 27.7 | 27.3 | 27.9 | 26.7 | 23.1 | 20.7
Nagpur 21 9'N | 312

Rainfall (cm) 1.1 | 2.3] 1.7 | 16] 2.1 | 22.2 | 37.6] 286/185] 5.5 | 2.0 | 1.0] 124.2

Temperature ( C) 9.8 | 11.3] 15.9] 18.5] 19.2] 20.5 | 21.1} 20.9 | 20.0 | 17.2} 13.3] 10.4
Shillong 24 34'N| 1461

Rainfall (cm) 14 | 2.9 | 5.6 | 14.6] 29.5} 47.6 | 35.9] 34.3 | 30.2 | 18.8) 3.8 | 0.6] 225.3

Temperature ( C) 26.7 | 27.3 | 28.3 | 28.7] 28.6 | 26.6 | 26.2 | 2.6.2 | 26.5 | 26.7 | 26.6 | 26.5
Thiruvananthapuram| 8 29' N 61

Rainfall (cm) 2.3 | 2.1 | 3.7 | 10.6] 20.8] 35.6 | 22.3] 14.6 | 13.8 | 27.3] 20.6| 7.5] 181.2

Temperature ( C) -8.5|}-7.2}-0.6] 6.1 | 10.0) 14.4 | 17.2] 16.1 | 12.2] 6.1 0.0 |-5.6|
Leh 34 N 34 N 3506

Rainfall (cm) 1.0 | 08 | 08 | 05) 05) 05 | 13 ] 13 | 08 | 0.5 - | 05 8.5
CLIMATE 37

Reprint 2025-26

4.

Now find out
(i) Why are Thiruvananthapuram and Shillong rainier in June than in July?
(ii) Why is July rainier in Mumbai than in Thiruvananthapuram?
(iii) Why are southwest monsoons less rainy in Chennai?
(iv) Why is Shillong rainier than Kolkata?
(v) Why is Kolkata rainier in July than in June unlike Shillong which is rainier in June than
in July?
(vi) Why does Delhi receive more rain than Jodhpur?
Now think why
 Thiruvananthapuram has equable climate?
 Chennai has more rains only after the fury of monsoon is over in most parts of the country?
 Jodhpur has a hot desert type of climate?
 Leh has moderate precipitation almost throughut the year?
 while in Delhi and Jodhpur most of the rain is confined to nearly three months, in
Thiruvananthapuram and Shillong it is almost nine months of the year?
In spite of these facts see carefully if there are strong evidences to conclude that the monsoons

still provide a very strong framework lending overall climatic unity to the whole country.
CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

Reprint 2025-26