0968CHO5

NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE

ave you observed the type of trees,

bushes, grasses and birds in the fields

and parks in and around your school?
Are they similar or there are variations? India
being a vast country you can imagine the
types of bio-forms available throughout the
country.

Our country India is one of the 12 mega
bio-diversity countries of the world. With
about 47,000 plant species India occupies
tenth place in the world and fourth in Asia in
plant diversity. There are about 15,000
flowering plants in India, which account for
6 per cent in the world s total number of
flowering plants. The country has many nonflowering plants, such as ferns, algae and
fungi. India also has approximately 90,000
species of animals, as well as, a rich variety of
fish in its fresh and marine waters.

Natural vegetation refers to a plant
community, which has grown naturally
without human aid and has been left
undisturbed by humans for a long time. This
is termed as a virgin vegetation. Thus,
cultivated crops and fruits, orchards form part
of vegetation but not natural vegetation.

Do You Know?

The virgin vegetation, which
are purely Indian are known as endemic or
indigenous species but those which have come
from outside India are termed as exotic plants.

The term flora is used to denote plants of
a particular region or period. Similarly, the
species of animals are referred to as fauna.

TYPES OF VEGETATION

The following major types of vegetation may
be identified in our country (Figure 5.4).

(i) Tropical Evergreen Forests

(ii) Tropical Deciduous Forests

(iii) Tropical Thorn Forests and Scrubs

(iv) Montane Forests

(v) Mangrove Forests

Maximum Height
60 Metres

Emergent
Layer

40 Metres

Canopy
Layer

20 Metres

Shrubs
Layer

1.5 Metres

Ground Layer

Figure 5.1 : Tropical Evergreen Forest

Reprint 2025-26

Tropical Evergreen Forests

These forests are restricted to heavy rainfall
areas of the Western Ghats and the island
groups of Lakshadweep, Andaman and
Nicobar, upper parts of Assam and Tamil Nadu
coast. They are at their best in areas having
more than 200 cm of rainfall with a short dry
season. The trees reach great heights up to 60
metres or even above. Since the region is warm
and wet throughout the year, it has a luxuriant
vegetation of all kinds trees, shrubs and
creepers giving it a multilayered structure. There
is no definite time for trees to shed their leaves.
As such, these forests appear green all the
year round.

Some of the commercially important trees
of this forest are ebony, mahogany, rosewood,
rubber and cinchona.

The common animals found in these forests
are elephant, monkey, lemur and deer. Onehorned rhinoceroses are found in the jungles
of Assam and West Bengal. Besides these
animals, plenty of birds, bats, sloth, scorpions
and snails are also found in these jungles.

Tropical Deciduous Forests

These are the most widespread forests of India.
They are also called the monsoon forests and
spread over the region receiving rainfall
between 200 cm and 70 cm. Trees of this forest

type shed their leaves for about six to eight
weeks in dry summer.

On the basis of the availability of water,
these forests are further divided into moist and
dry deciduous. The former is found in areas
receiving rainfall between 200 and 100 cm.
These forests exist, therefore, mostly in the
eastern part of the country northeastern
states, along the foothills of the Himalayas,
Jharkhand, West Odisha and Chhattisgarh,
and on the eastern slopes of the Western Ghats.
Teak is the most dominant species of this forest.
Bamboos, sal, shisham, sandalwood, khair,
kusum, arjun and mulberry are other
commercially important species.

The dry deciduous forests are found in areas
having rainfall between 100 cm and 70 cm.
These forests are found in the rainier parts of
the Peninsular plateau and the plains of Bihar
and Uttar Pradesh. There are open stretches,
in which teak, sal, peepal and neem grow. A
large part of this region has been cleared for
cultivation and some parts are used for grazing.

In these forests, the common animals found
are lion, tiger, pig, deer and elephant. A huge
variety of birds, lizards, snakes and tortoises
are also found here.

The Thorn Forests and Scrubs

In regions with less than 70 cm of rainfall, the
natural vegetation consists of thorny trees and

Figure 5.2 : Tropical Deciduous Forest
Figure 5.3 : Thorn Forests and Scrubs

CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

Reprint 2025-26

INDIA
NATURAL VEGETATION

PAKISTAN

CHINA
(TIBET)

EE 2 BHUTAN

nl MYANMAR

ARABIAN BAY OF
SEA BENGAL

*

.
?
 

~~

oe Ne ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS
LAKSHADWEEP (INDIA)
(INDIA)

INDIAN %
76 2 E YQ

Figure 5.4 : Natural Vegetation

Study the given map for the forest cover and try to find the reasons as to why certain states have more forest area
as compared to others?

NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILBDLEE : Kl OS_ L eeew 41

Reprint 2025-26

bushes. This type of vegetation is found in the
north-western part of the country, including
semi-arid areas of Gujarat, Rajasthan, Madhya
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh and
Haryana. Acacias, palms, euphorbias and cacti
are the main plant species. Trees are scattered
and have long roots penetrating deep into the
soil in order to get moisture. The stems are
succulent to conserve water. Leaves are mostly
thick and small to minimise evaporation. These
forests give way to thorn forests and scrubs in
arid areas.

In these forests, the common animals are
rats, mice, rabbits, fox, wolf, tiger, lion, wild ass,
horses and camels.

Montane Forests

In mountainous areas, the decrease in
temperature with increasing altitude leads to
the corresponding change in natural
vegetation. As such, there is a succession of
natural vegetation belts in the same order as
we see from the tropical to the tundra region.
The wet temperate type of forests are found
between a height of 1000 and 2000 metres.
Evergreen broad-leaf trees, such as oaks and
chestnuts predominate. Between 1500 and
3000 metres, temperate forests containing

Figure 5.5 : Montane Forests
coniferous trees, like pine, deodar, silver fir,
spruce and cedar, are found. These forests
cover mostly the southern slopes of the
Himalayas, places having high altitude in
southern and north-east India. At higher
elevations, temperate grasslands are common.
At high altitudes, generally, more than 3,600
metres above the sea level, temperate forests
and grasslands give way to the Alpine
vegetation. Silver fir, junipers, pines and
birches are the common trees of these forests.
However, they get progressively stunted as
they approach the snow-line. Ultimately,
through shrubs and scrubs, they merge into
the Alpine grasslands. These are used
extensively for grazing by nomadic tribes, like
the Gujjars and the Bakarwals. At higher
altitudes, mosses and lichens form part of
tundra vegetation.

The common animals found in these forests
are Kashmir stag, spotted dear, wild sheep, jack
rabbit, Tibetan antelope, yak, snow leopard,
squirrels, Shaggy horn wild ibex, bear and rare
red panda, sheep and goats with thick hair.

Mangrove Forests

The mangrove tidal forests are found in the
areas of coasts influenced by tides. Mud and
silt get accumutated on such coasts. Dense

Figure 5.6 : Mangrove Forests

CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

Reprint 2025-26

mangroves are the common varieties with roots Royal Bengal Tiger is the famous animal
of the plants submerged under water. The _ in these forests. Turtles, crocodiles, gharials
deltas of the Ganga, the Mahanadi, the Krishna, and snakes are also found in these forests.

the Godavari and the Kaveri are covered by Let us discuss : What will happen if plants and

such vegetation. In the Ganga-Brahmaputra animals disappear from the earth s surface? Can
delta, sundari trees are found, which provide the human beings survive under such a situation?
durable hard timber. Palm, coconut, keora, Why is biodiversity necessary and why should it be

conserved?

agar, etc., also grow in some parts of the delta.

MEDICINAL PLANTS
India is known for its herbs and spices from ancient times. Some 2,000 plants have been described in Ayurveda
and at least 500 are in regular use. The World Conservation Union s Red List has named 352 medicinal plants
of which 52 are critically threatened and 49 endangered. The commonly used plants in India are:

Sarpagandha _ : Used to treat blood pressure; it is found only in India.
Jamun : The juice from ripe fruit is used to prepare vinegar, which is carminative and diuretic, and
has digestive properties. The powder of the seed is used for controlling diabetes.

Arjun : The fresh juice of leaves is a cure for earache. It is also used to regulate blood pressure.
Babool : Leaves are used as a cure for eye sores. Its gum is used as a tonic.

Neem : Has high antibiotic and antibacterial properties.

Tulsi : Is used to cure cough and cold.

Kachnar : Is used to cure asthma and ulcers. The buds and roots are good for digestive problems.

Identify more medicinal plants in your area. Which plants are used as medicines by local
people to cure some diseases?

Source : Medicinal Plants by Dr. S.K. Jain, 5th edition 1994, National Book Trust of India

The elephants are the most
majestic animals among the
mammals. They are found in the hot
wet forests of Assam, Karnataka and
Kerala. One-horned rhinoceroses are
the other animals, which live in
swampy and marshy lands of Assam
and West Bengal. Arid areas of the
Rann of Kachchh and the Thar
Desert are the habitat for wild ass
and camels respectively. Indian
<i! fxr bison, nilgai (blue bull), chousingha

me of aie (four-horned antelope), gazel ond
a, - different species of deer are some
other animals found in India. It also has several
species of monkeys.

WILDLIFE

Like its flora, India is also rich in its fauna. It

has approximately 90,000 animal species. Do You Know? Wildlife Protection Act was
The country has about 2,000 species of birds. implemented in 1972 in India.

They constitute 13% of the world s total. There

are 2,546 species of fish, which account for India is the only country in the world that

nearly 12% of the world s stock. It also shares has both tigers and lions. The natural habitat
between 5 and 8 per cent of the world s of the Indian lion is the Gir forest in Gujarat.

amphibians, reptiles and mammals. Tigers are found in the forests of Madhya

NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE 43

Reprint 2025-26

Pradesh, the Sundarbans of West Bengal and
the Himalayan region. Leopards, too, are
members of the cat family. They are important
among animals of prey.

The Himalayas harbour a hardy range of
animals, which survive in extreme cold.
Ladakh s freezing high altitudes are a home to
yak, the shaggy horned wild ox weighing
around one tonne, the Tibetan antelope, the
bharal (blue sheep), wild sheep, and the kiang
(Tibetan wild ass). Furhtermore, the ibex, bear,
snow-leopard and rare red panda are found
in certain pockets.

New Dethi, January 30

=
sands of vulture=

pouching of tigers in the November 206 and had con
lakh in the global

will take ser 
jor,

vultures hi 

investigation into the large-scale rested on charges of poaching in $00,000. A dead tiger's skin and poachers and the connivance of ang Ss
tevth and bones are worth Rs 20 forest department staff. It has or sed carcas'

 :
5 + in
SS hate uel to probe links gagmmpose SV nq-like SPO" =. give othel inc, G

In the rivers, lakes and coastal areas,
turtles, crocodiles and gharials are found. The
latter is the only representative of a variety of
crocodile, found in the world today.

Bird life in India is colourful. Peacocks,
pheasants, ducks, parakeets, cranes and
pigeons are some of the birds inhabiting the
forests and wetlands of the country.

We have selected our crops from a
bio-diverse environment, i.e., from the reserve
of edible plants. We also experimented and
selected many medicinal plants. The animals
were selected from large stock provided by
nature as milch animal. They also provided us
draught power, transportation, meat and eggs.
The fish provide nutritive food. Many insects
help in pollination of crops and fruit trees and
exerting biological control on such insects is
harmful. Every species has a role to play in the

jarat

~ 4m anproved the con
5]

omm: - 
According to a proposal iu...
inet, the environment minister wi

the authority. The 9"**ied for horn

ab
aaa

a Ow

Diclofenac. Soret athorities la
rk (KNP) 20 an Asiat
probe ore AL Paved rhino and ron I
-hor .
HT Correspondent 22 tigers have been killed in thrown up startling facts, espe- is the second tiger reserve inh YZ AZIRAN fa yare hy nges f e ngal nett
New Delhi, January 5 Ranthambore in the past three cially after the arrests of Mohar jasthan where a CBI inquiry hi arcass 8) parate ax
 ___ years, the Rajasthan Police Singh and son Madho Singh, been ordered. The ministryha {he C an ES) ; of two nd a Pp
THE MINISTRY of environment claim only 12 were killed. They who were involved in smuggling however, broadened the scope o puffa oO oisont ards fo wy ir te
and forests has decided to ask are depending on the version tiger skin and other body parts. the investigation, asking the of {EY ows F { guar jn a vy
the Central Bureau of Investiga- given by a village pradhan and They had said that one body part _ficers to investigate into the pos: FYy4S follows 1 park. it yhino e.T
tion to conduct an independent. his two associates who were ar- of the tiger fetched them Rs sible nexus of criminals and ationa dau ura ahar yange
Activity

@) Find out from the above newspaper cuttings, the main concern highlighted in the given news items.
(i) Collect more information about various endangered species from newspapers and magazines.
(iii) Find out various steps taken by the Indian government to protect them.
(iv) Describe how you can contribute to the protection of endangered animals and birds.

CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

Reprint 2025-26

ae Sy INDIA 
i ery SOME WILDLIFE RESERVES
Veal Pachigam .

32 mL,

PAKISTAN

Rajali,. N
wn, CHINA
Corbett g - (TIBET)
 

aoe

aI oe On sy =
( Sariskag = Dudhwa a, 72 Steg er
hy Keoladeo Ghanaa "74+. Mahanadi | BHUTAN Skaziranga if

\. Ranthambhor & ste Ni 
\ PUM eid

. gonrs I N

oO .
si pro . 7

A
2D, 5,
Chandra Prabha = COUNT, Manas

Kanha A

Tadoba A Pimlipal ay

| Sanjay Gandhi Chandd a

Kawal @ Dampara 2

Pocharam @ e
Eturnagaram

Wildlife Sanctuary
Bird Sanctuary
National Park

cw
e
 

*
A Bandipur
@

. \ Mudumalai
LAKSHADWEEP

 
a ~

Ur a Periyar

INDIAN
Figure 5.7 : Wildlife Reserves

NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE ?:.?. OO]. Ln 45

Reprint 2025-26

ecosystem. Hence, conservation is essential. As
has been mentioned earlier due to excessive
exploitation of plant and animal resources by
human beings, the ecosystem has been
disturbed. About 1,300 plant species are
endangered and 20 species are extinct. Quite
a few animal species are also endangered and
some have become extinct.

The main causes for this major threat to
nature are hunting by greedy hunters for
commercial purposes. Pollution due to
chemical and industrial waste, acid deposits,
introduction of alien species and reckless
cutting of the forests to bring land under
cultivation and habitation, are also responsible
for the imbalance.

To protect the flora and fauna of the
country, the government has taken many
steps.

(i) Eighteen biosphere reserves have been
set up in the country to protect flora and
fauna. Twelve out of these, the Sundarbans
Nanda Devi, the Gulf of Mannar, the Nilgiri,
Nokrek, Great Nicobar, Simlipal,
Pachmarhi, Achanakmar-Amarkantak,
Agasthyamalai, Kangchendzonga and
Panna have been included in the world
network of biosphere reserves.

in hie. ae One st
avourable with birds is Ba Rai '
Kachchh. At a place wher re, th deser

merges with the sea, flamingo with their
brilliant pink plumage come in thousands
to build nest mounds from the salty mud 
pe raise their young ones. se e
mong many extraordinary sig
try. i

7 ours? .

not a rich natural heritelg
Eighteen Bio-reserves

 Sundarbans Simlipal

 Gulf of Mannar Dihang-Dibang

 Nilgiri Dibru Saikhowa
 Nanda Devi e Agasthyamalai

 Nokrek e Kangchendzonga

Great Nicobar e Pachmarhi

e Manas e Achanakmar-Amarkantak
e Kachchh Cold Desert
e Seshachalam e Panna

(ii) Financial and technical assistance is
provided to many botanical gardens by the
government since 1992.

(iii) Project Tiger, Project Rhino, Project
Great Indian Bustard and many other
eco-developmental projects have been
introduced.

(iv) 106 National Parks, 573 Wildlife
sanctuaries and Zoological gardens are set
up to take care of natural heritage.

All of us must realise the importance of the
natural ecosystem for our own survival. It is
possible if indiscriminate destruction of natural
environment is put to an immediate end.

CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I

Reprint 2025-26

EXERCISE

1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below:
(i) To which one of the following types of vegetation does rubber belong to?

(a) Tundra (c) Himalayan
(b) Tidal (d) Tropical Evergreen
(ii) Cinchona trees are found in the areas of rainfall more than
(a) 100 cm (c) 70 cm
(b) 50 cm (d) less than 50 cm
(iii) In which of the following state is the Simlipal bio-reserve located?
(a) Punjab (b) Delhi
(c) Odisha (d) West Bengal

(iv) Which one of the following bio-reserves of India is not included in the world
network of bioreserve?

(a) Manas (c) Gulf of Mannar
(b) Nilgiri (d) Panna
2. Answer the following questions briefly.
(i) What is a bio-reserve? Give two examples.
(ii) Name two animals having habitat in tropical and montane type of vegetation.
3. Distinguish between
(i) Flora and Fauna
(ii) Tropical Evergreen and Deciduous forests

4. Name different types of Vegetation found in India and describe the vegetation of
high altitudes.

5. Quite a few species of plants and animals are endangered in India. Why?
6. Why has India a rich heritage of flora and fauna?

| Map Skills

On an outline map of India, label the following.
(i) Areas of Evergreen Forests
(ii) Areas of Dry Deciduous Forests

(iii) Two national parks each in Northern, Southern, Eastern and Western parts
of the Country

| Project /Activity

(i) Find some trees in your neighbourhood having medicinal values.

(ii) Find ten occupations getting raw material from forests and wildlife.

(iii) Write a poem or paragraph showing the importance of wildlife.

(iv) Write the script of a street play giving the importance of tree plantation and
try to enact it in your locality.

(v) Plant a tree either on your birthday or one of your family member s birthday.
Note the growth of the tree and notice in which season it grows faster.

NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILDLIEFEe OO AT

Reprint 2025-26