zero for the quadratic polynomial ax? + bx +c in this case. Reprint 2025-26 POLYNOMIALS 15 Case (iii) : Here, the graph is either completely above the x-axis or completely below the x-axis. So, it does not cut the x-axis at any point (see Fig. 2.5). (i) (ii) Fig. 2.5 So, the quadratic polynomial ax? + bx + c has no zero in this case. So, you can see geometrically that a quadratic polynomial can have either two distinct zeroes or two equal zeroes (i.e., one zero), or no zero. This also means that a polynomial of degree 2 has atmost two zeroes. Now, what do you expect the geometrical meaning of the zeroes of a cubic polynomial to be? Let us find out. Consider the cubic polynomial x? 4x. To see what the graph of y =x 4x looks like, let us list a few values of y corresponding to a few values for x as shown in Table 2.2. Table 2.2 Locating the points of the table on a graph paper and drawing the graph, we see that the graph of y = x 4x actually looks like the one given in Fig. 2.6. Reprint 2025-26 We see from the table above that 2, 0 and 2 are zeroes of the cubic polynomial x* 4x. Observe that 2, 0 and 2 are, in fact, the x-coordinates of the only points MATHEMATICS where the graph of y = x 4x intersects the x-axis. Since the curve meets the x-axis in only these 3 points, their x-coordinates are the only zeroes of the polynomial. Let us take a few more examples. Consider the cubic polynomials x* and x* x*. We draw the graphs of y = x and y=x3 x? in Fig. 2.7 and Fig. 2.8 respectively. Fig. 2.7 Reprint 2025-26 Fig. 2.8 POLYNOMIALS 17 Note that 0 is the only zero of the polynomial x . Also, from Fig. 2.7, you can see that 0 is the x-coordinate of the only point where the graph of y = x? intersects the x-axis. Similarly, since x x =x*(x 1), O and 1 are the only zeroes of the polynomial x? x , Also, from Fig. 2.8, these values are the x-coordinates of the only points where the graph of y = x* x intersects the x-axis. From the examples above, we see that there are at most 3 zeroes for any cubic polynomial. In other words, any polynomial of degree 3 can have at most three zeroes. Remark : In general, given a polynomial p(x) of degree n, the graph of y = p(x) intersects the x-axis at atmost 7 points. Therefore, a polynomial p(x) of degree n has at most 1 zeroes. Example 1 : Look at the graphs in Fig. 2.9 given below. Each is the graph of y = p(x), where p(x) is a polynomial. For each of the graphs, find the number of zeroes of p(x). (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) Fig. 2.9 Solution :