Wikipedia GRAND PLACE GROTE MARKT & The photograph here is of a street address in Belgium. You will notice that place names and directions in two languages French and Dutch. e 19/03/2024 10:38:13 accepted equal representation in the Central Government. @ Apart from the Central and the State Government, there is a third kind of government. This community government is elected by people belonging to one language community - Dutch, French and German-speaking - no matter where they live. This government has the power regarding cultural, educational and language-related issues. You might find the Belgian model very complicated. It indeed is very complicated, even for people living in Belgium. But these arrangements European Parliament in Brussels, Belgium have worked well so far. They helped to avoid civic strife between the two major communities and a possible Europe came together to form the = 0 you are saying that sharing of power makes us more powerful. Sounds odd! Let me division of the country on linguistic European Union, Brussels was lines. When many countries of chosen as its headquarters. t iS vet us <28y ew Pape Read any newspaper for one week and make clippings of news related to ongoing conflicts or wars. A group of five students could pool their clippings together and do the following: @ Classify these conflicts by their location (your state, India, outside India). @ Find out the cause of each of these conflicts. How many of these are related to power sharing disputes? @ Which of these conflicts could be resolved by working out power sharing arrangements? a What do we learn from these two and regions. Such a realisation stories of Belgium and Sri Lanka? resulted in mutually acceptable Both are democracies. Yet, they arrangements for sharing power. dealt with the question of power Sri Lanka shows us a contrasting sharing differently. In Belgium, example. It shows us that if a the leaders have realised that the majority community wants to unity of the country is possible force its dominance over others only by respecting the feelings and and refuses to share power, it can interests of different communities undermine the unity of the country. D S n fr vu = [o) a Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 1.indd 5 08-04-2022 Prudential: Based on prudence, or on careful calculation of gains and losses. Prudential decisions are usually contrasted with decisions based purely on moral considerations. a) 5) w [o) (aL s) w o z) [o) ) (an) Chapter 1.indd 6 FINE GERMAN ENGINEERING. |] Glossary st i Tab - The Calgary Sun, Cagle Cartoons Inc. Why power sharing is desirable? Thus, two different sets of reasons can be given in favour of power sharing. Firstly, power sharing is good because it helps to reduce the possibility of conflict between social groups. Since social conflict often leads to violence and political instability, power sharing is a good way to ensure the stability of political order. Imposing the will of majority community over others may look like an