Lanka Sinhalese Sri Lankan Tamil Indian Tamil ill Muslin Y% For more details, visit https:/Awww.gov.|k Reprint 2025-26 Glossary Majoritarianism: A belief that the majority community should be able to rule a country in whichever way it wants, by disregarding the wishes and needs of the minority. 08-04-2022 POWer-Sharing (es) a) 5) w [o) (aL s) w o z) [o) ) (an) Chapter 1.indd 4 What s wrong if the majority community rules? If Sinhalas don t rule in Sri Lanka, where else will they rule? ssary Civil war: A violent conflict between opposing groups within a country that becomes so intense that it appears like a war. result, the relations between the Sinhala and Tamil communities strained over time. The Sri Lankan Tamils launched parties and struggles forthe recognition of Tamil as an official language, for regional autonomy and equality of opportunity in securing education and jobs. But their demand for more autonomy toprovincespopulatedbythe Tamils was repeatedly denied. By 1980s, several political organisations were formed demanding an independent Tamil Eelam (state) in northern and eastern parts of Sri Lanka. The distrust between the two communities turned into widespread conflict. It soon turned into a CIVIL war. Asa result thousands of people of both the communities have been killed. Many families were forced to leavethe country as refugees and many more lost their livelihoods. The civil war has caused aterrible setback to the social, cultural and economic life of the country. It ended in 2009. Accommodation in Belgium The Belgian leaders took a different path. They recognised the existence of regional differences and cultural diversities. Between 1970 and 1993, they amended their constitution four timesso as to work outan arrangement that would enable everyone to live together within the same country. The arrangement they worked out is different from any other country andis very innovative. Here are some of the elements of the Belgian model: @ Constitution prescribes that the number of Dutch and French-speaking ministers shall be equal in the central government. Some special laws require Reprint 2025-26 the support of majority of members from each linguistic group. Thus, no single community can make decisions unilaterally. @ Many powers of the Central Government have been given to State Governments of the two regions of the country. The State Governments are not subordinate to the Central Government. @ Brusselshasaseparategovernment in which both the communities have equal representation. The Frenchspeaking people accepted equal representation in Brussels because the Dutch-speaking community has accepted equal representation in the RUE DE LA MONTAGNE BERG STRAAT Wikipedia GRAND PLACE GROTE MARKT & The photograph here is of a street address in Belgium. You will notice that place names and directions in two languages French and Dutch. e 19/03/2024 10:38:13 accepted equal representation in the Central Government. @ Apart from the Central and the State Government, there is a third kind of government. This community government is elected by people belonging to one language community - Dutch, French and German-speaking - no matter where they live. This