Vetal was the pillion rider. As usual, Vetal dilemma started telling Vikram a story to keep him awake while driving. This time the story went as follows: In the city of Beirut, there lived a man called Khalil. His parents came from different communities. His father was an Orthodox Christian and mother a Sunni Muslim. This was not so uncommon in this modern, cosmopolitan city. People from various communities that lived in Lebanon came to live in its capital, Beirut. They lived together, intermingled, yet fought a bitter civil war among themselves. One of Khalil s uncles was killed in that war. At the end of this civil war, Lebanon s leaders came together and agreed to some basic rules for power sharing among different communities. As per these rules, the country s President must belong to the Maronite sect of Catholic Christians. The Prime Minister must be from the Sunni Muslim community. The post of Deputy Prime Minister is fixed for Orthodox Christian sect and that of the Speaker for Shi a Muslims. Under this pact, the Christians agreed not to seek French protection and the Muslims agreed not to seek unification with the neighbouring state of Syria.When the Christians and Muslims came to this agreement, they were nearly Wo i ulation. Both sides have continued to respect this agreement though now the are in clear OT Khalil does not like this system Wy sopuiareeyh h political ambition. But under the present system, thefl ae position is outtag NP reach. He does not practise either his father s or his mother s religion and does not wish to be known by either. He cannot understand why Lebanon can t be like any other normal democracy. Just hold an election, allow everyone to contest and ver wins maximum votes becomes the president, no matter which community he nd from. Why can t we do that, like in other democracies of the world? he asks. His elders, who have seen the bloodshed of the civil war, tell him that the present diem is the best guarantee for peace... The story was not finished, but they had reached the TV tower where they stopped every day. Vetal wrapped up quickly and posed his customary question to Vikram: If you had the power to rewrite the rules in Lebanon, what would you do? Would you adopt the regular rules followed everywhere, as Khalil suggests? Or stick to the old rules? Or do something else? Vetal did not forget to remind Vikram of their basic pact: If you have an answer in mind and yet do not speak up, your mobike will freeze, and so will you! Can you help poor Vikram in answering Vetal? POWer-Sharing N Reprint 2025-26 08-04-2022 a) 5) w [o) (aL s) w o z) [o) ) (an) Reigning the Reins Olle Johansson - Sweden, Cagle Cartoons Inc., 25 Feb. 2005 WE GOTTA KEEP THE REIN TIGHT, VLADIMIR... Forms of power-sharing The idea of power-sharing has emerged in opposition to