Tamil Nadu. It has about two crore people, about the same as in Haryana. Like other nations in the South Asia region, Sri Lanka has a diverse population. The major social groups are the Sinhala-speakers (74 per cent) and the Tamil-speakers (18 per cent). Among Tamils there are two sub-groups. Tamil natives of the country are called Sri Lankan Communities and regions of Belgium Look at the maps of Belgium and Sri Lanka. In which region, do you find concentration of different communities? Reprint 2025-26 For more details, visit https://www.belgium.be/en 08-04-2022 12:29:07 Chapter 1.indd 3 Tamils (13 per cent). The rest, whose forefathers came from India as plantation workers during colonial period, are called Indian Tamils . As you can see from the map, Sri Lankan Tamils are concentrated in the north and east of the country. Most of the Sinhala-speaking people are Buddhists, while most of the Tamils are Hindus or Muslims. There are about 7 per cent Christians, who are both Tamil and Sinhala. Just imagine what could happen in situations like this. In Belgium, the Dutch community could take advantage of its numeric majority and force its will on the French and German-speaking population. This would push the conflict among communities further. This could lead to a very messy partition of the country; both the sides would claim control over Brussels. In Sri Lanka, the Sinhala community enjoyed an even bigger majority and could impose its will on the entire country. Now, let us look at what happened in both these countries. Majoritarianism in Sri Lanka Sri Lanka emerged as an independent country in 1948. The leaders of the Sinhala community sought to secure dominance over government by virtue of their majority. As a result, the democratically elected government adopted a series of MAJORITARIAN measures to establish Sinhala supremacy. In 1956, an Act was passed to recognise Sinhala as the only official language, thus disregarding Tamil. The governments followed preferential policies that favoured Sinhala applicants for university positions and government jobs. A new constitution stipulated that the state shall protect and foster Buddhism. All these government measures, coming one after the other, gradually increased the feeling of alienation among the Sri Lankan Tamils. They felt that none of the major political parties led by the Buddhist Sinhala leaders was sensitive to their language and culture. They felt that the constitution and government policies denied them equal political rights, discriminated against them in getting jobs and other opportunities and ignored their interests. As a Ethnic Communities of Sri Lanka Sinhalese Sri Lankan Tamil Indian Tamil ill Muslin Y% For more details, visit https:/Awww.gov.|k Reprint 2025-26 Glossary Majoritarianism: A belief that the majority community should be able to rule a country in whichever way it wants, by disregarding the wishes and needs of the minority. 08-04-2022 POWer-Sharing (es) a) 5) w [o) (aL s) w o z) [o) ) (an) Chapter 1.indd 4 What s wrong if the majority community rules? If Sinhalas don t rule in Sri Lanka,