and thus share power. In a democracy, we find interest groups, such as those of traders, businessmen, industrialists, farmers and industrial workers. They also will have a share in governmental power, either through participation in governmental committees or bringing influence on the decision-making process. In Unit III, we shall study the working of political parties. Reprint 2025-26 4/29/2022 5: POWer-Sharing ener Us e~ Here are some examples of power sharing. Which of the four types of power sharing do these represent? Who is sharing power with whom? @ The Bombay High Court ordered the Maharashtra State Government to immediately take action and improve living conditions for the 2,000-odd children at seven children s homes in Mumbai. @ The government of Ontario state in Canada has agreed to a land claim settlement with the aboriginal community. The Minister responsible for Native Affairs announced that the government will work with aboriginal people in a spirit of mutual respect and cooperation. @ Russia s two influential political parties, the Union of Right Forces and the Liberal Yabloko Movement, agreed to unite their organisations into a strong right wing coalition. They propose to have a common list of candidates in the next parliamentary elections. The finance ministers of various states in Nigeria got together and demanded that the federal government declare its sources of income. They also wanted to know the formula by which the revenue is distributed to various State Governments. 1. What are the different forms of power sharing in modern democracies? Give an example of each of these. 2. State one prudential reason and one moral reason for power sharing with an example from the Indian context. 3. After reading this chapter, three students drew different conclusions. Which of these do you agree with and why? Give your reasons in about 50 words. Thomman - Power sharing is necessary only in societies which have religious, linguistic or ethnic divisions. Mathayi - Power sharing is suitable only for big countries that have regional divisions. Ouseph - Every society needs some form of power sharing even if it is small or does not have social divisions. 4. The Mayor of Merchtem, a town near Brussels in Belgium, has defended a ban on speaking French in the town s schools. He said that the ban would help all non-Dutch speakers integrate in this Flemish town. Do you think that this measure is in keeping with the spirit of Belgium s power sharing arrangements? Give your reasons in about 50 words. a) 5) w [o) (aL s) w o z) [o) ) (an) Reprint 2025-26 r1.indd 10 08-04-2022 12:29:21 5. Read the following passage and pick out any one of the prudential reasons for power sharing offered in this. We need to give more power to the panchayats to realise the dream of Mahatma Gandhi and the hopes of the makers of our Constitution. Panchayati Raj establishes true democracy. It restores power to the only place where power belongs in a democracy in the hands