(aL s) w o z) [o) ) (an) Reprint 2025-26 r1.indd 10 08-04-2022 12:29:21 5. Read the following passage and pick out any one of the prudential reasons for power sharing offered in this. We need to give more power to the panchayats to realise the dream of Mahatma Gandhi and the hopes of the makers of our Constitution. Panchayati Raj establishes true democracy. It restores power to the only place where power belongs in a democracy in the hands of the people. Giving power to Panchayats is also a way to reduce corruption and increase administrative efficiency. When people participate in the planning and implementation of developmental schemes, they would naturally exercise greater contro! over these schemes. This would eliminate the corrupt middlemen. Thus, Panchayati Raj will strengthen the foundations of our democracy. 6. Different arguments are usually put forth in favour of and against power sharing. Identify those which are in favour of power sharing and select the answer using the codes given below? Power sharing: reduces conflict among different communities decreases the possibility of arbitrariness delays decision making process . accommodates diversities increases instability and divisiveness promotes people's participation in government . undermines the unity of a country A B Cc D E F. G | (a) | A B D (b) | A (c) A (d) B O;}B)O 1) sa |G 7. Consider the following statements about power sharing arrangements in Belgium and Sri Lanka. A. In Belgium, the Dutch-speaking majority people tried to impose their domination on the minority French-speaking community. B. In Sri Lanka, the policies of the government sought to ensure the dominance of the Sinhala-speaking majority. C. The Tamils in Sri Lanka demanded a federal arrangement of power sharing to protect their culture, language and equality of opportunity in education and jobs. D. The transformation of Belgium from unitary government to a federal one prevented a possible division of the country on linguistic lines. Which of the statements given above are correct? f(a) 4,8, CandD (b) A,BandD (c)CandD (d) B,C andD i Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 1.indd 11 IS Cs , Ss UY x on POWer-Sharing _ _ 08-04-2022 8. Match List I (forms of power sharing) with List II (forms of government) and select the correct answer using the codes given below in the lists: List I List II 1. | Power shared among different A. Community government organs of government 2. | Power shared among B. Separation of powers governments at different levels 3. | Power shared by different social | C. Coalition government groups 4. | Power shared by two or more D. Federal government SP) political parties 1 2 3 4 (a) D A B C (b) B C D A (c) B D @ pam 9. Consider the following two statements on power sharing and select the answer using the codes given below: A. Power sharing is good for democracy. B. It helps to reduce the possibility of conflict between social groups. Which of these statements are true