object? Consider the example given in (Fig. 7.1). For motion of the object from O to A, the distance covered is 60 km and the magnitude of displacement is also 60 km. During its motion from O to A and back to B, the distance covered Motion are used to describe the overall motion of an object and to locate its final position with reference to its initial position at a given time. Activity e Take a metre scale and a long rope. e Walk from one corner of a basket-ball court to its oppposite corner along its sides. e Measure the distance covered by you and magnitude of the displacement. e What difference would you notice between the two in this case? Activity Automobiles are fitted with a device that shows the distance travelled. Such a device is known as an odometer. A car is driven from Bhubaneshwar to New Delhi. The difference between the final reading and the initial reading of the odometer is 1850 km. e Find the magnitude of the displacement between Bhubaneshwar and New Delhi by using the Road Map of India. Reprint 2025-26 uestions 1. An object has moved through a distance. Can it have zero displacement? If yes, support your answer with an example. 2. A farmer moves along the boundary of a square field of side 10 m in 40 s. What will be the magnitude of displacement of the farmer at the end of 2 minutes 20 seconds from his initial position? 3. Which of the following is true for displacement? (a) It cannot be zero. (b) Its magnitude is greater than the distance travelled by the object. 7.1.22 UNIFORM MOTION AND NONUNIFORM MOTION Consider an object moving along a straight line. Let it travel 5 m in the first second, 5 m more in the next second, 5 m in the third second and 5 m in the fourth second. In this case, the object covers 5 m in each second. As the object covers equal distances in equal intervals of time, it is said to be in uniform motion. The time interval in this motion should be small. In our day-to-day life, we come across motions where objects cover unequal distances in equal intervals of time, for example, when a car is moving on a crowded street or a person is jogging in a park. These are some instances of non-uniform motion. Activity e The data regarding the motion of two different objects A and B are given in Table 7.1. e Examine them carefully and state whether the motion of the objects is uniform or non-uniform. Table 7.1 Distance travelled by Distance travelled by object A in m object Bin m 7.2 Measuring the Rate of Motion k u (a) Fig. 7.2 SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 Look at the situations given in Fig. 7.2. If the bowling speed is 143 km hr! in Fig. 7.2(a) what does it mean? What do you understand from the signboard in Fig. 7.2(b)?