Table 7.1. e Examine them carefully and state whether the motion of the objects is uniform or non-uniform. Table 7.1 Distance travelled by Distance travelled by object A in m object Bin m 7.2 Measuring the Rate of Motion k u (a) Fig. 7.2 SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 Look at the situations given in Fig. 7.2. If the bowling speed is 143 km hr! in Fig. 7.2(a) what does it mean? What do you understand from the signboard in Fig. 7.2(b)? Different objects may take different amounts of time to cover a given distance. Some of them move fast and some move slowly. The rate at which objects move can be different. Also, different objects can move at the same rate. One of the ways of measuring the rate of motion of an object is to find out the distance travelled by the object in unit time. This quantity is referred to as speed. The SI unit of speed is metre per second. This is represented by the symbol ms orm/s. The other units of speed include centimetre per second (cm s ') and kilometre per hour (km h ). To specify the speed of an object, we require only its magnitude. The speed of an object need not be constant. In most cases, objects will be in non-uniform motion. Therefore, we describe the rate of motion of such objects in terms of their average speed. The average speed of an object is obtained by dividing the total distance travelled by the total time taken. That is, Total distance travelled Total time taken If an object travels a distance sin time then its speed vis, average speed = +|n v= (7.1) Let us understand this by an example. A car travels a distance of 100 km in 2 h. Its average speed is 50 km Ir!. The car might not have travelled at 50 km h all the time. Sometimes it might have travelled faster and sometimes slower than this. Example 7.1 An object travels 16 min4s and then another 16 m in 2 s. What is the average speed of the object? Solution: Total distance travelled by the object = 16m+16m=32m Total time taken =4s+2s=6s5s Motion Total distance travelled Total time taken Average speed = 32 m ="65 =9-33ms" Therefore, the average speed of the object is5.83 ms. 7.2.1 SPEED WITH DIRECTION The rate of motion of an object can be more comprehensive if we specify its direction of motion along with its speed. The quantity that specifies both these aspects is called velocity. Velocity is the speed of an object moving in a definite direction. The velocity of an object can be uniform or variable. It can be changed by changing the object s speed, direction of motion or both. When an object is moving along a straight line at a variable speed, we can express the magnitude of its rate of motion in terms of average velocity. It is calculated in the same way as we calculate average