You can also determine the distance moved by the car from its velocity-time graph. The area under the velocity-time graph gives the distance (magnitude of displacement) moved by the car in a given interval of time. If the car would have been moving with uniform velocity, the distance travelled by it would be represented by the area ABCD under the graph (Fig. 7.6). Since the magnitude of the velocity of the car is changing due to acceleration, the distance s travelled by the car will be given by the area ABCDE under the velocity-time graph (Fig. 7.6). That is, s = area ABCDE = area of the rectangle ABCD + area of the triangle ADE = AB x BC + 5 (AD x DE) In the case of non-uniformly accelerated motion, velocity-time graphs can have any shape. 30 u & 20 > x B) 2 10 s (0) 1 2 3 4 5 6 Time (s) (a) w & 20 > b=] g 10 (0) 4 8 10 14 16 20 Time (s) (b) Fig. 7.7: Velocity-time graphs of an object in nonuniformly accelerated motion. Fig. 7.7(a) shows a velocity-time graph that represents the motion of an object whose velocity is decreasing with time while Fig. 7.7 (b) shows the velocity-time graph representing the non-uniform variation of velocity of the object with time. Try to interpret these graphs. Activity. 7-9 e The times of arrival and departure of a train at three stations A, B and C and the distance of stations B and C from station A are given in Table 7.4. Table 7.4: Distances of stations B and C from A and times of arrival and departure of the train Station | Distance | Time of | Time of arrival | departure e Plot and interpret the distance-time graph for the train assuming that its motion between any two stations is uniform. SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 Activity 7.10 Feroz and his sister Sania go to school on their bicycles. Both of them start at the same time from their home but take different times to reach the school although they follow the same route. Table 7.5 shows the distance travelled by them in different times Table 7.5: Distance covered by Feroz and Sania at different times on their bicycles Distance Distance travelled travelled by Feroz by Sania (km) (km) Plot the distance-time graph for their motions on the same scale and interpret. uestions 1. What is the nature of the distance-time graphs for uniform and non-uniform motion of an object? 2. What can you say about the motion ofvan object whose distance-time graph is a straight line parallel to the time axis? 3. What can you say about the motion of an object if its speedtime graph is a straight line parallel to the time axis? Motion 4. What is the quantity which is measured by the area occupied below the velocity-time graph? 7.5 Equations of Motion When an object moves along a straight line with uniform acceleration, it