with time for an object moving in a straight line can be represented by a velocity-time graph. In this graph, time is represented along the x-axis and the velocity = 50 c | 40 > 30 x 0 20 g t, t, 1 2 3 4 Time (h) Fig. 7.5: Velocity-time graph for uniform motion of a car Motion is represented along the y-axis. If the object moves at uniform velocity, the height of its velocity-time graph will not change with time (Fig. 7.5). It will be a straight line parallel to the x-axis. Fig. 7.5 shows the velocity-time graph for a car moving with uniform velocity of 40 km h"t. We know that the product of velocity and time give displacement of an object moving with uniform velocity. The area enclosed by velocity-time graph and the time axis will be equal to the magnitude of the displacement. To know the distance moved by the car between time , and t, using Fig. 7.5, draw perpendiculars from the points corresponding to the time t, and t,on the graph. The velocity of 40 km h"' is represented by the height AC or BD and the time (t,- t,) is represented by the length AB. So, the distance s moved by the car in time (t, t,) can be expressed as s = AC CD = [40 kmh ) (t,- t) hl] = 40 (t,-t,) km = area of the rectangle ABDC (shaded in Fig. 7.5). We can also study about uniformly accelerated motion by plotting its velocitytime graph. Consider a car being driven along a straight road for testing its engine. Suppose a person sitting next to the driver records its velocity after every 5 seconds by noting the reading of the speedometer of the car. The velocity of the car, in km hr! as well as in ms , at different instants of time is shown in table 7.3. Table 7.3: Velocity of a car at regular instants of time Velocity of the car (kmh ) (ms) Reprint 2025-26 In this case, the velocity-time graph for the motion of the car is shown in Fig. 7.6. The nature of the graph shows that velocity changes by equal amounts in equal intervals of time. Thus, for all uniformly accelerated motion, the velocity-time graph is a straight line. 50 cS fo) Velocity (km h ) o o N o i o B Cc 5 10 15 20 25 30 Time (s) Fig. 7.6: Velocity-time graph for a car moving with uniform accelerations. You can also determine the distance moved by the car from its velocity-time graph. The area under the velocity-time graph gives the distance (magnitude of displacement) moved by the car in a given interval of time. If the car would have been moving with uniform velocity, the distance travelled by it would be represented by the area ABCD under the graph (Fig. 7.6). Since the magnitude of the velocity of the car is changing due to acceleration, the distance s