increases its speed by unequal amounts in equal intervals of time, then the car is said to be moving with non-uniform acceleration. Activity__________ 7.8 co In your everyday life you come across a range of motions in which (a) acceleration is in the direction of motion, (b) acceleration is against the direction of motion, (c) acceleration is uniform, (d) acceleration is non-uniform. co Can you identify one example each for the above type of motion? Example 7.4 Starting from a stationary position, Rahul paddles his bicycle to Motion Reprint 2025-26 attain a velocity of 6m sin 30 s. Then he applies brakes such that the velocity of the bicycle comes down to 4m sin the next 5 s. Calculate the acceleration of the bicycle in both the cases. Solution: In the first case: initial velocity, u=0; final velocity, v=6 ms; time, t=30s. From Eq. (8.3), we have a= t Substituting the given values of u,vand tin the above equation, we get (6m s' -Om s') 30s =0.2ms? In the second case: initial velocity, u=6 ms"; final velocity, v=4ms71; time, t=5s. (4m ss 6m s') Then, a= 5s =-0.4ms . The acceleration of the bicycle in the first case is 0.2 ms? and in the second case, itis 0.4 ms . uestions 1. When will you say a body is in Gi) uniform acceleration? (ii) nonuniform acceleration? 2. A bus decreases its speed from 80 km hh" to 60 km th! in 5s. Find the acceleration of the bus. 3. A train starting from a railway station and moving with uniform acceleration attains a speed 40 km h" in 10 minutes. Find its acceleration. 7.4 Graphical Representation of Motion Graphs provide a convenient method to present basic information about a variety of events. For example, in the telecast of a one-day cricket match, vertical bar graphs show the run rate of a team in each over. As you have studied in mathematics, a straight line graph helps in solving a linear equation having two variables. To describe the motion of an object, we can use line graphs. In this case, line graphs show dependence of one physical quantity, such as distance or velocity, on another quantity, such as time. 7.4.1 DISTANCE-TIME GRAPHS The change in the position of an object with time can be represented on the distance-time graph adopting a convenient scale of choice. In this graph, time is taken along the x-axis and distance is taken along the y-axis. Distance-time graphs can be employed under various conditions where objects move with uniform speed, non-uniform speed, remain at rest etc. fo) wo o NS o Distance (km) i o oO 20 40 60 Time (min) Fig. 7.3: Distance-time graph of an object moving with uniform speed We know that when an object travels equal distances in equal intervals of time, it moves with uniform speed. This shows that the distance travelled by the object is directly proportional to time taken. Thus, for uniform speed, a graph of distance travelled against