aspects is called velocity. Velocity is the speed of an object moving in a definite direction. The velocity of an object can be uniform or variable. It can be changed by changing the object s speed, direction of motion or both. When an object is moving along a straight line at a variable speed, we can express the magnitude of its rate of motion in terms of average velocity. It is calculated in the same way as we calculate average speed. In case the velocity of the object is changing at a uniform rate, then average velocity is given by the arithmetic mean of initial velocity and final velocity for a given period of time. That is, initial velocity + final velocity average velocity = utv Mathematically, v, = (7.2) where v,,_ is the average velocity, u is the initial velocity and vis the final velocity of the object. Speed and velocity have the same units, that is, ms or m/s. Activity e Measure the time it takes you to walk from your house to your bus stop or the school. If you consider that your average walking speed is 4 km h , estimate the distance of the bus stop or school from your house. Reprint 2025-26 Activity Example 7.2 The odometer of a car reads 7 77 At a time when it is cloudy, there may be frequent thunder and lightning. The sound of thunder takes some time to reach you after you see the lightning. Can you answer why this happens? Measure this time interval using a digital wrist watch or a stop watch. Calculate the distance of the nearest point of lightning. (Speed of sound in air = 346 ms'.) uestions 1. Distinguish between speed and velocity. 2. Under what condition(s) is the magnitude of average velocity of an object equal to its average speed? 3. What does the odometer of an automobile measure? 4. What does the path of an object look like when it is in uniform motion? 5. During an experiment, a signal from a spaceship reached the ground station in five minutes. What was the distancevof the spaceship from the ground station? The signal travels at the speed of light, that is, 3 10 ms?. 2000 km at the start of a trip and 2400 km at the end of the trip. If the trip took 8 h, calculate the average speed of the carin km h'! andms . Solution: Distance covered by the car, s = 2400 km 2000 km = 400 km Time elapsed, t=8h Average speed of the car is, D = s_ 400 km vw" t 8h = 50 km hb! km x 1000m x lh h lkm 3600s =13.9ms1 The average speed of the car is 50 km h" or 13.9ms". = 50 Example 7.3 Usha swims in a 90 m long pool. She covers 180 m in one minute by swimming from one end to the other and back along the same straight path. Find the