2 s to stop after the application of brakes, calculate the distance it travels during this time. Solution: We have been given a=-6ms? ;t=2sandv=Oms1. From Eq. (7.5) we know that v=utat O=u+(-6ms%x25s or u=12ms'!. From Eq. (7.6) we get s=utt 2 at? =(12ms!)x(2s)+ 2 (-6 m s7) (2 s)? =24m-12m =12m Thus, the car will move 12 m before it stops after the application of brakes. Can you now appreciate why drivers are cautioned to maintain some distance between vehicles while travelling on the road? uestions 1. A bus starting from rest moves with a uniform acceleration of 0.1 ms? for 2 minutes. Find (a) the speed acquired, (b) the distance travelled. 2. A train is travelling at a speed of 90 km h"'. Brakes are applied so as to produce a uniform acceleration of 0.5 m s*. Find how far the train will go before it is brought to rest. 3. A trolley, while going down an inclined plane, has an acceleration of 2cm s*. What will be its velocity 3s after the start? SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 4. A racing car has a uniform acceleration of 4 m s?. What distance will it cover in 10s after start? 5. A stone is thrown in a vertically upward direction with a velocity of 5m s". If the acceleration of the stone during its motion is 10 m s in the downward direction, what will be the height attained by the stone and how much time will it take to reach there? 7.6 Uniform Circular Motion When the velocity of an object changes, we say that the object is accelerating. The change in the velocity could be due to change in its magnitude or the direction of the motion or both. Can you think of an example when an object does not change its magnitude of velocity but only its direction of motion? E D A (a) Rectangular track (b) Hexagonal track (c) Octagonal shaped track (da) A circular track Fig. 7.8: The motion of an athlete along closed tracks of different shapes. Let us consider an example of the motion of a body along a closed path. Fig 8.9 (a) shows the path of an athlete along a rectangular track ABCD. Let us assume that the athlete runs at a uniform speed on the Motion straight parts AB, BC, CD and DA of the track. In order to keep himself on track, he quickly changes his speed at the corners. How many times will the athlete have to change his direction of motion, while he completes one round? It is clear that to move in a rectangular track once, he has to change his direction of motion four times. Now, suppose instead of a rectangular track, the athlete is running along a hexagonal shaped path ABCDEF, as shown in Fig. 7.8(b). In this situation, the athlete will have to change his direction six times while he completes one round. What if the track was not a hexagon but a regular