move with uniform speed, non-uniform speed, remain at rest etc. fo) wo o NS o Distance (km) i o oO 20 40 60 Time (min) Fig. 7.3: Distance-time graph of an object moving with uniform speed We know that when an object travels equal distances in equal intervals of time, it moves with uniform speed. This shows that the distance travelled by the object is directly proportional to time taken. Thus, for uniform speed, a graph of distance travelled against time is a straight line, as shown in Fig. 7.3. The portion OB of the graph shows that the distance is increasing at a uniform rate. Note that, you can also use the term uniform velocity in place of uniform speed if you take the magnitude of displacement equal to the distance travelled by the object along the y-axis. We can use the distance-time graph to determine the speed of an object. To do so, consider a small part AB of the distance-time graph shown in Fig 7.3. Draw a line parallel to the x-axis from point A and another line parallel to the y-axis from point B. These two lines meet each other at point C to form a triangle ABC. Now, on the graph, AC denotes the time interval (t, t,) while BC corresponds to the distance (s, s,). We can see from the graph that as the object moves from the point A to B, it covers a distance (s,- s,) in time (t, t,). The speed, v of the object, therefore can be represented as S$, S, t, ~ t, We can also plot the distance-time graph for accelerated motion. Table 7.2 shows the distance travelled by a car in a time interval of two seconds. V= (7.4) Table 7.2: Distance travelled by a car at regular time intervals Time in seconds | Distance in metres O 2 1 4 4 6 g 8 16 10 25 12 36 SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 35 25 Distance (m) 10 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 Time (s) Fig. 7.4: Distance-time graph for a car moving with non-uniform speed The distance-time graph for the motion of the car is shown in Fig. 7.4. Note that the shape of this graph is different from the earlier distance-time graph (Fig. 7.3) for uniform motion. The nature of this graph shows nonlinear variation of the distance travelled by the car with time. Thus, the graph shown in Fig 7.4 represents motion with non-uniform speed. 7.4.2 VELOCITY-TIME GRAPHS The variation in velocity with time for an object moving in a straight line can be represented by a velocity-time graph. In this graph, time is represented along the x-axis and the velocity = 50 c | 40 > 30 x 0 20 g t, t, 1 2 3 4 Time (h) Fig. 7.5: Velocity-time graph for uniform motion of a car Motion is represented along the y-axis. If the object moves at uniform velocity, the height of its velocity-time graph will not change