moves in the direction in which it was moving at the e Now, let the stone go by releasing the time it was released, just like the piece of thread. stone in the activity described above. There * Can you tell the direction in which are many more familiar examples of objects the stone moves after it is released? . . : . moving under uniform circular motion, e By repeating the activity for a few : times and releasing the stone at such as the motion of the moon and the Fig. 7.9: A stone describing a circular path with avelocity of constant magnitude. different positions of the circular earth, a satellite in a circular orbit around path, check whether the direction in the earth, a cyclist on a circular track at which the stone moves remains the constant speed and so on. same or not. you have learnt Motion is a change of position; it can be described in terms of the distance moved or the displacement. The motion of an object could be uniform or non-uniform depending on whether its velocity is constant or changing. The speed of an object is the distance covered per unit time, and velocity is the displacement per unit time. The acceleration of an object is the change in velocity per unit time. Uniform and non-uniform motions of objects can be shown through graphs. The motion of an object moving at uniform acceleration can be described with the help of the following equations, namely v=utat s=ut+'%at? 2as = v - u? 84 SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 where u is initial velocity of the object, which moves with uniform acceleration a for time , v is its final velocity and s is the distance it travelled in time . co If an object moves in a circular path with uniform speed, its motion is called uniform circular motion. Exercises 1. An athlete completes one round of a circular track of diameter 200 m in 40 s. What will be the distance covered and the displacement at the end of 2 minutes 20 s? 2. Joseph jogs from one end A to the other end B of a straight 300 m road in 2 minutes 30 seconds and then turns around and jogs 100 m back to point C in another 1 minute. What are Joseph s average speeds and velocities in jogging (a) from A to B and (b) from A to C? 3. Abdul, while driving to school, computes the average speed for his trip to be 20 km h!. On his return trip along the same route, there is less traffic and the average speed is 30 km h!. What is the average speed for Abdul s trip? 4. A motorboat starting from rest on a lake accelerates in a straight line at a constant rate of 3.0 m s? for 8.0 s. How far does the boat travel during this time? 5. A driver of a car travelling at 52 km