direction of motion, while he completes one round? It is clear that to move in a rectangular track once, he has to change his direction of motion four times. Now, suppose instead of a rectangular track, the athlete is running along a hexagonal shaped path ABCDEF, as shown in Fig. 7.8(b). In this situation, the athlete will have to change his direction six times while he completes one round. What if the track was not a hexagon but a regular octagon, with eight equal sides as shown by ABCDEFGH in Fig. 7.8(c)? It is observed that as the number of sides of the track increases the athelete has to take turns more and more often. What would happen to the shape of the track as we go on increasing the number of sides indefinitely? If you do this you will notice that the shape of the track approaches the shape of a circle and the length of each of the sides will decrease to a point. If the athlete moves with a velocity of constant magnitude along the circular path, the only change in his velocity is due to the change in the direction of motion. The motion of the athlete moving along a circular path is, therefore, an example of an accelerated motion. We know that the circumference of a circle of radius ris given by 2nr. If the athlete takes tseconds to go once around the circular path of radius r, the speed vis given by (7.8) When an object moves in a circular path with uniform speed, its motion is called uniform circular motion. Reprint 2025-26 Activity 7-11 If you carefully note, on being released the stone moves along a straight line e Take a piece of thread and tie a small tangential to the circular path. This is piece of stone at one of its ends. Move because once the stone is released, it the stone to describe a circular path continues to move along the direction it has with constant speed by holding the ; ; ; thread at the other end, as shown in been moving at that instant. This shows that the direction of motion changed at every point when the stone was moving along the circular path. When an athlete throws a hammer or a discus in a sports meet, he/she holds the hammer or the discus in his/her hand and gives it a circular motion by rotating his/ her own body. Once released in the desired direction, the hammer or discus moves in the direction in which it was moving at the e Now, let the stone go by releasing the time it was released, just like the piece of thread. stone in the activity described above. There * Can you tell the direction in which are many more familiar examples of objects the stone moves after it is released? . . : . moving under uniform circular motion, e By repeating the activity for a few : times and releasing