now correspond to the positions of the points P, F and C, respectively. Remember For a spherical mirror of small aperture, the principal focus F lies mid-way between the pole P and the centre of curvature C. = Keep a bright object, say a burning candle, at a position far beyond C. Place a paper screen and move it in front of the mirror till you obtain a sharp bright image of the candle flame on. it. = Observe the image carefully. Note down its nature, position and relative size with respect to the object size. = Repeat the activity by placing the candle - (a) just beyond C, (b) at C, (c) between F and C, (d) at F, and (e) between P and F. = In one of the cases, you may not get the image on the screen. Identify the position of the object in such a case. Then, look for its virtual image in the mirror itself. = Note down and tabulate your observations. Light Reflection and Refraction Reprint 2025-26 You will see in the above Activity that the nature, position and size of the image formed by a concave mirror depends on the position of the object in relation to points P, F and C. The image formed is real for some positions of the object. It is found to be a virtual image for a certain other position. The image is either magnified, reduced or has the same size, depending on the position of the object. A summary of these observations is given for your reference in Table 9.1. Table 9.1 Image formation by a concave mirror for different positions of the object Position of the Position of the Size of the Nature of the 9.2.2 Representation of Images Formed by Spherical Mirrors Using Ray Diagrams We can also study the formation of images by spherical mirrors by drawing ray diagrams. Consider an extended object, of finite size, placed in front of a spherical mirror. Each small portion of the extended object acts like a point source. An infinite number of rays originate from each of these points. To construct the ray diagrams, in order to locate the image of an object, an arbitrarily large number of rays emanating from a point could be considered. However, it is more convenient to consider only two rays, for the sake of clarity of the ray diagram. These rays are so chosen that it is easy to know their directions after reflection from the mirror. The intersection of at least two reflected rays give the position of image of the point object. Any two of the following rays can be considered for locating the image. (i) A ray parallel to the principal axis, after reflection, will pass through the principal focus in case of a concave mirror or appear to diverge from the principal focus in case of a convex mirror. This is illustrated in Fig.9.3 Figure 9.3 (a) and (b). Science Reprint 2025-26 (ii) A ray