axis ofa lens. What happens when you pass such rays of light through a lens? This is illustrated for a convex lens in Fig.9.12 (a) and for a concave lens in Fig.9.12 (b). Observe Fig.9.12 (a) carefully. Several rays of light parallel to the principal axis are falling on a convex lens. These rays, after refraction from the lens, are converging to a point on the principal axis. This point on the principal axis is called the principal focus of the lens. Let us see now the action of a concave lens. Observe Fig.9.12 (b) carefully. Several rays of light parallel to the principal axis are falling on a concave lens. These rays, after refraction from the lens, are appearing to diverge from a point on the principal axis. This point on the principal axis is called the principal focus of the concave lens. If you pass parallel rays from the opposite surface of the lens, you get another principal focus on the opposite side. Letter F is usually used to represent principal focus. However, a lens has two principal foci. They are represented by F, and F,. The distance of the principal focus from the optical centre of a lens is called its focal length. The letter f is used to represent the focal length. How can you find the focal length of a convex lens? Recall the Activity 9.11. In this Activity, the distance between the position of the lens and the position of the image of the Sun gives the approximate focal length of the lens. Light Reflection and Refraction Reprint 2025-26 9.3.4 Image Formation by Lenses Lenses form images by refracting light. How do lenses form images? What is their nature? Let us study this for a convex lens first. = Take a convex lens. Find its approximate focal length in a way described in Activity 9.11. = Draw five parallel straight lines, using chalk, on a long Table such that the distance between the successive lines is equal to the focal length of the lens. = Place the lens on a lens stand. Place it on the central line such that the optical centre of the lens lies just over the line. = The two lines on either side of the lens correspond to F and 2F of the lens respectively. Mark them with appropriate letters such as 2F,, F,, F, and 2F,, respectively. = Place a burning candle, far beyond 2F, to the left. Obtain a clear sharp image on a screen on the opposite side of the lens. = Note down the nature, position and relative size of the image. = Repeat this Activity by placing object just behind 2F,, between F, and 2F, at F,, between F, and O. Note down and tabulate your observations. The nature, position and relative size of the image formed by convex lens for various positions of the object is summarised in Table 9.4. Table 9.4 Nature, position and relative size of the image formed by a