the lens. Find the power of a concave lens of focal length 2 m. What you have learnt Light seems to travel in straight lines. Mirrors and lenses form images of objects. Images can be either real or virtual, depending on the position of the object. The reflecting surfaces, of all types, obey the laws of reflection. The refracting surfaces obey the laws of refraction. New Cartesian Sign Conventions are followed for spherical mirrors and lenses. Science Reprint 2025-26 1,1_1 Mirror formula, D TL Ff , gives the relationship between the object-distance (uw), image-distance (vu), and focal length (f) of a spherical mirror. The focal length of a spherical mirror is equal to half its radius of curvature. The magnification produced by a spherical mirror is the ratio of the height of the image to the height of the object. A light ray travelling obliquely from a denser medium to a rarer medium bends away from the normal. A light ray bends towards the normal when it travels obliquely from a rarer to a denser medium. Light travels in vacuum with an enormous speed of 3x10%m_s'. The speed of light is different in different media. The refractive index of a transparent medium is the ratio of the speed of light in vacuum to that in the medium. In case of a rectangular glass slab, the refraction takes place at both air-glass interface and glass-air interface. The emergent ray is parallel to the direction of incident ray. Ff? gives the relationship between the object-distance (u), image-distance (v), and the focal length (f) of a spherical lens. Power of a lens is the reciprocal of its focal length. The SI unit of power of a lens is dioptre. Which one of the following materials cannot be used to make a lens? (a) Water (b) Glass (c) Plastic (d) Clay The image formed by a concave mirror is observed to be virtual, erect and larger than the object. Where should be the position of the object? (a) Between the principal focus and the centre of curvature (b) At the centre of curvature (c) Beyond the centre of curvature (d) Between the pole of the mirror and its principal focus. Where should an object be placed in front of a convex lens to get a real image of the size of the object? (a) Atthe principal focus of the lens (b) Attwice the focal length (c) | At infinity (d) | Between the optical centre of the lens and its principal focus. A spherical mirror and a thin spherical lens have each a focal length of-15 cm. The mirror and the lens are likely to be (a) both concave. (b) both convex. Light Reflection and Refraction 159 Reprint 2025-26 (c) the mirror is concave and the lens is convex. (d) the mirror is convex, but the lens is concave. No matter how far you stand from a mirror, your image appears erect. The mirror is likely to be (a) only plane. ) only concave.