at a distance of 30 cm on the other side of the optical centre. The image is real and inverted. Magnification m= rie gnificati hu or, h =h(v/u) Height of the image, h = (2.0) (+30/-15) =- 4.0 cm Magnification m= v/u +30cm or, m= _ =-2 -15cm The negative signs of m and h show that the image is inverted and real. It is formed below the principal axis. Thus, a real, inverted image, 4 cm tall, is formed at a distance of 30 cm on the other side of the lens. The image is two times enlarged. 9.3.8 Power of a Lens You have already learnt that the ability of a lens to converge or diverge light rays depends on its focal length. For example, a convex lens of short focal length bends the light rays through large angles, by focussing them closer to the optical centre. Similarly, concave lens of very short focal length causes higher divergence than the one with longer focal length. The degree of convergence or divergence of light rays achieved by a lens is expressed in terms of its power. The power ofa lens is defined as the reciprocal of its focal length. It is represented by the letter P. The power P of a lens of focal length fis given by P= (9.11) Light Reflection and Refraction Reprint 2025-26 More to Know! The SI unit of power of a lens is dioptre . It is denoted by the letter D. If fis expressed in metres, then, power is expressed in dioptres. Thus, 1 dioptre is the power of a lens whose focal length is 1 metre. 1D = lm". You may note that the power of a convex lens is positive and that of a concave lens is negative. Opticians prescribe corrective lenses indicating their powers. Let us say the lens prescribed has power equal to + 2.0 D. This means the lens prescribed is convex. The focal length of the lens is + 0.50 m. Similarly, a lens of power - 2.5 D has a focal length of- 0.40 m. The lens is concave. Oo OQQOQOQOoogo good OodOoOdO O OD OO OPO OOOO OO OOO ODO D Q UES TION S Define 1 dioptre of power of a lens. A convex lens forms areal and inverted image of a needle at a distance of 50 cm from it. Whereis the needle,placed in front of the convex lens if the image is equal\to_the size of the object? Also, find the power of the lens. Find the power of a concave lens of focal length 2 m. What you have learnt Light seems to travel in straight lines. Mirrors and lenses form images of objects. Images can be either real or virtual, depending on the position of the object. The reflecting surfaces, of all types, obey the laws of reflection. The refracting surfaces obey the laws of refraction. New Cartesian Sign Conventions are followed for spherical mirrors and lenses. Science Reprint 2025-26 1,1_1