of at least two reflected rays give the position of image of the point object. Any two of the following rays can be considered for locating the image. (i) A ray parallel to the principal axis, after reflection, will pass through the principal focus in case of a concave mirror or appear to diverge from the principal focus in case of a convex mirror. This is illustrated in Fig.9.3 Figure 9.3 (a) and (b). Science Reprint 2025-26 (ii) A ray passing through the principal focus of a concave mirror or a ray which is directed towards the principal focus of a convex mirror, after reflection, will emerge parallel to the principal axis. This is illustrated in Fig.9.4 (a) and (b). (a) (b) (iii) A ray passing through the Figure 9.4 centre of curvature of a concave mirror or directed in the direction of the centre [ of curvature of a convex Se mirror, after reflection, is reflected back along the same _ path. This is illustrated in Fig.9.5 (a) and (b). The light rays come back (a (b) along the same path because the incident rays fall on the mirror along the normal to the reflecting surface. Figure 9.5 (iv) A ray incident obliquely to the principal axis, towards a point P (pole of the mirror), on the concave mirror [Fig. 9.6 (a)] or a convex ; . mirror [Fig. 9.6 (b)], is or FO P r E c reflected obliquely. The incident and reflected rays (a) (b) follow the laws of reflection at the point of incidence (point P), making equal Figure 9.6 angles with the principal axis. Remember that in all the above cases the laws of reflection are followed. At the point of incidence, the incident ray is reflected in such a way that the angle of reflection equals the angle of incidence. (a) Image formation by Concave Mirror Figure 9.7 illustrates the ray diagrams for the formation of image by a concave mirror for various positions of the object. Light Reflection and Refraction 139 Reprint 2025-26 At infinity > At infinity (e) () Figure 9.7 Ray diagrams for the image formation by a concave mirror = Draw neat ray diagrams for each position of the object shown in Table 9.1. You may take any two of the rays mentioned in the previous section for locating the image. Compare your diagram with those given in Fig. 9.7. Describe the nature, position and relative size of the image formed in each case. = Tabulate the results in a convenient format. Uses of concave mirrors Concave mirrors are commonly used in torches, search-lights and vehicles headlights to get powerful parallel beams of light. They are often used as shaving mirrors to see a larger image of the face. The dentists use concave mirrors to see large images of the teeth of patients. Large concave mirrors are used to concentrate sunlight to produce heat in solar furnaces. (b) Image formation by a Convex Mirror We studied the image formation by