in such a way that one of its edges makes an angle with the line. = Look at the portion of the line under the slab from the sides. What do you observe? Does the line under the glass slab appear to be bent at the edges? = Next, place the glass slab such that it is normal to the line. What do you observe now? Does the part of the line under the glass slab appear bent? = Look at the line from the top of the glass slab. Does the part of the line, beneath the slab, appear to be raised? Why does this happen? 9.3.1 Refraction through a Rectangular Glass Slab To understand the phenomenon of refraction of light through a glass slab, let us do an Activity. Science Reprint 2025-26 Fix a sheet of white paper on a drawing board using drawing pins. Place a rectangular glass slab over the sheet in the middle. Draw the outline of the slab with a pencil. Let us name the outline as ABCD. Take four identical pins. Fix two pins, say E and F, vertically such that the line joining the pins is inclined to the edge AB. Look for the images of the pins E and F through the opposite edge. Fix two other pins, say G and H, such that these pins and the images of E and F lie on a straight line. Remove the pins and the slab. Join the positions of tip of the pins E and F and produce the line up to AB. Let EF meet AB at O. Similarly, join the positions of tip of the pins G and H and produce it up to the edge CD. Let HG meet CD at O% Join O and O . Also produce EF up to P, as shown by a dotted line in Fig. 9.10. In this Activity, you will note, the light ray has changed its direction at points O and O% Note that both the points O and O lie on surfaces separating two transparent media. Draw a perpendicular NN to AB at O and another perpendicular MM to CD at O% The light ray at point O has entered from a rarer medium to a denser medium, that is, from air to glass. Note that the light ray has bent towards the normal. At O , the light ray has entered from glass to air, that is, from a denser medium to a rarer medium. The light here has bent away from the normal. Compare the angle of incidence with the angle of refraction at both refracting surfaces AB and CD. In Fig. 9.10, a ray EO is obliquely incident on surface AB, called incident ray. OO is the refracted ray and O H is the emergent ray. You may observe that the emergent ray is parallel to the direction of the incident ray. Why does it happen so? The extent of bending of the ray of light at