of it. Further, the image is laterally inverted. How would the images be when the reflecting surfaces are curved? Let us explore. = Take a large shining spoon. Try to view your face in its curved surface. = Do you get the image? Is it smaller or larger? = Move the spoon slowly away from your face. Observe the image. How does it change? = Reverse the spoon and repeat the Activity. How does the image look like now? = Compare the characteristics of the image on the two surfaces. The curved surface of a shining spoon could be considered as a curved mirror. The most commonly used type of curved mirror is the spherical mirror. The reflecting surface of such mirrors can be considered to form a part of the surface of a sphere. Such mirrors, whose reflecting surfaces are spherical, are called spherical mirrors. We shall now study about spherical mirrors in some detail. 9.2 SPHERICAL MIRRORS The reflecting surface of a spherical mirror may be curved inwards or outwards. A spherical mirror, whose reflecting surface is curved inwards, that is, faces towards the centre of the sphere, is called a concave mirror. A spherical mirror whose reflecting surface is curved outwards, is called a convex mirror. The schematic representation of these mirrors is shown in Fig. 9.1. You may note in these diagrams that the back of the mirror is shaded. You may now understand that the surface of the spoon curved inwards can be approximated to a concave mirror and the surface of the spoon bulged outwards can be approximated to a convex mirror. Before we move further on spherical mirrors, we need to recognise and understand the meaning of a few terms. These terms are commonly used in discussions about spherical (a) Concave mirror mirrors. The centre of the reflecting surface of a spherical Figure 9.1 (b) Convex mirror mirror is a point called the pole. It lies on the surface ofthe Schematic representation of spherical mirror. The pole is usually represented by the letter P. mirrors; the shaded side is non-reflecting. Light Reflection and Refraction Reprint 2025-26 At infinity The reflecting surface of a spherical mirror forms a part of a sphere. This sphere has a centre. This point is called the centre of curvature of the spherical mirror. It is represented by the letter C. Please note that the centre of curvature is not a part of the mirror. It lies outside its reflecting surface. The centre of curvature of a concave mirror lies in front of it. However, it lies behind the mirror in case of a convex mirror. You may note this in Fig.9.2 (a) and (b). The radius of the sphere of which the reflecting surface of a spherical mirror forms a part, is called the radius of curvature of the mirror. It is represented by the letter R. You may note that the distance PC is equal to the radius of curvature. Imagine a straight line passing through the