bent away from the normal. Compare the angle of incidence with the angle of refraction at both refracting surfaces AB and CD. In Fig. 9.10, a ray EO is obliquely incident on surface AB, called incident ray. OO is the refracted ray and O H is the emergent ray. You may observe that the emergent ray is parallel to the direction of the incident ray. Why does it happen so? The extent of bending of the ray of light at the opposite parallel faces AB (air-glass interface) and CD (glass-air interface) of the rectangular glass slab is equal and opposite. This is why the ray emerges parallel to the incident ray. However, the light ray is shifted sideward slightly. What happens when a light ray is incident normally to the interface of two media? Try and find out. Now you are familiar with the refraction of light. Refraction is due to change in the speed of light as it enters from one transparent medium to another. Experiments show that refraction of light occurs according to certain laws. Light Reflection and Refraction i N'7r,\\ \ \ Glass >) \\ slab \ \ \ \ i,,\ \ ML Cc oO c \ D Air \ Mt? \ H \p Figure 9.10 Refraction of light through a rectangular glass slab Reprint 2025-26 The following are the laws of refraction of light. (i) The incident ray, the refracted ray and the normal to the interface of two transparent media at the point of incidence, all lie in the same plane. (ii) The ratio of sine of angle of incidence to the sine of angle of refraction is a constant, for the light of a given colour and for the given pair of media. This law is also known as Snell s law of refraction. (This is true for angle 0 < i< 90 ) If iis the angle of incidence and ris the angle of refraction, then, sini - = constant (9.4) sinr This constant value is called the refractive index of the second medium with respect to the first. Let us study about refractive index in some detail. 9.3.2 The Refractive Index You have already studied that a ray of light that travels obliquely from one transparent medium into another will change its direction in the second medium. The extent of the change in direction that takes place in a given pair of media may be expressed in terms of the refractive index, the constant appearing on the right-hand side of Eq.(9.4). The refractive index can be linked to an important physical quantity, the relative speed of propagation of light in different media. It turns out that light propagates with different speeds in different media. Light travels fastest in vacuum with speed of 3x10 ms". In air, the speed of light is only marginally less, compared to that in vacuum. It reduces considerably in glass or water. The value of the refractive index for a given pair of media depends upon the speed