We can represent image formation by lenses using ray diagrams. Ray diagrams will also help us to study the nature, position and relative size of the image formed by lenses. For drawing ray diagrams in lenses, alike of spherical mirrors, we consider any two of the following rays (i) Array of light from the object, parallel to the principal axis, after refraction from a convex lens, passes through the principal focus on the other side of the lens, as shown in Fig. 9.13 (a). In case of a concave lens, the ray appears to diverge from the principal focus located on the same side of the lens, as shown in (a) ie) Fig. 9.13 (b). Figure 9.13 Light Reflection and Refraction 153 Reprint 2025-26 (ii) A ray of light passing through a principal focus, after refraction from a convex lens, will emerge parallel to the principal axis. This is shown in Fig. 9.14 (a). A ray of light appearing to meet at the principal Figure 9.14 focus of a concave lens, after refraction, will emerge parallel to the principal axis. This is shown in Fig.9.14 (b). (ii) A ray of light passing through the optical centre of a lens will emerge without any deviation. This is (a) (b) illustrated in Fig.9.15(a) Figure 9.15 and Fig.9.15 (b). (a) The ray diagrams for the image formation in a convex lens for a few positions of the object are shown in Fig. 9.16. The ray diagrams representing the image formation in a concave lens for various positions of the object are shown in Fig. 9.17. 154 Science Reprint 2025-26 Figure 9.16 The position, size and the nature of the image formed by a convex lens for various positions of the object Figure 9.17 Nature, position and relative size of the image formed by a concave lens 9.3.6 Sign Convention for Spherical Lenses For lenses, we follow sign convention, similar to the one used for spherical mirrors. We apply the rules for signs of distances, except that all measurements are taken from the optical centre of the lens. According to the convention, the focal length of a convex lens is positive and that of a concave lens is negative. You must take care to apply appropriate signs for the values of u, v, f, object height h and image height h . 9.3.7 Lens Formula and Magnification As we have a formula for spherical mirrors, we also have formula for spherical lenses. This formula gives the relationship between objectdistance (u), image-distance (Vv) and the focal length (f). The lens formula is expressed as =A (9.8) The lens formula given above is general and is valid in all situations for any spherical lens. Take proper care of the signs of different quantities, while putting numerical values for solving problems relating to lenses. Light Reflection and Refraction 155 Reprint 2025-26 Magnification The magnification produced by a lens, similar to that for spherical mirrors, is defined as the ratio of the height of the image and the