she was literally on the enormity of the top of the world , Santosh has said, It took some moment avery great time for the enormity of the moment to sink in... Then I unfurled the Indian tricolour and held it aloft on the roof of the world. The feeling is indescribable. The Indian flag was flying on top of the world. It was truly a spiritual moment. I felt proud as an Indian. Also a fervent environmentalist, Santosh collected fervent: having and brought down 500 kilograms of garbage from S' ongand sincere . feelings the Himalayas. sink in: be understood held it aloft: held it up high & % Thinking about the Text I. Answer these questions in one or two sentences each. (The paragraph numbers within brackets provide clues to the answers.) 1. Why was the holy man who gave Santosh s mother his blessings surprised? (1) 2. Give an example to show that even as a young girl Santosh was not ready to accept anything unreasonable. (2) 3. Why was Santosh sent to the local school? (3) Reach for the Top / 87 # Reprint 2025-26 * 4. 5. * Bw When did she leave home for Delhi, and why? (4) Why did Santosh s parents agree to pay for her schooling in Delhi? What mental qualities of Santosh are brought into light by this incident? (4) II. Answer each of these questions in a short paragraph (about 30 words). 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. How did Santosh begin to climb mountains? What incidents during the Everest expedition show Santosh s concern for her team-mates? What shows her concern for the environment? How does she describe her feelings at the summit of the Everest? Santosh Yadav got into the record books both times she scaled Mt Everest. What were the reasons for this? III. Complete the following statements. 1. 2. From her room in Kasturba Hostel, Santosh used to When she finished college, Santosh had to write a letter of apology to her father because During the Everest expedition, her seniors in the team admired her while __SSSSSSsSMeendeaaredd her to fellow climbers. IV. Pick out words from the text that mean the same as the following words or expressions. (Look in the paragraphs indicated.) 1. 2. took to be true without proof (1): based on reason; sensible; reasonable (2): the usual way of doing things (3): a strong desire arising from within (5): the power to endure, without falling ill (7): & 88 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 Part II Maria Sharapova Before You READ e A Russian girl, Maria Sharapova, reached the summit of women's tennis when she was barely eighteen. As you read about her, see if you can draw a comparison between her and Santosh Yadav. Match the following. something disarming quickly, almost immediately at odds with more calm, confident and in control than people of her age usually are glamorous attire in contrast to; not agreeing with in almost no time something that makes