Part II Maria Sharapova Before You READ e A Russian girl, Maria Sharapova, reached the summit of women's tennis when she was barely eighteen. As you read about her, see if you can draw a comparison between her and Santosh Yadav. Match the following. something disarming quickly, almost immediately at odds with more calm, confident and in control than people of her age usually are glamorous attire in contrast to; not agreeing with in almost no time something that makes you feel friendly, taking away your suspiciousness poised beyond her sent off years packed off attractive and exciting clothes launched causing strong feelings of sadness heart wrenching started e As you read, look for the answers to these questions. Why was Maria sent to the United States? Why didn't her mother go with her? What are her hobbies? What does she like? What motivates her to keep going? 1. THERE is something disarming about Maria Sharapova, something at odds with her ready smile and glamorous attire. And that something in her lifted her on Monday, 22 August 2005 to the world number one position in women s tennis. All this happened in almost no time. Poised beyond her years, the Siberian born teenager took just four years as a professional to reach the pinnacle. Reach for the Top / 89 # Reprint 2025-26 Maria Sharapova won the women s singles at Wimbledon in 2004 2. However, the rapid ascent in a fiercely competitive world began nine years before with a level of sacrifice few children would be prepared to endure. Little Maria had not yet celebrated her tenth birthday when she was packed off to train in the United States. That trip to Florida with her father Yuri launched her on the path to success and stardom. But it also required a heart-wrenching two-year separation from her mother Yelena. The latter was compelled to stay back in Siberia because of visa restrictions. The nine-year-old girl had already learnt an important lesson in life that tennis excellence would only come at a price. I used to be so lonely, Maria Sharapova recalls. I missed my mother terribly. My father was working as much as he could to keep my tennis-training going. So, he couldn t see me either. Because I was so young, I used to go to bed at 8 p.m. The other tennis pupils would come in at s& 90 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 hl 10. 11 p.m. and wake me up and order me to tidy up the room and clean it. Instead of letting that depress me, I became more quietly determined and mentally tough. I learnt how to take care of myself. I never thought of quitting because I knew what I wanted. When you come from nothing and you have nothing, then it makes you very hungry and determined ... I would have put up with much more humiliation and insults than that to steadfastly pursue my dream. That toughness runs through Maria even today.