to check it out myself. I check it out: find out found nobody except a few mountaineers. I asked if {the truth) I could join them. To my pleasant surprise, they answered in the affirmative and motivated me to take to climbing. 6. Then there was no looking back for this determined young girl. She saved money and enrolled in a course at Uttarkashi s Nehru Institute of Mountaineering. My college semester in Jaipur was to end in April but it ended on the nineteenth of May. And I was supposed to be in Uttarkashi on the twenty-first. So, I did not go back home; instead, I headed straight for the training. I had to write a headed straight for: letter of apology to my father without whose We" towards permission I had got myself enrolled at Uttarkashi. 7. Thereafter, Santosh went on an expedition every year. Her climbing skills matured rapidly. Also, she developed a remarkable resistance to cold and the altitude. Equipped with an iron will, physical endurance and an amazing mental toughness, she proved herself repeatedly. The culmination of her hard work and sincerity came in 1992, just four years after she had shyly asked the Aravalli mountaineers if she could join them. At barely twenty years of age, Santosh Yadav scaled Mt Everest, becoming the youngest woman in the world to achieve the feat. If her climbing skills, physical fitness, and mental strength impressed her seniors, her concern for others and desire to work together with /ron will, physical endurance and them found her a special place in the ental toughness characterise . Santosh Yadav. hearts of fellow climbers. s& 86 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 vk e 8. During the 1992 Everest mission, Santosh Yadav provided special care to a climber who lay dying at the South Col. She was unfortunately unsuccessful in saving him. However, she managed to save another climber, Mohan Singh, who would have met with the same fate had she not shared her oxygen with him. 9. Within twelve months, Santosh found herself a member of an Indo-Nepalese Women s Expedition that invited her to join them. She then scaled the Everest a second time, thus setting a record as the only woman to have scaled the Everest twice, and securing for herself and India a unique place in the annals of mountaineering. In recognition of her achievements, the Indian government bestowed upon her one of the nation s top honours, top honours: highest the Padmashri. ayvards 10. Describing her feelings when she was literally on the enormity of the top of the world , Santosh has said, It took some moment avery great time for the enormity of the moment to sink in... Then I unfurled the Indian tricolour and held it aloft on the roof of the world. The feeling is indescribable. The Indian flag was flying on top of the world. It was truly a spiritual moment. I felt proud as an Indian. Also a fervent environmentalist, Santosh collected