told him that they did not want a son. The holy man was-7~ also surprised! Nevertheless, he gave the requested blessing ... and as destiny would have it, the blessing seemed to work. Santosh was born the sixth child in a family with five sons, a sister to Reprint 2025-26 five brothers. She was born in the small village of Joniyawas of Rewari District in Haryana. 2. The girl was given the name Santosh , which means contentment. But Santosh was not always content with her place in a traditional way of life. She began living life on her own terms from the start. Where other girls wore traditional Indian dresses, Santosh preferred shorts. Looking back, she says now, From the very beginning I was quite determined that if I chose a correct and a rational path, the others around me had to change, not me. 3. Santosh s parents were affluent landowners who could afford to send their children to the best schools, even to the country s capital, New Delhi, which was quite close by. But, in line with the i Jine with: following prevailing custom in the family, Santosh had to Wh, according to make do with the local village school. So, she decided to fight the system in her own quiet way when the right moment arrived. And the right moment came when she turned sixteen. At sixteen, most of the girls in her village used to get married. Santosh was also under pressure from her parents to do the same. 4. A marriage as early as that was the last thing on e/ast thing: the her mind. She threatened her parents that she /*@stimportantthing would never marry if she did not get a proper education. She left home and got herself enrolled in a school in Delhi. When her parents refused to pay for her education, she politely informed them of her plans to earn money by working part time to pay her school fees. Her parents then agreed to pay for her education. 5. Wishing always to study a bit more and with her father slowly getting used to her urge for more education, Santosh passed the high school examinations and went to Jaipur. She joined Maharani College and got a room in Kasturba Hostel. Santosh remembers, Kasturba Hostel faced the Reach for the Top / 85 # Reprint 2025-26 Aravalli Hills. I used to watch villagers from my room, going up the hill and suddenly vanishing after a while. One day I decided to check it out myself. I check it out: find out found nobody except a few mountaineers. I asked if {the truth) I could join them. To my pleasant surprise, they answered in the affirmative and motivated me to take to climbing. 6. Then there was no looking back for this determined young girl. She saved money and enrolled in a course at Uttarkashi s Nehru Institute of Mountaineering. My college semester in Jaipur was to end in April but