7. % Notes for the Teacher Units 7-9 7 REACH FOR THE Top yp This unit has two biographical pieces that depict persistent endeavours to reach the top. Part II of this unit is taken from a newspaper. The language is very current and idiomatic. An exercise of matching words and phrases to their meanings has been given as a pre-reading activity to facilitate students understanding and appreciation of this part of the text. In this unit students are asked to imagine that they have to give a speech. They may wish to read the texts of well-known speeches such as Nehru s Tryst with Destiny . A speech is a formal use of spoken language. It must be prepared meticulously. The language is formal but should be made powerful by the use of balance ( Ask not what your country can do for you, ask what you can do for your country. Kennedy), imagery ( The light has gone out of our lives Nehru) and other such rhetorical devices. It can be enriched by the use of examples and anecdotes. The Writing task of composing an article for a school magazine can be prepared for by looking at other examples of such articles in newspapers. This task makes a beginning in helping students to write for the print media. Encourage them to work within a given word limit (such as 500 words, or 1000 words), and to use everyday, contemporary language. Help students to write a description of Santosh Yadav s character by drawing their attention to her background, likes and dislikes, her humanity and her contribution to society. KATHMANDU ay Kathmandw is excerpted from Heaven Lake, a travelogue in which Vikram Seth gives an account of what he saw, thought and felt when he travelled from China to Tibet, from Heaven Lake to the Himalayas. The map reading activity and the activity on locating the possible routes (by road, rail or air) from Kathmandu to different places in India are designed to link the lesson to the outside world. Students may wish to consult brochures or travel guides, visit a travel agency or call them on the telephone, speak to people who have been to Nepal, and so on. This is a communicative and authentic task. Reprint 2025-26 To prepare for the second Speaking task, students can listen to cricket/ football commentaries or eyewitness accounts of the Independence Day/ Republic Day parade in class or at home on radio or T.V. Encourage them to observe the use of the language and follow the narration. Have a discussion in the class on the features of the commentary (its language, its liveliness, etc.) A diary can be an opportunity to write freely about our life and the things that happen to us funny, sad, happy, embarrassing or fearful. We also make notes on places we visit or our encounters with people. The Writing task suggests that diary entries can form the basis of a travelogue, and asks students to imagine