the language and follow the narration. Have a discussion in the class on the features of the commentary (its language, its liveliness, etc.) A diary can be an opportunity to write freely about our life and the things that happen to us funny, sad, happy, embarrassing or fearful. We also make notes on places we visit or our encounters with people. The Writing task suggests that diary entries can form the basis of a travelogue, and asks students to imagine a journey to Kathmandu. It may be supplemented by an actual travelogue-writing task given after a long holiday, or after a class trip out of the town. 9. Ir I WERE You cS & This one-act play is to be read aloud in class by assigning roles to students. Draw the students attention to the stage setting, stage directions, description of the characters, their movements, gestures and tonal variations, since these combine to bring out the effect of the play. The play has many examples of wit and irony. Two examples are given in an exercise. You can add a few more for the students to have a clear understanding. The dictionary task in this unit is to help children locate the right meaning from a dictionary for a word they come across while reading. The task draws students attention to signposts such as parts of speech that help match use to meaning. Encourage the students to look at more entries in the dictionary and observe the meanings of words that occur as different parts of speech (adjective, noun, verb). Notes for the Teacher / 83 # Reprint 2025-26 % * 7. Reach for the Top Part I Santosh Yadav Berore You READ e Think for a while and make a list of three to five persons you idolise, or admire very much for their achievements. Your idols may be from any sphere of life sports, medicine, media, or art and culture. Your teacher will then discuss your choices with you to find out who the top five idols of your class are. 1. The only woman in the world who has scaled Mt Everest twice was born in a society where the birth of a son was regarded as a blessing, and a daughter, though not considered a curse, was not generally welcome. When her mother was expecting Santosh, a travelling holy man , giving her his blessing, assumed that she wanted a son. But, to everyone s surprise, the unborn child s grandmother, who was standing close by, told him that they did not want a son. The holy man was-7~ also surprised! Nevertheless, he gave the requested blessing ... and as destiny would have it, the blessing seemed to work. Santosh was born the sixth child in a family with five sons, a sister to Reprint 2025-26 five brothers. She was born in the small village of Joniyawas of Rewari District in Haryana. 2. The girl was given the name Santosh , which means contentment. But Santosh