below with relevant phrases or sentences. Points of Comparison/Contrast Santosh Yadav Maria Sharapova Their humble beginning Their parents approach Their will power and strong desire to succeed Evidence of their mental toughness Their patriotism % gf Thinking about Language Look at the following sentences. They each have two clauses, or two parts each with their own subject and verb or verb phrase. Often, one part (italicised) tells us when or why something happened. e I reached the market when most of the shops had closed. (Tells us when I reached.) e When Rahul Dravid walked back towards the pavilion, everyone stood up. (Tells us when everyone stood up.) e The telephone rang and Ganga picked it up. (Tells us what happened next.) e Gunjan has been with us ever since the school began. (Tells us for how long he has been with us.) I. Identify the two parts in the sentences below by underlining the part that gives us the information in brackets, as shown above. 1. Where other girls wore traditional Indian dresses, Santosh preferred shorts. (Contrasts her dress with that of others) & 92 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 2. She left home and got herself enrolled in a school in Delhi.(Tells us what happened after the first action.) 3. She decided to fight the system when the right moment arrived.(Tells us when she was going to fight the system.) 4. Little Maria had not yet celebrated her tenth birthday when she was packed off to train in the United States. (Tells us when Maria was sent to the U.S.) II. Now rewrite the pairs of sentences given below as one sentence. 1. Grandfather told me about the old days. All books were printed on paper then. What do you do after you finish the book? Perhaps you just throw it away. He gave the little girl an apple. He took the computer apart. You have nothing. That makes you very determined. I never thought of quitting. I knew what I wanted. & &% Dictation Read the passage once. Then close your books. Your teacher will dictate the story to you. Write it down with the correct punctuation and paragraphing. aR wh The Raincoat After four years of drought in a small town in the Northeast, the Vicar gathered everyone together for a pilgrimage to the mountain, where they would pray together and ask for the rain to return. The priest noticed a boy in the group wearing a raincoat. Have you gone mad? he asked. It hasn t rained in this region for five years, the heat will kill you climbing the mountain. I have a cold, father. If we are going to ask God for rain, can you imagine the way back from the mountain? It s going to be such a downpour that I need to be prepared. At that moment a great crash was heard in the sky and the first drops began to fall. A boy s faith was enough to bring about a