room and clean it. Instead of letting that depress me, I became more quietly determined and mentally tough. I learnt how to take care of myself. I never thought of quitting because I knew what I wanted. When you come from nothing and you have nothing, then it makes you very hungry and determined ... I would have put up with much more humiliation and insults than that to steadfastly pursue my dream. That toughness runs through Maria even today. It was the key to her bagging the women s singles crown at Wimbledon in 2004 and to her meteoric rise to the world number one spot the following year. While her journey from the frozen plains of Siberia to the summit of women s tennis has touched the hearts of tennis fans, for the youngster herself there appears to be no room for sentiment. The straight looks and the answers she gives when asked about her ambition make it amply clear that she considers the sacrifices were worth it. I am very, very competitive. I work hard at what I do. It s my job. This is her mantra for success. Though Maria Sharapova speaks with a pronounced American accent, she proudly parades her Russian nationality. Clearing all doubts, she says, I m Russian. It s true that the U.S. is a big part of my life. But I have Russian citizenship. My blood is totally Russian. I will play the Olympics for Russia if they want me. Like any number of teenaged sensations, Maria Sharapova lists fashion, singing and dancing as her hobbies. She loves reading the novels of Arthur Conan Doyle. Her fondness for sophisticated evening gowns appears at odds with her love of pancakes with chocolate spread and fizzy orange drinks. Maria Sharapova cannot be pigeon-holed or categorised. Her talent, unwavering desire to succeed and readiness to sacrifice have lifted her to the top of the world. Few would grudge her the Reach for the Top / 91 # Reprint 2025-26 e * Bw riches she is now reaping. This is what she has to say about her monetary gains from tennis: Of course, money is a motivation. Tennis is a business and a sport, but the most important thing is to become number one in the world. That s the dream that kept me going. % i Thinking about the Text Working in small groups of 4-5 students, go back over the two passages on Santosh Yadav and Maria Sharapova and complete the table given below with relevant phrases or sentences. Points of Comparison/Contrast Santosh Yadav Maria Sharapova Their humble beginning Their parents approach Their will power and strong desire to succeed Evidence of their mental toughness Their patriotism % gf Thinking about Language Look at the following sentences. They each have two clauses, or two parts each with their own subject and verb or verb phrase. Often, one part (italicised) tells us when or why something happened. e I reached the market when most