Natural Resources
and Their Use

Concerned social scientists are clear on what we need to do: we
must move toward a regenerative economy, an economy that
operates in harmony with nature, repurposing used resources,
minimizing waste, and replenishing depleted resources.
We must return to the innate wisdom of nature herself, the
ultimate regenerator and recycler of all resources.

CHAPTER

 Christiana Figueres and
Tom Rivett-Carnac in The Future We Choose 

Fig. 1.1. Dudhsagar waterfall and the railway
bridge, Goa, India

1. How do we categorise natural
resources?

The Big

Questions @
What is the connection between

the distribution of natural
resources and different aspects
of life?
3. What are the implications
of unsustainable use / over
exploitation of natural resources?

0881CHOT

Fig. 1.2. A microhydel plant in Fig. 1.3. An offshore oil rig extracts

Himachal Pradesh the power of flowing petroleum from below the seabed

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Chapter l.indd 2

water converted into electricity

WHEN DOES NATURE BECOME A RESOURCE?

One of the meanings of the word Nature is the totality of life
and non-life forms that are part of our environment but have
not been created by humans. When humans use these for their
sustenance, or create new things from them for consumption,
these elements of Nature become resources . For example, trees
are part of the environment; they exist independently ofhumans.
When we cut them and convert their wood into furniture, we
see the trees as a resource.

Often these entities are not easily accessible. For example, there
may be petroleum in places deep under the ocean that we do
not have the technology to access, or the extraction cost may
be too high; or it may be culturally unacceptable like cutting
trees in sacred groves. So, for an entity to be called a resource, it
should be technologically accessible, and its exploitation should
be economically feasible and culturally acceptable. (Usually, the
word exploitation has a negative connotation; in the context
we use it here, it means extraction, utilisation and consumption
of Natural resources .)

The Earth has treasures, many of which have formed over
millions of years, and which humans have taken and learnt to
use. These include the most obvious ones like water, air and soil,
and also the not-so-obvious ones like coal, petroleum, precious
stones, metal ores, timber, etc.

05-07-2025 16:47:36

; 3 a on > ed 
s a

Fig. 1.4. Gentle ploughing causes minimal Fig. 1.5. Honey from a beehive
disturbance to the underground ecosystem
and retains soil moisture.

DON'T MISS OUT

> In many indigenous traditions of the
world, Nature is considered sacred. You
have read about this. In such traditions,

Nature is a nurturer and nourisher.
. s 9 i 7 oe. = | * ay
> Doyouknow of practices that reflect this? Te, ody
Fig. 1.6. Tulasi puja for wellbeing

THINK ABOUT IT

Take a pause. Look at yourself and the things around you. What
is the origin of each of them? At some point they all lead to
Nature; even the plastic button on your shirt.

In short, we apply the term natural resources to materials and
substances that occur in Nature and are valuable to humans.

CATEGORIES OF NATURAL RESOURCES

In Science, we learn the usefulness of categorisation and naming
 we use some shared characteristics (or criteria) when we
categorise ideas or things; we name the categories so that we can
refer to them with just one word or a short phrase. When these
names and meanings are shared across groups of people, it helps

India and the World: Land and the People
1 - Natural Resources and Their Use

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

us discuss a set of ideas or things without needing to describe
them every time. We can communicate more effectively, too. In
earlier classes, you learnt about living and non-living things. As
soon as we use these words, you know what they mean. This is a
simple example of categories.

We do the same with natural resources.

y THINK ABOUT IT

What might be the different criteria we can use to categorise
natural resources?

One of the ways we could categorise natural resources is based
on the uses we put them to essential for our life, source for
materials and sources for energy.

Resources essential for life

Life could not exist on Earth without the air we breathe, the
water we drink and the food we eat. We take these from the
atmosphere, the rivers and ponds, and through the cultivation
of soil or other living things. We cannot make the air we breathe,
the water we drink, or the soil which gives us food.

Resources for materials

Human beings create physical objects out of Nature s gifts. We
make them for our utility or to create things of beauty that
enrich our lives and those of others a piece of wood can be
transformed into a chair and also carved into a statuette. India s
geographical diversity provides us with a wide variety of natural
resources, from wood to marble, and coal to gold.

Resources for energy

Energy is a cornerstone of modern living electricity for our
buildings, transportation, and all types of production processes.
This energy can come from diverse natural sources: coal, water,
petroleum, natural gas, sunlight, wind, etc.

Chapter l.indd 5

resource as long as glaciers and

ie

Fig. 1.8. We can take timber from the
forest, in limited quantities, for a long

forests exist time if we allow it to regenerate.

Renewable and non-renewable resources

A second way of categorising natural resources could be based on
whether they are renewable or not.

A general principle of Nature is that it functions in a restorative and
regenerative way. Restoration is the process of returning something
to its original healthy state ifit has been degraded or damaged. Nature
heals, renews and maintains herself over time. A cut on your skin
will normally heal; a forest recovers after a wildfire. Regeneration
goes beyond restoration. It is about Nature s ability to create new life
and the conditions for thriving.

We plant trees in areas that may have lost them on account of human
interventions like clearing forests for housing. Planting the types
of trees that were originally growing there restores the ecosystem
 the trees provide food and shelter for birds, squirrels and other
creatures, enabling life to return.

Nature works in cycles where there is no waste. Take a forest. Let s
say a tree falls in the forest. It decomposes with the bacteria, fungi
and insects feeding on it. The tree becomes part of the soil enriching
it. New trees and plants grow from seeds ... eventually some will fall
and the cycle starts again.

These are examples of Nature s principle of restoration and
regeneration in practice.

Renewable resources

Renewable resources exhibit these characteristics over time. Most
of India has abundant sunshine. In the natural course, rivers are

India and the World: Land and the People
1 - Natural Resources and Their Use

05-07-2025 16:47:40

fed regularly by rain and melting glaciers,
forests renew themselves, soil replenishes
itself through natural processes, and so on.

Solar energy, wind energy, energy from
flowing water, timber from forests are
renewable resources as long as we are able
to manage them in a sustainable manner.

However, for them to remain renewable
there is a condition the natural rhythm
of restoration and regeneration must not

Fig. 1.9. Offering arghyam to Surya, be disturbed. If we harvest timber faster
the sun-god, in gratitude.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Arghyam:
offering,
generally
of water, as
a mark of
respect or
gratitude

than the forest can grow trees, we will
eventually deplete the forest. Scientists have shown that through
irresponsible human actions, many of Nature s cycles have been
disturbed. A combination of several factors interacting fossil
fuel-driven industrialisation and the cutting down of forests
for agriculture and other purposes are two of them has led
to rising temperatures that we are experiencing; on account of
this, the glaciers in some places in the Himalayas are melting
at a rate faster than precipitation can replace them. This has
implications on water security for the populations living in the
plains dependent on the water tower .

 ) DON'T MISS OUT

> Traditionally, communities had a system of regulating
(or refraining from) fishing during the spawning season
to enable the maintenance of the fish population.
However, the commercialisation of fishing resulted in
over-fishing. In the case of a type of fish called tuna,
for example, the rapid and extensive decline in their
population led to some agreements on control of fishing.
Nevertheless, this important type of fish that keeps the
ocean ecosystem in balance by consuming smaller fish,
shrimps, etc., is on a decline.

> Do you know of other traditional practices that help the
ecosystem to stay in balance?

We need industries to produce the
goods we consume. The process
also creates wastes that are
frequently discharged into rivers
and other water bodies. Often,
these wastes cannot decay to
become the food of some lifeform.
Instead, it leads to a disturbance
in Nature s cycle of restoration
and regeneration, leading to a
situation where the river becomes
poisonous and cannot support life. without proper treatment

LET'S EXPLORE

Identify human actions in your surroundings that result in |
Nature losing her ability to restore and regenerate. What
types of interventions can be undertaken to restore Nature s
cycle?

~ DON'T MISS OUT

> Ecosystem functions and ecosystem services: Nature
has some inherent ways of working. For example, trees
naturally produce oxygen. When these natural processes
benefit humans, we call them ecosystem services . We
can think of it like this: a forest naturally filters water,
prevents soil erosion, and provides habitat for animals
 these are ecosystem functions. When we benefit from
clean water, protected farmland, and pollinated crops
because of that forest, we are receiving ecosystem services
from Nature.

> Amature tree produces about 275 litres of oxygen per day
(this varies a little depending on the type of tree). Ahuman
being needs about 350 litres of oxygen every day (this can
change based on the type of activity that an individual
engages in, their height and weight, and so on).

India and the World: Land and the People
1 - Natural Resources and Their Use

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

ld

Take up a small research study to assess the types of
renewable resources in your region; you may discuss with
your teacher the geographical area of your study and sources
to access information that you may need. What has been the
change in their status over time? Make a small report that
identifies the reasons for the change and what may be done.

Non-renewable resources

Non-renewable resources are created over long periods. They
cannot be replenished at the rate we use them. For example,
fossil fuels (coal and petroleum), and minerals and metals like
iron, copper and gold, are non-renewable resources. India has
significant quantities of coal reserves. We mine coal to meet
our growing need for energy, but it has been estimated that the
coal reserves in India may last another 50 years; the demand for
electricity has been increasing as the population expands and
development work accelerates. Till more sustainable options
become available widely, we need to use the coal we have
judiciously.

What are the non-renewable resources that you use daily,
directly or indirectly? What are the possible renewable
substitutes? What are some of the steps we can take to
transition to renewables?

DISTRIBUTION OF NATURAL RESOURCES
AND ITS IMPLICATIONS

Natural resources are not evenly distributed across our planet or
even within countries. This uneven distribution shapes human
settlements, trade patterns, international relations, and conflicts
too. Many wars have been fought, and continue to be fought, to
gain control over natural resources.

25 N

20 N

15 N

10 N

70 E 75 E 80 E 85 E 90 E

A

Basse
A
Mumbai Hig

LEGEND
@ Coal

AOil
Iron Ore
 Bauxite
70 E 75 E 80 E 85 E 90 E
Fig. 1.11. Distribution of important minerals

Observe the map in Fig.1.11. Notice the uneven distribution of
important minerals. What types of resources are available in
your region? How are they distributed?

Industries located near natural resources create employment
opportunities for the local people. Townships grow around them
and expand economic opportunities for others, too. More modern
facilities that improve the quality of life become accessible.
However, these benefits are often accompanied by costs, in
the short term as well as in the long term. We have examples
from across the world of people living in resource-rich areas
who have been displaced from their homes to facilitate such

95 E

N oSL N 002 N oS2

N oOL

India and the World: Land and the People
1 - Natural Resources and Their Use

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Fig. 1.12. Shared waters of the
Brahmaputra river

developments. In some cases
their sacred places are under
threat, leading to conflicts.

National and international trade
depend on the geographical
location of natural resources.
Combined with human
knowledge and skills, these can
create unique products like the
Wootz steel. As we know, trade
fuelled the development of large
empires in India.

> Select any two natural resources. Gather information
about their availability across different parts of India.
Mark them on a map. What do you observe about their

distribution? What are the types of economic activities

connected with them?

> Discuss the implications of extracting the natural
resources in those parts for current and future generations. Suggest ways in which we can use Nature s gifts

in responsible ways.

Nature does not pay attention to political boundaries. This

leads to tensions regarding the sharing of natural resources

across states as well as countries. One example is the sharing of

Kaveri River water among Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and

Puducherry; negotiations and deft management were required

to maintain peace and fair sharing. Of course, reaching such
| agreements between neighbouring countries is not easy.

Find out about such a conflict in the international context.
Discuss your findings in the class.

Fig. 1.13. Mettur dam in Tamil Nadu built on the Kaveri river

Having abundant natural resources does not guarantee
economic prosperity. Some regions rich in natural resources
can experience slower economic growth and development a
phenomenon economists call the natural resource curse or
the paradox of plenty . Put very simply, this means that often
having plenty of natural resources does not automatically
mean that a country is rich. Frequently, economies are unable
to develop industries that convert the resources into products
of higher value; the chapter Factors of Production in the latter
part of this book will give you an understanding of this.

India has generally avoided this curse by investing in the
development of such industries to meet our growing needs.

What do you think are the different inputs required to
enable the use of the natural resources available in different
geographical areas?

However, the challenge of balancing resource extraction with
sustainability remains. Understanding and managing natural
resources is a valuable starting point, but human knowledge,
good governance, and strategic planning determine whether
they become lasting benefits or temporary windfalls.

India and the World: Land and the People
1 - Natural Resources and Their Use

Biodiversity
loss:

The decline
in the
variety of
life on Earth

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Chapter l.indd 12

RESPONSIBLE AND WISE USE OF NATURAL
RESOURCES: STEWARDSHIP

Sustaining life on Earth requires that we respect Nature and
use natural resources in a way that enables the restoration and
regeneration of renewable resources, and the responsible and
judicious use of non-renewable ones.

Scientists studying these aspects have warned that the
irresponsible treatment of natural resources has led to pollution,
biodiversity loss and climate change, which has been taking place
at an increased pace in recent years.

Restoration and regeneration of
renewable resources

Here are two examples of how we are pushing the use of natural
resources beyond their capacity to regenerate.

Many farmers in our country extract groundwater for irrigation
purposes. In most states, the extraction rate is greater than the
rate at which the water table is replenished. Over time, this deficit
builds up, leading to higher cost of extraction of groundwater and
eventually to its unavailability. It has been predicted that many
of our growing cities will run out of groundwater soon. Initiatives
to raise groundwater levels have been launched to remedy this.
Traditional practices of water harvesting, rejuvenation of ponds
and tanks, cutting down on wasteful consumption of water,
processing and reusing water are
some of the strategies attempted.

Similarly, the improper use of
chemical fertilisers and pesticides
has led to soil degradation. Traditional farming practices considered
soil to be part of Mother Earth.
Practices like the use of cow dung and
other natural fertilisers, mulching,
multi-cropping, and so on, enabled

injudicious use of chemical fertilisers learn from these practices and apply

05-07-2025 16:47:45

Chapter l.indd 13

them in our current situation to prevent further degradation.
We need to replenish and rejuvenate our soil.

Overexploitation of groundwater:
a caselet from Punjab

A crisis has unfolded in the fertile plains of Punjab where
groundwater resources have been severely depleted. Punjab was
home to the Green Revolution that fed a large proportion of our
population, and contributed to India becoming self-sufficient
in food. Today the same state faces issues of sustainability 
Nature has been exploited beyond regeneration, at least in the
short term. However, this concern is not particular to Punjab; it
affects many other states.

In the 1960s, farmers shifted to high-yielding varieties of wheat
and paddy. These required more water than the traditional seeds,
and farmers began to extract groundwater to meet this need. In
addition, the supply of free power led to the over-pumping of
groundwater (a situation still prevalent in much of India today).
Modern farming techniques also required the use of chemical
pesticides and fertilisers.

The combined effect of these factors is that the groundwater level
in a large part of Punjab (see fig. 1.17) has become inaccessible
till depths of about 30 metres; and the chemicals from the
pesticides and fertilisers have dissolved in the groundwater
causing health hazards.

im

N
$
Z

ee

Fig. 1.15. Extraction of groundwater Fig. 1.16. Wet paddy fields

India and the World: Land and the People
1 - Natural Resources and Their Use

05-07-2025 16:47:49

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

32 00'00" N

31 00'00" N

30 00'00" N

Almost 80% of the area of Punjab has been classified as overexploited ; in other words, we have drawn water at a rate
much greater than at which restoration and rejuvenation of
groundwater is possible.

We can see that food security was ensured for the short term,
but the long-term consequences will take time and effort to heal.

74 00'00" E 75 00'00" E 76 00'00" E 77 00'00" E

Depth to Water Level Map of Punjab State & Chandigarh (U.T.)
(June 2022)

_ 25 50
Kilometers

N 100,00 oZ 

Kapurthala
lar}
N 100,00 ol 

Bathinda Sangrury

Chandigarh

N 100,00 o0 

INDEX
Depth to Water Level (m bg})

Mi 0-2 ji) 10-20
Me 2-5 Mm 20-40
Mm 5-10 ma >40

74 00'00" E 75 00'00" E 76 00'00" E 77 00'00"E

Fig 1.17. Depth to water level map of Punjab and Chandigarh, June 2022
(m bgl = metres below ground level)

Chapter l.indd 15

z SRT et Rt ee = a biased fi : MS <

Fig. 1.18. Jaisalmer fort, Rajasthan. A mud structure built in the

12" century and refurbished later using sandstone.

We cannot imagine life without cement. Our houses, schools
and hospitals and other buildings, bridges, roads and airports,
all require cement. The production of cement has been listed as
one of the most polluting industries. The process of production
releases fine dust that enters our lungs and those of animals
damaging them, settles on leaves of plants decreasing their yields,
and causes soil and water pollution too. The Central Pollution
Control Board has created guidelines for cement factories to
ensure that the pollution is minimised or eliminated.

In addition, thereisa move towards creating alternative materials
that reduce pollution. These include the use of traditional
materials like stone and mud, new plant-based materials and
recycled materials from waste plastic.

\

Fig. 1.19. A community building in Auroville constructed by Auroville Earth Institute
(which holds the UNESCO Chair for Earthen Architecture). This modern building is

made of mud using special techniques.
India and the World: Land and the People
1 - Natural Resources and Their Use

05-07-2025 16:47:52

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Chapter l.indd 16

Traditional materials and methods are being combined with
modern technological advances to create new materials that
are sustainable the process of production is less polluting,
provides local employment, and is designed keeping in mind the
climate of the place.

Vrikshayurveda is an ancient Indian botanical science that
focuses on the study and care of plants and trees. The term
comes from Sanskrit, with vriksha meaning tree and ayurveda
meaning the science of life or health. This traditional knowledge
system dates back several millennia and was formalised in texts
such as Surapala s Vrikshayurveda around the 10" century CE.

It has elaborate recommendations on the specific plants to be
grown on different soil types, and provides intricate methods
for seed collection, preservation, and pre-planting treatments.
Irrigation techniques are _ elaborately described, with
recommendations varying according to plant species, growth
stage, and seasonal conditions. It specifies pest management
strategies through natural repellents and plants that should be
grown together. This form of sustainable agriculture promotes
practices like crop rotation and mixed cropping to maintain soil
health. Vrikshayurveda also offers advice on proper methods of
ploughing soil so as to retain soil moisture as well as facilitate
the growth of living organisms in the soil like fungi, bacteria and
earthworms.

A caselet from Sikkim

Pema s family farm in Sikkim faced
declining yields and mounting
debts from expensive chemical
inputs. When the state government
announced a policy to promote
organic farming throughout the state,
Pema s family decided to try. It was
not an easy transition initially
the yields dropped as the soil was

Fig. 1.20. Organic farming in Sikkim recovering from years of chemical use.

05-07-2025 16:47:53

Chapter l.indd 17

The family switched to compost, prepared natural pest
repellents using neem and garlic, and started growing multiple
crops across the year. After about five years, Pema s farm
was thriving. She was able to sell her cardamom, ginger, and
traditional vegetables at premium prices. In 2016, Sikkim became
a 100 per cent organic state with all of its farmland certified
organic. The effects were transformational local biodiversity
flourished, with beneficial insects and birds returning; tourism
increased as visitors came to see the organic farming model, and
farmers incomes grew by 20 per cent on average. Today, Sikkim
serves as a global model, demonstrating that an entire region
can successfully transition to sustainable agricultural practices
while improving both ecological and economic outcomes.

Responsible and judicious use of resources

In the case of non-renewables we need to ensure that we use the
resources so that they can last long enough for humanity to find
more sustainable alternatives. For example, we need to make
the switch to renewable sources of energy for as many purposes
as we can.

ee f)

ver

Fig. 1.21. Satellite image of one of the largest solar parks in the
world located in Rajasthan. It can generate enough electricity
to power about 15% of the current needs of Rajasthan.

India and the World: Land and the People
1 - Natural Resources and Their Use

05-07-2025 16:47:54

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Chapter l.indd 18

Pi

ener ovis) tn Wm SEED ESD EY ED OE EN TE

Fig. 1.22. Solar farm near Raichur, Karnataka

The International Solar Alliance India s leadership in
renewable energy

India and France launched the International Alliance for Solar
Energy (IASE) in 2015 a coalition of sunshine-rich countries
committed to harnessing solar power. The alliance focuses on
countries blessed with abundant sunlight throughout the year.
India has helped channel billions of dollars into solar projects
across developing nations, sharing technical expertise and
creating affordable financing options. The Bhadla Solar Park
is a symbol of India s solar ambitions, demonstrating how
a country can transition from traditional energy sources to
renewable alternatives. For Indians, this alliance represents
both environmental responsibility and economic opportunity.

Even as we deal with these issues we must be mindful that the
distribution and access to resources, including basic ones like
water and clean air, is often unfair to some sections of society. In
cities, many areas do not receive adequate and regular supply of
drinking water. Air pollution caused by industries and excessive
use of fossil fuels, affects those who are unable to protect
themselves from these hazards.

We must remember our relationship with Nature and act as

stewards of natural resources toward restoration, regeneration,
and sustainability. The Bhagavad Gita refers to lokasangraha,

ES BBA ETT AE BEDE AIT

05-07-2025 16:47:55

the idea that everyone must transcend personal desires and act
for the wellbeing of all. Has the time come for us to consider this
seriously?

Before we move on...

>

>

 Natural resources are materials and substances that
occur in Nature and are valuable to humans.

There are different ways of categorising resources;
renewable and non-renewable are useful categories.

The resource curse can be overcome through investments
in the development of technology and skills.

We need to become vigilant about the rate at which we use
renewables so as not to overexploit them; judicious and
wise use of non-renewables will enable stretching their
use for a longer period of time.

Questions and activities

1.

What can make what is today a renewable resource nonrenewable tomorrow? Describe some actions that can
prevent this from happening.

Name five ecosystem functions that serve humans.

What are renewable resources? How are they different
from non-renewable ones? What can people do to ensure
that renewable resources continue to be available for our
use and that of future generations? Give two examples.

Identify cultural practices in your home and neighbourhood
that point to mindfulness in the use of natural resources.

What are some considerations to keep in mind in the
production of goods for our current use?

India and the World: Land and the People
1 - Natural Resources and Their Use

Chapter l.indd 20

A NOTE ON HISTORY S DARKER PERIODS

History sometimes seems to be full of wars and destruction; it is true that
it rarely focuses on periods when the society is, on the whole, harmonious
and peaceful. But while every country may have had such peaceful eras
and some benevolent rulers, history seems peopled by incompetent,
corrupt or cruel rulers. We find them especially in what we may call
the darker chapters or periods of history, when war, abuse, fanaticism,
bloodshed, etc., suddenly dominate the landscape and inflict suffering
and misery on the whole society or country.

The world over, historians have faced this dilemma: how much attention
should we draw to such darker periods? Should we omit them entirely?
Should we mention them in passing, with most atrocious details left out?
Or should we face them and analyse them so as to understand what made
such developments possible and, hopefully, help avoid their recurrence
in future? The third option is, in our opinion, the best, if it can be done
with enough detachment and sensitivity; it is important to know our
past, pleasant or unpleasant, since the past continues to live with us and
shapes the present.

What do we mean by detachment and sensitivity ? Simply that it is
important to study those darker developments dispassionately, without
blaming anyone living today for them. For instance, you will learn later
that World War II (1939-1945) resulted in millions of deaths worldwide;
Germany then followed a cruel ideology (known as Nazism ) which
believed in the extermination of inferior races and resulted in the
inhuman treatment of some ethnic groups and a brutal rule of occupied
nations. Yet it would be clearly unacceptable to blame today s Germans
for what happened over eight decades ago. Rather, what matters is to
understand what made the Nazi ideology possible, so that similar
ideologies today or tomorrow may be defeated.

The same principle applies to the Tapestry of the Past chapters in this
textbook, which include passages on warfare and instances of cruelty or
brutality. While those happenings cannot be erased or denied, it would
be wrong to hold anyone today responsible for them. Understanding
the historical origin of cruel violence, abusive misrule or misplaced
ambitions of power is the best way to heal the past and build a future
where, hopefully, they will have no place.

08-07-2025 09:54:51