Reshaping India s
Political Map

CHAPTER

Fig. 2.1. An aerial view of the Qutub Minar complex, Delhi

1. How did foreign invasions and
the rise of new dynasties reshape
India s political boundaries
during this period?

The Big ;
Questions @

0881CHO2

2. How did Indian society respond
to invasions? How did India s
economy adapt during times of
political instability?

3. What impact did this period have

on the lives of the people?

1498: Arrival of the

1336: Establishment of Portuquese in India

the Vijayanagara Empire

1206: Establishment of 1398: Timur
the Delhi Sultanate attacks Delhi

t

1347:
Establishment of the
Bahmani Sultanate

1326: Re-establishment
of the Mewar Kingdom

The period in this chapter and the next is often called the latter part
of the medieval period of Indian history. The term medieval (i.e.,
 between two ages ) was originally applied to European history,
roughly from the fall of the Roman Empire (5" century CE) to the
Renaissance (Europe s cultural revival in the 14-16" centuries,
nurtured by the rediscovery of Greek and Roman art and literature).
It was once thought to mark a dark age before the development of
modern science; but, of course, Europe s and India s histories are very
different, so applying the same term medieval to both is not ideal,
and historians do not always agree on which period it covers in India.
We will sometimes have to use the term medieval but for us it simply
means the period from the 11" to the 17" centuries.

In Tapestry of the Past chapters, we have tried to keep as few dates
as possible only those that mark important reference points. You
will find it helpful to keep revisiting the timelines in those chapters.
Revisit the maps too, as they will help you visualise the geography
that was traversed by armies, common people, traders, scholars or
spiritual figures.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Chapter 2.indd 22 05-07-2025 16:55:31

1556: Second Battle
of Panipat; Akbar s
decisive victory

ie pate 1799: Establishment
aldighati; Maharana . : of the Sikh Empire

1699: Formation of Pp
Pratap forced to retreat the Khalsa by Guru

Gobind Singh

1565: Battle of

Talikota, destruction 1754: Beginning
of Vijayanagara city of Maratha
1671: Battle of control of Delhi

Saraighat; the Ahoms
1526: First Battle defeat the Mughals
of Panipat; Babur's
victory establishes the
Mughal Empire

Spellings, spellings ...

Turkic:
Because of difficulties in transcribing the Persian script in Refers to
the Roman script, you will find some alternative spellings in peopies,

. .. eyes anguages,
parentheses here and there. For instance, Khalji or Khilji and cultures
are the same. Similarly, we use here the nowstandard spelling historically

 ; . . , ; associated
of Mughal spelling, but alternatives such as Mughul or with a vast
 Moghul are still sometimes used. region

stretching
A new era in India s journey began in the early 11 century. across

Central Asia,
Invasions from beyond the Hindu Kush mountains reshaped all the way to

India s political map. No doubt, India had seen much warfare in Turkey and
earlier periods, but the spate of invasions by people from outside Siberia.
the Indian subcontinent during this period was unprecedented.

Many of these invaders were Central Asian Turkic or Afghan.

They were drawn to India not only for her reputed riches and

for territorial ambitions, but also often to spread, by force of

violence if necessary, their own versions of their religion.

2 - Reshaping India s Political Map

Tapestry of the Past

Let us now explore in this chapter the ever-changing landscape
of India from the 13" century onward.

Chapter 2.indd 23 05-07-2025 16:55:31

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

30 N

20 N

10 N

70 E 80 E 90 E

LEGEND

)) Eastern Ganga Territory
under Narasimhadeva (1264)

IN) Hoysala Territories (1300)
(I1]] Extent of Tughlaq Dynasty (1335)
> Extent of Lodi Dynasty (1479)

@ Important cities

70 E 80 E 90 E

Fig. 2.3. A comparison of the territories under the Tughlaqs and the Lodis
(13 to 15" centuries), and regional powers in the south and east.

40 N

30 N

20 N

10 N

Chapter 2.indd 25

Fig. 2.4. The Qutub Minar. Fig. 2.5. A section of the Quwwat-ul-Islam (Might of Islam ) mosque
in Delhi s Qutub Minar complex; its construction began in Qutub-ud-din Aibak s time (early

13 century) and was completed by later sultans. An inscription states that materials from 27
destroyed Hindu and Jain temples were used in the construction, some of which can be seen here.

RISE AND FALL OF THE DELHI SULTANATE

We begin our journey here with the Delhi Sultanate, formed
after the defeat in 1192 of King Prithviraj Chauhan, who ruled
over parts of northwestern India. This Sultanate saw the rule
of five successive foreign dynasties of Turkic-Afghan origin 
the Mamluks (or Slave dynasty ), the Khiljis (or Khaljis), the
Tughlagqs, the Sayyids, and the Lodis (or Lodhis). While certain
parts of northern India came under the control of the Delhi
Sultanate, neighbouring kingdoms, such as the Eastern Gangas
in the east and the Hoysalas in the south resisted its advance
(Fig. 2.3) and also emerged as thriving centres of art, culture,
and administration. The city of Delhi also assumed a bigger role
in the political landscape of northern India.

The Sultanate period was marked by political instability
combined with efforts at territorial expansion. This resulted in
military campaigns that raided villages and cities, and plundered

Sultanate:

A territory
ruled by

a Sultan 
 atitle
that some
Muslim
rulers
adopted.

2 - Reshaping India s Political Map

Tapestry of the Past

05-07-2025 16:55:34

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Ala-ud-din : _ Ag - 10.7 gms
me Khilji a

Fig. 2.6. A coin minted by Ala-ud-din Khilji, which
bears the inscription Sikander Sani or the
second Alexander in Persian.

LET'S EXPLORE

and destroyed temples and
seats of learning. Successions
(the appointments of new
sultans) were often violent:
almost two sultans out of
three seized power by
eliminating their predecessor, so that a sultan s
average reign was _ hardly
more than nine years!

Looking at Fig. 2.6, why do you think Ala-ud-din Khilji called

himself the second Alexander ?

At the turn of the 14" century, Ala-ud-din Khilji conducted
military campaigns over large areas of north and central India,
sacking and plundering many cities; at the same time, he also
repelled several invasions by Mongol forces, who were trying to
add India to the vast Mongol Empire (it covered most of Asia at

the time).

His slave-general Malik Kafur expanded the Sultanate s reach
southward, conquering several kingdoms on the way; their
plundered wealth helped finance the Sultanate s enormous
military apparatus. He also attacked a number of Hindu centres
such as Srirangam, Madurai, Chidambaram, and possibly

Rameswaram.

LET US EXPLORE

What kind of resources do you think were needed to maintain
an army and wage war in those days? Discuss in groups the
various types of expenditure involved, from weapons or food
for soldiers to animals used in warfare, road construction, etc.

A few decades later, Muhammad bin Tughlag (or Tughluq )
ruled Delhi and expanded the Delhi Sultanate s territories
further. For the first time since the Mauryan Empire, most of

Chapter 2.indd 27

the Subcontinent was now
under one ruler. Although
this dominance was
significant, it proved to be
short-lived. Muhammad
bin Tughlag had ambitious
schemes, but they were
often poorly executed. One
such was moving his capital
from Delhi to Daulatabad
(then called Devagiri ,
near present-day Sambhaji
Nagar); perhaps he thought
its more central location
would offer better control
of the empire. The people
were forced to travel over
1,000 km, and a few years
later, as his plan misfired,
he shifted the capital back
to Delhi; both transfers
resulted in great loss of
life according to some
sources. Another instance
was the introduction of
 token currency , where
cheap copper coins were

Fig. 2.7. A 19"-century painting depicting
Muhammad bin Tughlag in his court

declared to be tokens and have the value of silver or gold coins
 although this was a progressive idea (most of our currency
today is actually token ), at the time this created confusion in
the trade and encouraged people to counterfeit copper coins, all
of which caused the economy to decline.

The sultans and their court elite lived in luxurious palaces,
enjoying elaborate clothing, jewelled ornaments and fine food.
This wealth was largely derived from plunder from their military
campaigns, taxes levied on common people and conquered
regions, and engagement in slave trade (as enslaved people

2 - Reshaping India s Political Map

Tapestry of the Past

05-07-2025 16:55:34

re

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Iconoclasm:
The rejection
or destruction

of icons or

ligious images
considered
idolatrous.

provided free labour or were sent away to distant Central Asia
to be sold). But plunder, in turn, affected trade networks and
agricultural production. This period also witnessed numerous
attacks on sacred or revered images in Buddhist, Jain and Hindu
temples; such destruction was motivated not just by plunder but
also by iconoclasm.

Y THINK ABOUT IT

Infidel:
Literally,
someone
who does
not share
the faith

(of a given
religion). For
medieval
Christianity,
infidels were
Muslims or
Pagans; for
medieval
Islam,
infidels were
Christians
or, in the
context

of India,
Hindus,
Buddhists or
Jains.

Why do we use the term image rather than common terms
like idol or icon ? The latter two terms are considered
pejorative in the context of Judaism, Christianity and Islam,
whose orthodox sects condemn idolatry or the worship of
 idols or icons .

India s classical texts used words like murti, vigraha, pratima,
rupa, etc., to designate images, often statues, used for worship
in temples or homes. In English, image is a neutral term.

Some of the sultans also imposed the jizya, a tax on nonMuslim subjects to grant them protection and exemption
from military service. In practice, depending on the ruler, this
discriminatory tax would be a source of economic burden and
public humiliation, and formed a financial and social incentive
for subjects to convert to Islam. At the end of the 14" century,
Timur, a brutal Turkic-Mongol conqueror from central Asia,
invaded northwest India and launched a devastating attack
on Delhi, then a thriving city. As he wrote in his memoirs, his
two-fold objective was to wage war with the infidels and to
gain something by plundering the wealth of the infidels. 
Large numbers were killed or enslaved, and the city was left
in ruins. Timur soon withdrew from India with huge plunder,
leaving chaos behind. In the aftermath, the Lodis emerged and
established the last dynasty of the Delhi Sultanate. By then,
however, its territory had shrunk considerably in the face of
increasing resistance from other states and kingdoms from
within India (see Fig. 2.3).

Resistance to the Delhi Sultanate

Throughout its rule, the Delhi
Sultanate faced resistance
from many quarters. While
many kingdoms fell into its
net, it failed to subdue the
Eastern Ganga kingdom (see
Fig. 2.3) of Kalinga, which
included present-day Odisha
and parts of Bengal and
Andhra Pradesh. One of its
rulers in the mid-13" century,
Narasimhadeva I (also spelt
Narasingha Deva I), was noted
for the military strength and
cultural brilliance he brought
to the kingdom. Apart from
repelling multiple inroads of
the Sultanate, he defeated the
Delhi Sultanate s governor of
Bengal. Partlytocommemorate Lig *
these victories, he built the mw)

famed Suryatemple at Konark Fig. 2.8. A statue depicting Narasimhadeva I seated
(present-day Odisha). on his throne, surrounded by attendants and

musicians.
Y THINK ABOUT IT

During the time of the Tughlaqs, the Musunuri Nayakas,
Telugu chieftains, rallied over 75 more chieftains of the region,
formed a confederacy that defeated smaller provinces, formed
a confederacy that defeated the Delhi Sultanate forces, and
expelled Muhammad bin Tughlaq s army from Warangal
(present-day Telangana) around 1330-1336. Do you think it
would have been an easy task to bring together 75 leaders in
those days?

2 - Reshaping India s Political Map

Tapestry of the Past

 

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

We mentioned earlier Alaud-din s push to the South,
attracted by its renowned
wealth. At the time, the
Hoysalas ruled parts of
southern India (mostly
present-day Karnataka,
see Fig. 2.3) and fended off
several attacks from the
Delhi Sultanate, remaining
the only independent
kingdom in the south.
However, weakened by
these attacks and internal
conflicts, the Hoysala
kingdom declined and,
in the mid-14" century,
was absorbed into the

a

Fig. 2.9 The Hoysalas built magnificent temples, for Vijayanagara Empire

instance those of Belur (this picture) and Halebidu.

ci, DON'T MISS OUT

Rana:

A title
often
used for
Rajput
kings

further south (see below).

The sculpture in Fig. 2.9 narrates the story behind the
Hoysalas emblem. Kannada folklore recounts the story of
Sala, a young man who fought a lion to save his guru, giving
the dynasty its name Hoy (strike)! Sala .

The Delhi Sultanate also faced rebellions from the emergence
of several independent regional Sultanates. The Bahmani
Sultanate, for instance, rose in the mid-14" century and
controlled much of the Deccan for a while. Powerful Sultanates
also emerged in Gujarat, Bengal and other regions, leading to
a complex interplay of alliances and frequent wars. Parts
of Rajasthan also remained beyond the reach of the Delhi
Sultanate; in the 15" century, it faced stiff resistance from Rana
Kumbha, the ruler of the Mewar kingdom, who also successfully
repelled invasions from these later sultanates.

Fig. 2.10. A view of the Kumbhalgarh Fort in the Aravalli hills

~) DON'T MISS OUT |

Kumbhalgarh Fort (Fig. 2.10) was built by Rana Kumbha in the
15" century in the Aravalli hills and served as a stronghold for
the rulers of Mewar, a prominent Rajput kingdom (in the central
and southern parts of today s Rajasthan). Surrounded by forests
and steep slopes, it is famous for its massive 36-kilometre-long
wall, one of the longest continuous walls in the world.

LET'S EXPLORE

Why do you think such locations were chosen for many of f
the medieval forts? Discuss pros and cons. (Hint: think of \ 5

issues of strategy, security, vulnerability, etc.)

THE VIJAYANAGARA EMPIRE

While the Delhi Sultanate grew politically more unstable, a
new centre of power emerged in the south. In the 14" century,
two brothers, Harihara and Bukka, who had initially served as
governors under Muhammad bin Tughlagq, eventually rejected
Delhi s authority, and established an independent kingdom that
became a significant force in southern India and grew into the
Vijayanagara Empire.

2 - Reshaping India s Political Map

Tapestry of the Past

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

gp ee

Fig. 2.11. A section of the ruins of Vijayanagara city (present-day Hampi).
The large building is the Viripaksha temple.

According to popular folklore, Harihara and Bukka witnessed
a remarkable sight at Hampi (in present-day Karnataka) a
hare turning around and chasing a pack of hounds, symbolising
unexpected strength and courage. When they recounted this
incident to their guru, Vidyaranya, he interpreted it as a symbol
of resilience and bravery, and advised them to establish their
capital at that very spot.

To the north of the Vijayanagara Empire (see Fig. 2.12), the Bahmani
Sultanate was a major rival; it eventually fragmented into five
independent states called the Deccan Sultanates Bijapur,
Golconda, Berar, Ahmednagar, and Bidar each ruled by former
governors or tarafdars who declared autonomy. The Vijayanagara
rulers battled with the first two, as well as with the Gajapati rulers
of Odisha in the east.

Y THINK ABOUT IT

Have you noticed the term pati in titles like Gajapati ? Pati
means lord or master and was commonly used by many
ruling dynasties of this period to signify power and stature. The
Vijayanagara kings were called Narapati , the BahmaniSultanate
rulers Ashwapati , and the Maratha rulers Chhatrapati each
title reflecting different aspects of kingship and power. Can you
guess what these three terms might mean?

25 N

20 N

15 N

10 N

 (Kozhikode)
; =" . . PAN AY IE fi
% zy 2 a
~~ 5, ae Fe 4 a4

\ % (O- %G is

Berar
(Achalpur)

Ahmednagar

Bijapur
(Vijayapura)

Vijayanagara
(Hampi)

Calicut

LEGEND

[]] Gajapati Kingdom (1458)
| Bahmani Sultanate (1477)

Vijayanagara Empire (1509)
Vijayanagara Empire under
CL] Krishnadevaraya (1529)

@ Important cities

80 E 85 E

Fig. 2.12. Kingdoms in the Deccan and the Vijayanagara Empire

N02

NOL

2 - Reshaping India s Political Map

Tapestry of the Past

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Chapter 2.indd 34

Krishnadevaraya

In the 16" century, the Vijayanagara Empire reached its peak
under its celebrated ruler, Krishnadevaraya, who expanded
and secured the empire s dominance over the Deccan. Under
his rule, the empire achieved both military power and cultural
renaissance. He patronised poets and scholars in Sanskrit,
Telugu and Kannada; he himself composed an epic poem in
Telugu, Amuktamdlyada, on the story of the Tamil poet-saint
Andal; one section of the work is a Rdjaniti ( royal policy ) where
he expounded his ideas of good governance. Krishnadevaraya
provided grants to many temples, including Tirupati in Andhra
Pradesh and the Vitthala temple in his own capital Vijayanagara,
which displayed many grand temples, palaces and other
buildings.

Fig. 2.13. The mahamandapa (great hall) of the Vitthala temple; note the
grandeur and intricacy of the architecture, in particular the finely sculpted
monolithic pillars; when struck, their smaller columns give out different

musical notes hence their name musical pillars !

05-07-2025 16:55:39

_- DON'T MISS OUT

Foreign travellers visited Vijayanagara for trade. Portuguese
travellers, in particular, were very well treated, as they came to
sell horses and the king did not want them to go and sell those
precious horses to enemy kingdoms!

One of them, Domingo Paes, left a long and detailed record of his
stay in the Vijayanagara capital. An excerpt: This city ... seemed
to me as large as Rome, and very beautiful to the sight; there
are many groves of trees within it, in the gardens of the houses,
and many conduits of water which flow into the midst of it, and
in places there are lakes... The people in this city are countless
in number... This is the best provided city in the world... The
streets and markets are full of laden oxen ... you could find in
great abundance everything that you wanted. 

Fig. 2.14. A panel from the Vitthala temple

LET'S EXPLORE

In Fig. 2.14, what elements do you observe? What do they tell
you about life then? (Hint: observe the weapons, the animals,
the activities.)

2 - Reshaping India s Political Map

Tapestry of the Past

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Chapter 2.indd 36

After winning many wars against his _ neighbours,
Krishnadevaraya died of illness in 1529. In 1565, the Deccan
Sultanates formed a coalition and defeated the Vijayanagara
forces led by Ramaraya, Krishnadevaraya s son-in-law, at the
Battle of Talikota. The city was sacked over several months;
houses, shops, buildings, palaces and most of its temples were
destroyed, and much of its civilian population massacred; it was
left in ruins. After this, the empire got fragmented into smaller
regions ruled by Nayakas, who were former military governors;
the empire came to an end in the mid-17 century.

THE MUGHALS

While the Delhi Sultanate
weakened, Babur, a TurkicMongol ruler and military
strategist who, having been
thrown out of Samarkand
(modern-day Uzbekistan),
turned his sights to India. A
descendant of Timur, Babur
defeated Ibrahim Lodi at
Panipat in 1526, which will
later be called the First
Battle of Panipat ; it relied
heavily on gunpowder, field
artillery, and matchlock
guns, which had recently
been introduced in warfare
in India. That defeat put
a final end to the Delhi
Sultanate and laid the
foundation of the Mughal
Empire, as Babur assumed
control of the Delhi throne.

Fig. 2.15. The battle of Panipat
as depicted in a copy of the
Baburnama. Note the use of
cannons.

05-07-2025 16:55:41

Babur and India

Babur left a candid autobiography of great historical value, Baburnama
( Babur s Memoirs ). In it, he comes out as cultured and intellectually
curious, with a keen appreciation for architecture, poetry, animals (birds
in particular, many of which he lists in some detail) and flora (fruit trees
especially). But he was also a brutal and ruthless conqueror, slaughtering
entire populations of cities, enslaving women and children, and taking
pride in erecting towers of skulls made from the slaughtered people of
plundered cities.

Babur was nostalgic about Central Asia and found India to be a country
of few charms ; at the same time, he acknowledged, Hindustan is a large
country and has masses of gold and silver. ... Through the rainy season,
the air is remarkably fine, not to be surpassed for healthiness and charm.
... There are countless artisans and workmen of every sort in Hindustan. 
Perhaps for the last reasons, especially India s wealth, he decided to stay
and build his empire in India rather than return to Central Asia.

THINK ABOUT IT

What strikes you in Babur s impressions of India? Discuss in
groups.

After Babur s death in 1530, his son Humayun struggled to hold
the empire together. Taking advantage of this, Sher Shah Suri, a
powerful Afghan leader, established the Sur Empire over large
parts of north India and introduced many lasting reforms; the
empire was short-lived, however, as Humayun soon reconquered
the lost ground.

Before this happened, Himu (or Hemu), a skilled military
commander and chief minister ( wazir ) under one of the last
Suri rulers, captured Delhi and ruled it briefly under the royal
name of Hemchandra Vikramaditya. Though enjoying some
military successes, he was injured on the battlefield (the Second
Battle of Panipat) when confronted by Babur s grandson, Akbar.
Captured, Himu was brought to Akbar, who had him beheaded.
Akbar soon reclaimed Delhi for the Mughals.

2 - Reshaping India s Political Map

Tapestry of the Past

Akbar

Declared emperor at the age of 13 upon his father Humayun s
accidental death, Akbar set out to bring the entire Subcontinent
under Mughal control; his reign was a blend of brutality and
tolerance, shaped by ambition and strategy.

In early conquests, following many of his predecessors 
examples, he showed no mercy at the fort Chittor (or Chittorgarh,
in Rajasthan), which he besieged for more than five months in
the face of determined resistance from the Rajput soldiers. They
inflicted heavy losses on the Mughal army, but, the fort finally
breached, died fighting in large numbers, while hundreds of
women committed jauhar (see box). Akbar ordered the massacre
of some 30,000 civilians, and the surviving women and children
were enslaved. Akbar was 25 at the time, and he sent a message
of victory which read, We have succeeded in occupying a
number of forts and towns belonging to the infidels and have
established Islam there. With the help of our bloodthirsty sword,
we have erased the signs of infidelity from their minds and have
destroyed temples in those places and also all over Hindustan. 

Akbar followed his predecessors
What is jauhar? in this thought of his:
 A monarch should be ever
intent on conquest, otherwise
his enemies rise in arms against
him. As his empire grew (Fig.
2.16), he increasingly used
political strategies to stabilise it;
he entered into marriage alliances
with princesses of neighbouring
kingdoms, welcomed _ Rajput
and regional leaders into his
court, abolished the jizya, and
promoted the doctrine of sulh-ikul literally, peace with all or
tolerance of all faiths. Through
interfaith dialogues, appointment

When invading Turkic or Mughal
armies conquered a territory, they
often took the women as slaves or
abused them. There are historical
examples of Rajput women
jumping into mass fires to avoid
being captured and enslaved; this
jauhar was considered a_ heroic
act of final resistance and a means
of preserving one s honour. Thus,
when Akbar finally broke into the
Chittorgarh Fort, hundreds of Rajput
women, led by their queens and
noblewomen, committed jauhar.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

SS

Chapter 2.indd 38 05-07-2025 16:55:41

30 N

20 N

10 N

70 E 80 E 90 E

a

Cuttack

Hh BAY OF

Machilipatnam BENGAL

Mumbai

ARABIAN
SEA
LEGEND

Mughal Empire under
Akbar (1605)

Mughal expansion under
Aurangzeb (1700)

 _ Rajput Territories (1751)
250 500km i , [lig Ahom Kingdom (1826)
Sikh Empire (1839)

Kanchipuram |

INDIAN

@ Important cities

70 E 80 E 90 E

Fig. 2.16. The Mughals and the rise of regional powers at different periods.

of Hindu officials in high positions and other bold reforms, Akbar
expanded and stabilised his empire, even gaining the support
of many Rajput rulers. His court historian and biographer
Abul Fazl recorded him as stating, Formerly I persecuted
men into conformity with my faith and deemed it Islam.

10 N 20 N

2 - Reshaping India s Political Map

Tapestry of the Past

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

As I grew in knowledge,
I was overwhelmed with
shame. Not being a Muslim
myself, it was unmeet [i.e.,
inappropriate] to force
others to become such.
What constancy is to be
expected from proselytes
[i.e., converted people] on
compulsion? 

His long reign lasted
almost 50 years (1556 to
his death in 1605); while
its middle period was
relatively peaceful, the
final 15 years involved
fresh military campaigns
in Kashmir, Sindh, the
Deccan, and Afghanistan.

Fig. 2.17. Painting showing
Akbar in his court receiving
scholars, including two
Jesuits (dressed in black).

Why do you think Akbar employed different strategies to
expand his empire, while the earlier rulers of Delhi relied
mostly on military might?

LET'S EXPLORE

Compare the maps in Figs. 2.3, 2.12 and 2.16. What differences
do you notice? What is the reshaping that has occurred?

Fig. 2.18. The five-storied Panch Mahal at Fatehpur Sikri, a city built by
Akbar near present-day Agra

Despite being illiterate, Akbar became keen to explore Persian
and Indian texts, and showed great interest in classical Indian
thought and often invited scholars to his court (Fig. 2.17). He
established a house of translation at Fatehpur Sikri where
he had major Sanskrit texts translated into Persian, including
the Mahabharata (Razmnama in Persian, or the Book of War ),
the Ramayana (with 176 beautiful miniature paintings), the
Bhagavad Gita, and the Pafichatantra.

Akbar s son Jahangir shared with his father a love for art and
architecture and tried to expand the empire into the Deccan. His
son Shah Jahan fought several rebellions andis best remembered

2 - Reshaping India s Political Map

Tapestry of the Past

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Chapter 2.indd 42

 

j E . DIEU Dy pn eo elo if wah
| None ase Per Herdasinge fpisy

bunilen : lear) Naor pea bat bala esa

ite sesh rh ister ea

rink, of! 4

{i

Aurangzeb

Rpphesennatoi | |
\ Sie ian hess PL Deca: iis

 Vlnssrcsoetag

as the builder of the
Taj Mahal at Agra.
The Taj Mahal is even
today recognized
as one of the great
architectural marvels
of the world. This
period formed the
peak of an immense
flowering of art and
architecture, which
included the building
of Humayun s tomb
in Delhi and the Red
Forts in Delhi and
Agra. Other classical
arts and music of
India also flourished
during this period,
as also remarkable
works of calligraphy
and miniature
painting.

Fig. 2.19. A miniature
painting illustrating the
Persian translation of the
Ramayana and depicting
the well-known episode
of Rama chasing the
golden deer.

We mentioned earlier the frequent violent successions during
the Sultanate period; this was repeated during the succession
of Shah Jahan, who fell ill in 1657. He wished the throne to
go to Dara Shikoh, his eldest son, but Dara s younger brother

05-07-2025 16:55:44

Aurangzeb defeated him in a series of battles and eventually
executed him, presenting his severed head to their father.
Aurangzeb also removed his two other brothers he had one
arrested and executed, and drove the second into exile. To
prevent further challenge to his rule, Aurangzeb imprisoned his
father Shah Jahan in the Agra Fort, where he remained until his
death. Aurangzeb crowned himself emperor in 1658 and named
himself Alamgir or conqueror of the world ; he ruled for almost
49 years.

Y THINK ABOUT IT

We saw above that Delhi sultans average reign lasted about
nine years. This figure becomes 27 years in the case of Mughal
emperors up to Aurangzeb; and 16 years if we consider all
Mughal rulers, up to the end of the empire in the 19" century.
What do you make of these numbers of years of reign?

Aurangzeb, skilled in military matters, conducted many
campaigns, conquering parts of the South in particular. Under
his reign the Mughal empire reached its greatest expansion (see
Fig. 2.16), though constantly faced with significant rebellions,
some of which we will turn to in the next section. Aurangzeb
had to spend the last 25 years of his life fighting war after war
in the Deccan. Maintaining large armies for those campaigns
depleted the empire s treasury and put a great strain on the
administration; indeed, this is often considered one of key
factors in the rapid decline of Mughal power after Aurangzeb s
death in 1707.

Aurangzeb, who belonged to Islam s Sunni sect, was deeply
religious; he led an austere life, and, unlike Akbar, observed all
religious rituals and occasions. He gradually banned practices
he regarded as un-Islamic, such as music and dance in his
court, and reimposed the jizya tax on non-Muslims as well as a
pilgrimage tax on Hindus travelling to their sacred places (both
of which had been abolished by Akbar).

2 - Reshaping India s Political Map

Tapestry of the Past

 

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Chapter 2.indd 44
& Pa 3 $F i y
Hy bP 3 af, a z geet e Sh,

Fig. 2.20. Aurangzeb in court, holding a hawk, with one of his sons standing in front of

him (17*-century painting).

Some scholars argue that Aurangzeb s motives were primarily
political, that is, to establish and strengthen his empire s
dominance; they also give examples of grants and assurances
of protection he gave to some temples. While politics did play
a part in his decisions, Aurangzeb s own farmans (or firmans,
i.e., edicts) make his personal religious motive clear too. In
1669, for instance, he ordered governors of all provinces to
demolish schools and temples of the infidels and put down
their teachings and religious practices. Temples at Banaras
(present-day Varanasi), Mathura, Somnath, among many others,
were destroyed, as well as Jain temples and Sikh gurudwaras.
This aspect of Aurangzeb was also visible in his persecution of
Muslims of other sects, including Sufis, and of Zoroastrians (the
religion of Parsis in India, originally from Persia).

05-07-2025 16:55:45

LET'S EXPLORE

In his last letters to two of his sons, Aurangzeb wrote, I came
alone and am going away alone. I know not who! am and what
I have been doing. ... 1 have not done well for the country and
the people, and of the future there is no hope. I was helpless
[in life] and I am departing helpless. What do these words
tell us about Aurangzeb? How do you feel about them?

y THINK ABOUT IT

Some of the invaders and rulers mentioned above committed
terrible deeds and atrocities. Many more could have been
mentioned. As the Note on History s Darker Chapters on page
20 makes clear, we must keep in mind that this is about people
in the past, not people of today. We need to know the facts of
the past, and the victims of these atrocities deserve our respect
and remembrance. But it is important to keep in mind that we,
today, bear no responsibility for actions of individuals hundreds
of years ago.

RESISTANCE TO THE MUGHALS

Let us survey some of the major rebellions that ended up eroding
the Mughal power (keeping the special case of the Marathas for
the next chapter).

Over the centuries, many peasant communities rebelled against
harsh exploitation. One such case, in the 17" century, involves the
Jat peasantry (in present-day western Uttar Pradesh, Haryana
and eastern Rajasthan), who managed to kill an oppressive
officer of the Mughal administration. In a subsequent battle,
20,000 men confronted the Mughal army and fought valiantly,
but their Jat leader was killed and the rebellion suppressed.

Many tribal groups the Bhils, the Gonds, the Santhals, the
Kochs, for instance also fought back against attempts to
annex their territory or impose taxes on them. While some of
these groups were subdued or gradually integrated into the

2 - Reshaping India s Political Map

Tapestry of the Past

 

Delhi Sultanate or the Mughal Empire, others especially those
inhabiting forested, hilly, or remote regions managed to
maintain some degree of independence.

Rani Durgavati is remembered as a
valiant queen of the Garha kingdom
(one of the Gond kingdoms in central
India). From all accounts, she ruled

wisely and made her kingdom AS

{eS prosperous. She kept an army of y
XIE me Sains," 20,000 soldiers and 1,000 elephants, 
SPS with which she repelled several eid

attempted invasions. When a general
sent by Akbar attacked her kingdom in
1564, despite being outnumbered and
outmatched in weaponry, she led her
troops and fought bravely. Wounded,
she took her own life on the battlefield
to avoid capture. She was only 40. Her
sacrifice became a symbol of regional
pride and resistance, and she is still
revered as a heroic figure in Indian
history.

Fig. 2.21. An artist s impression of
Rani Durgavati.

Surge of the Rajputs

Because of their location in northwest India and the proud
traditions they inherited from earlier dynasties (such as the
Pratiharas, who had resisted the Arab invasions of Sindh a few
centuries earlier), the Rajputs were often battling the invading
forces from beyond the Subcontinent. They had rebuilt their
| kingdoms after the Khiljis conquest, two major clans emerged
in this process, in the Mewar and Marwar regions. Inspirational
stories of their heroic deeds are still told today, in particular
through popular ballads. Among the valorous rulers those clans
produced, we met Rana Kumbha earlier. Rana Sanga (early 16"

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Chapter 2.indd 46 05-07-2025 16:55:45

Chapter 2.indd 47

Fig. 2.23. An artist s impression of the Battle of Haldighati
(from Udaipur palace)

century) unified several Rajput clans, won many battles against
sultans, ultimately meeting defeat against Babur at the Battle of
Khanwa.

Although he inherited a wounded kingdom from _ his
predecessors, Mewar s ruler Maharana Pratap refused to accept
Mughal suzerainty and became the face of Rajput resistance. A
confrontation took place at the Haldighati pass in the Aravallis
in 1576 (Fig. 2.23), and although the Mughal army had the
upper hand, Maharana Pratap escaped
and pursued for years guerrilla warfare
against the Mughals from the Aravalli
hills, living in harsh conditions but firm
on his independence. It is noteworthy that
Maharana Pratap received strong support
from the Bhils, who not only joined his
troops as archers but also contributed their
knowledge of the terrain; their service (on
other occasions too) earned them arespected
place in Mewar s military tradition, as the
Mewar emblem shows (Fig. 2.22).

Guerrilla
warfare:

A style of
fighting where
small groups
with knowledge
of the terrain
carry out
surprise attacks
and ambushes
to defeat bigger
armies.

2 - Reshaping India s Political Map

Tapestry of the Past

Fig. 2.22. The Mewar emblem, witha

Bhil warrior on the left @

05-07-2025 16:55:46

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

 

While some Rajput states eventually allied with the Mughals 
through diplomacy and marriage alliances some, especially
Mewar, did not accept Mughal dominance. During Aurangzeb s
reign, several Rajput nobles rebelled, including Durga Das
Rathore of Marwar, who fought to protect the independence of
Jodhpur. Mughal authority thus remained limited in Rajasthan.

The Ahoms

In the 13" century, the Ahom ethnic group migrated from
present-day Myanmar to the Brahmaputra Valley and formed
the Ahom kingdom there.

During both the Sultanate and the Mughal periods, the Ahom
rulers offered stiff resistance to attempts at expansion into the
Northeast. Their unique paik system called on every able-bodied
man to provide service to the state through labour or military
duty in exchange for land rights. This allowed the rulers to
create public infrastructure and maintain a large standing force
without a permanent army.

Over time, the Ahoms assimilated the local culture, promoted
agriculture, encouraged diverse faiths, and contributed to the
rich traditions of Assam.

Discuss in class how the paik system affected the daily lives
of the people in the Ahom kingdom, both in terms of challenges
and benefits, and helped the king manage both the army and
the economy.

In the 17" century, when Aurangzeb sent Mughal forces, briefly
capturing the Ahom capital Garhgaon, the Ahoms used their
knowledge of the terrain dense forests, hills and rivers and
persistent guerrilla tactics to repulse the attack, although the
latter had more men and a larger fleet of river boats. Notably, in
the Battle of Saraighat (1671), fought on the Brahmaputra River
near present-day Guwahati, the Ahom military commander
Lachit Borphukan and his 10,000 men defeated a Mughal force

of 30,000 soldiers. Ultimately, the Ahom were able to preserve
their independence.

DON'T MISS OUT

Ram Singh, the general of the Mughal army, praised the Ahom
watriors in these terms: Every Assamese soldier is expert in
rowing boats, in shooting arrows, in digging trenches, and in
wielding guns and cannons. I have not seen such specimens of
versatility in any other part of India. 

LET'S EXPLORE

How did the Ahoms use the rivers, hills and forests of Assam
to their advantage? Can you think of ways in which the
geography helped them build defences and fight wars?

Fig. 2.24. A plaque
commemorating the
Battle of Saraighat,
with an Ahom boat
in the foreground
(Saraighat War
Memorial Park).

Fig. 2.25. Statues depicting
Ahom warriors during the
Battle of Saraighat.

2 - Reshaping India s Political Map

Tapestry of the Past

 

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

The Rise of the Sikhs

In 15" century Punjab, Guru Nanak spread the message of
equality, compassion, and the oneness of God (Ik Onkar); his
followers came to be known as Sikhs. Although Sikhism began
purely as a spiritual movement, the later Sikh Gurus had to
respond to the growing intolerance and persecution under some
Mughal rulers. When Emperor Jahangir found out that Guru
Arjan had supported his rebellious son, he had Guru Arjan
tortured to death. This prompted Guru Arjan s son and successor,
Guru Hargobind, to introduce martial training and form a Sikh
army, which fought several battles against the Mughal forces.

e DON'T MISS OUT

In the context of this chapter, Punjab refers to the vast
region now split across India and Pakistan.

The Sikhs sacred text, Guru Granth Sahib, was first compiled
by Guru Arjan; Guru Tegh Bahadur s hymns were added later.
It stresses that there is one God for all (who established the
earth as a home for Dharma ) and enjoins Sikhs to practise
truthfulness, compassion, humility and self-control, among
other values. An example: Truth is high but higher still is
truthful living. 

In 1675, a group of Kashmiri Pandits approached Guru Tegh
Bahadur seeking protection from religious persecution. The
Guru decided to stand with them and court martyrdom; arrested,
Aurangzeb ordered him to convert to Islam. Despite torture,
and despite witnessing two of his disciples being tortured to
death, the Guru refused; on Aurangzeb s orders, he was publicly
beheaded in Chandni Chowk, Delhi. In response, his son Guru
Gobind Singh the 10" and last Guru established the Khalsa
 a martial brotherhood committed to justice, equality and
defence of the faith, which frequently clashed with the Mughal
forces, at great cost of life.

Fig. 2.26. Miniature painting of Guru Gobind Singh

<4, DON'T MISS OUT

Do you know what the Gurudwara Sis Gunj Sahib in Chandni
Chowk the famous shopping area in Delhi signifies? In
Sikhism, a gurudwara is a place of worship. This one marks
the site where Guru Tegh Bahadur, the ninth Sikh Guru, was
beheaded by Aurangzeb in 1675. This historic Gurdwara is
uniquely honoured by the Sikh Regiment, which has saluted it
before the President in the Republic Day parade each year since
1979. It stands as a powerful symbol of faith and sacrifice in
Indian history.

2 - Reshaping India s Political Map

Tapestry of the Past

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Y THINK ABOUT IT

> Why do you think Guru Tegh Bahadur endured torture
rather than convert? Why did he think his sacrifice
would make a difference?

> What values did the Sikh Gurus and the Khalsa embody?

> Howare they relevant in today s world?

As the Mughal Empire declined, especially under the onslaughts
of the Marathas (see next chapter), several Sikh confederacies
emerged in the Punjab region; they were ultimately unified
through the efforts of Maharaja Ranjit Singh at the turn of the
19" century. Ranjit Singh s military acumen, diplomatic skill and
religious tolerance allowed him to establish a strong, centralised

Eastern Ganga

Rajputs Kingdom

Fig. 2.27. This graphic sums up the chief dynasties involved in this chapter, witha
rough indication of their geographical locations.

Chapter 2.indd 53

Sikh Empire which spanned much of the Northwest, including
parts of Kashmir. Till the mid-19" century, this empire resisted
both Mughal remnants and later British expansion.

ADMINISTERING INDIA

Administration under the Delhi Sultanate

The Delhi Sultanate introduced a political system centred on the
sultan, who possessed absolute authority as the political and
military head, and whose duties, according to contemporary
chronicles, included defending the territories of Islam against
possible aggression, collecting fees and taxes and keeping
in touch with public affairs and the condition of the people by
personal contact. The sultan was however assisted by a council
of ministers who were in charge of the various departments of
the Sultanate.

One instrument of the administration was the igta system, in
which territories were assigned to nobles (iqtadars) to collect
taxes which, minus expenses, were supposed to go to the Sultan s
treasury; they were needed, in particular, to maintain the army.
The system created a network of local administrators loyal to
the central authority, but their posts were not hereditary. While
taxes were levied on trade at every stage, the burden fell most
heavily on the peasantry, and some contemporary accounts
report considerable cruelty in extracting revenue from the land.

The Mughal administrative framework

Aiming at greater control and efficiency, Akbar reorganised his
administrative machinery. The Diwan took care of the finances,
while the Mir Bakhshi looked after military matters and the
Khan-i-Saman was in charge of public works, trade, industry
and agriculture, besides the royal household. The Sadr was
responsible for justice, religious and educational matters. Such
ministers were assigned to each of the empire s twelve provinces
(subahs), which were further subdivided, with effective checks
and balances enforced between the government officials. At the
village level, traditional structures of self-governance continued
more or less undisturbed.

2 - Reshaping India s Political Map

Tapestry of the Past

 

05-07-2025 16:55:48

Chapter 2.indd 54

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Fig. 2.28. Manuscript painting of Abul Fazl, seated ona
terrace with his completed chronicles before him

Akbar also _ instituted
the mansabdari system.
As Abul Fazl recorded
in his Ain-i-Akbari,

which describes
Akbar s administration,
mansabdars (officers)

according to their mansab
(rank) were expected to
maintain a precise number
of elephants, horses,
camels as well as troops
for the state. This made
it possible to assemble
an army at a short notice
without having to maintain
a permanent centralised
army. Regular inspections
were carried out to ensure
compliance. Mansabdars
were generally __ paid
by being assigned land
(jagirs) and were therefore
also known as jagirdars.

Despite Akbar s growing
tolerance for different
faiths, non-Muslims were
kept in a minority in
the higher echelons
of the administration;
for instance, the total
percentage of nonMuslim officials in his
administration rarely

exceeded one-third of the total and was often much less. Even
among Muslim officials, those of foreign origin were generally

favoured over those of Indian origin.

05-07-2025 16:55:48

Chapter 2.indd 55

Todar Mal, Akbar s finance minister, introduced an efficient
revenue system. He made detailed surveys for crop yields and
prices, and determined prices for each crop on the basis of that
information. He also initiated a systematic survey of the land
in the entire empire which boosted revenue collection and
strengthened the state apparatus.

We will see a different kind of administration, that of the
Marathas, in the next chapter.

PEOPLE S LIVES

Despite shifting political powers between the 13" and 17"
centuries, India witnessed vibrant economic activity, thanks
to its agrarian foundations, thriving artisanal industries,
community-based and temple-based economies, and extensive
trade networks. Building on decentralised economic and social
systems such as Shrenis (guilds), jatis (professionally defined
communities), and systems
for credit the Subcontinent
remained one of _ the
wealthiest regions in the
world.

The Sultanate period
saw some progress in
infrastructural works,
especially roads in north
India, bridges, a few canals
and other irrigation works,
apart from the creation
of new cities, all of which
expanded considerably
during the Mughal period.
Coins in_ several metals
and denominations were
introduced as currency. The
Mughals will use a different
system, with a rupaya of

Fig. 2.29. A Persian wheel used to draw water
silver and a dam of copper. from wells or tanks to irrigate fields.

2 - Reshaping India s Political Map

Tapestry of the Past

 

05-07-2025 16:55:48

Agriculture was the mainstay of the Indian
economy; we have already seen
how rulers relied on agrarian

revenue to maintain their
administration and military,
typically extracting land
revenue at one-fifth of the
produce, though some of the
sultans raised it as high as onehalf. The expansion of irrigation
systems increased agricultural
productivity, allowing for the production
of multiple crops, including
both food (rice, wheat, barley,
pulses, sugarcane, spices,
etc.) and non-food items (cotton, which fed a thriving textile
production, silk, wool, dyes, timber, jute, etc.). Let us note that
agriculture output varied from region to region and period
to period; the peasantry suffered several severe famines in
this period, with relief depending upon the particular ruler s
benevolence.

Fig. 2.30. A Vijayanagara land grant, inscribed on a copper
plate, the equivalent of modern-day property deeds.

Apart from textiles, craftspeople made a wide range of products,
from weapons to utensils to ornaments and jewellery items.
Ship-building, essential to river and overseas trade, developed
considerably in those centuries. Indian goods were exported
through coastal and riverside towns such as Calicut, Mangalore,
Surat, Masulipatnam or Hooghly. India imported much less than
it exported; import products included silk, horses, metals, and
all kinds of luxury goods. Merchants from Arabia, Persia (now
Iran), and Central Asia settled in Indian ports, contributing to
the bustling trade activity.

| Thehundisystem also enabled merchants to transfer funds across
political boundaries without physically transporting currency,
making them less vulnerable to plunder. Trader communities,
such as the Marwaris, became adept at operating across different
political regimes, developing parallel systems of credit and trust
that functioned independently of official structures.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

 . DON'T MISS OUT

A hundi was a written instruction to make payment to an
individual. It could be carried across political borders and
enabled financial transactions without the need to carry
currency a precursor to modern banking. These systems
worked across trade networks without the participation of the
ruling classes.

Temples as centres of economic activity

Many temples were more than centres for worship, learning,
social interaction or performing arts. They also created
ecosystems with bustling markets; ruling classes donated land
and wealth (dana) to temple deities, held in trust by temple
managers who developed community infrastructure (irrigation
systems, tanks, etc.) and pilgrim accommodations (dharmashalas
and chhatrams). Temples provided merchants with credit and
funded internal as well as maritime trade.

While early periods saw prosperity, the late 1600s witnessed
economic stress. Peasants were often left with a small share
of their produce after taxes and payments to intermediary
parties. This caused many to lose their land and become bonded
labourers.

Historians suggest that craftspeople and labourers, too, often
faced harsh economic conditions. India was still a land of
abundance, as testified by many Arab and European travellers,
but the wealth was largely concentrated in the hands of the
rulers, courtiers, high officials and the merchant class. Frequent
warfare, in addition, caused forced displacement of population.

At the level of the common people, there were instances of
clashes, especially over sacred sites that had been desecrated or
destroyed under the rulers sanction. But by and large, people of
different faiths and communities lived peacefully side by side,
economically dependent on each other.

2 - Reshaping India s Political Map

Tapestry of the Past

 

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Even as mostrulers across India patronised the arts, communities,
too, strove to maintain or revive their traditions, many of which
adapted to changing circumstances. Among those cultural
traditions, a fair degree of interaction resulted in the creation of
a shared heritage.

Through it all, India endured, economically prosperous on
the whole but often politically unstable. During this period of
frequent reshaping of the political map, India faced serious
challenges, but survived. It is a tale not only of hardship but also
of resilience through the sword when the occasion demanded,
but also through fresh creation in art, literature, spirituality, and
timeless values.

Before we move on...

> This period witnessed many foreign invasions led
by Turkic, Afghan, and Mughal forces, which caused
widespread destruction, the fall of old dynasties, and
the rise and fall of kingdoms and empires. Continuous
warfare, alliances and conquests reshaped India s political
boundaries.

> The period had many instances of religious intolerance.
Buddhists, Jains, Hindus, Sikhs, Zoroastrians, and tribals
suffered severe persecution at times, though some rulers
were more broad-minded than others.

> Agriculture and trade expanded, enhancing India s wealth
and connectivity with the wider world. Yet the economic
condition of the common subjects generally remained
harsh.

> Indian society showed adaptability and resilience in
rebuilding towns, cities, temples, and other aspects of
the economy. At the same time, it found ways to preserve
cultural traditions and blend indigenous and foreign
elements to create new cultural expressions. Many forms
of art and culture, including architecture, music and
painting, flourished.

Chapter 2.indd 59

Questions and activities

1.

Compare the political strategies of the Delhi Sultanate and
the Mughals. What similarities and differences existed
between them?

Why did kingdoms like the Vijayanagara Empire and the
Ahom Kingdom manage to resist conquest for a longer time
compared to others? What geographical, military, and social
factors contributed to their success?

Imagine you are a scholar in the court of Akbar or
Krishnadevaraya. Write a letter to a friend describing the
politics, trade, culture, and society you are witnessing.

How come Akbar, a ruthless conqueror in his young days,
grew tolerant and benevolent after some years? What could
have led to such a change?

What might have happened if the Vijayanagara Empire
had won the Battle of Talikota? Imagine and describe how
it could have changed the political and cultural history of
south India.

Many values promoted by early Sikhism, including equality,
seva, and justice, remain relevant today. Select one of these
values and discuss how it remains relevant in contemporary
society.

Imagine you are a trader in a port city (Surat, Calicut or
Hooghly). Describe the scenes you see as regards goods,
people you trade with, movement of ships, etc.

2 - Reshaping India s Political Map

Tapestry of the Past

 

05-07-2025 16:55:49

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

* Noodles is our abbreviation for Notes and Doodles !

2 |

Chapter 2.indd 60 05-07-2025 16:55:49