The Parliamentary System:
Legislature and Executive

The Constitution is not a mere lawyer s document; it is a
vehicle of life, and its spirit is always the spirit of the age.
 Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar
November 1949, Constituent Assembly Debates

y - % = aL

m ZB ,
| : . ny 

F2

WSS0/E2025 26-52)

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

|

The Grade 8 students from Nalanda Vidyalaya were on a school
trip to Delhi. Usha, Sukhwinder, Anjali, John, and Farida were
especially excited to visit the new Parliament building.

It's not The three-sided It also uses green

square or design reflects balance, construction, cutting

round it s inclusivity, and purpose. electricity use by 30 per cent.
like a soft

triangle!

Inside, they saw
walls decorated
with carvings

 peacocks,
lotuses, tribal art,
temple patterns,
and freedom
fighters.

This Exactly, democracy must
new look ahead but never
building forget its roots.

houses

sO many

ancient

symbols!

Chapter 6.indd 141

INTRODUCTION

India s independence was achieved
through great sacrifices by many
people of the country after years of
struggle against colonial rule. The
citizens of a free country could now
make decisions about their own
governance. The first important
step in this new epoch in the life of
our nation was the drafting of the
Constitution of independent India.
This comprehensive document laid
foundational principles for the
nation, including that of Universal
Adult Franchise which guarantees
all adult citizens of the country the
right to vote irrespective of their
social or economic background,
gender, race, or religion.

The people of India directly elect
their representatives who become
members of the Lok Sabha. A
majority group from among these
elected representatives forms the
government. The Parliament is the
supreme legislative body of the
government (it makes laws for the
country). It comprises all elected
representatives of the people and
controls and guides the work of the
government. The government can
therefore be seen as functioning
with the people s consent. There
have been 17 Lok Sabhas since the
first one in 1952. The 18" Lok Sabha
was constituted in June 2024.

Fig. 6.2. Our old Parliament (now called

Samvidhan Sadan) building was constructed in
the 1920s. The Constituent Assembly met there
for its deliberations, and it served as Parliament

House for over seven decades.

ee

Fig. 6.3. The Parliament Building (Sansad
Bhavan) in New Delhi was constructed
to accommodate the growing needs
including capacity, technology,
sustainability and safety.

6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive

Governance and Democracy

@

05-07-2025 17:26:56

COMPOSITION OF THE PARLIAMENT
OF INDIA

The Indian Parliament is composed of the President and two
houses: the Lok Sabha (House of the People / Lower House) and
the Rajya Sabha (Council of States / Upper House). This structure
with two houses is called a bicameral system ( bi means two,
 cameral means chamber / house).

Fig. 6.4. Lok Sabha Chambers in Fig. 6.5. A view of the Chamber of the
the new Parliament building Rajya Sabha taken from the Press Gallery

 LET'S REMEMBER

The people of India choose their representatives for the
Lok Sabha through a direct election (based on universal
adult suffrage). The maximum number of members of this
House envisaged by the Constitution is 550. The Members of

__ Parliament (MPs) in the Rajya Sabha are elected indirectly
by the electoral college that you read about in the previous
chapter. Both, the number of Rajya Sabha seats allocated and
the number of MPs represented in the Lok Sabha, are based
on the population of each state.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

e

~ DON T MISS OUT

We are aware that several aspects
of the Indian Constitution were
drawn from the constitutions of
other countries. Britain s system 2a sINDIA
inspired our system of Parliamentary :
democracy. However, there were
also experiences that our freedom
fighters and Constitution makers
had the practical experience gained
through participation in British
colonial governance structures, even Fig. 6.6. Constitution

if in a very limited way, that provided of India
familiarity with Parliamentary procedures; the memory of
the ancient republics (mahdjanapadas); the village panchayats
where elders made collective decisions, as we learnt in a
previous chapter.

CONSTITUTION

Extensive discussions took place during the making of the
Constitution regarding whether India should have a bicameral
system. It was felt that a single directly elected House would be
inadequate to meet the challenges independent India would face.
In the spirit of federalism , it was felt that a Council of States,
the Rajya Sabha, was needed. The composition and process of
election to the Rajya Sabha were also designed to be different.
India practices federalism, which is a form of government where
power is distributed between the centre, states, as well as local
governments. This system helps to keep the balance between
national unity and local interests.

FUNCTION

Each House of the Parliament has a presiding officer to ensure
that debates and discussions are conducted in an orderly manner.
In the Lok Sabha, the members elect a speaker, who conducts
the sessions, allows members to speak, maintains discipline,
and ensures that rules are followed. The Rajya Sabha is presided
over by the Vice President of India, who acts as its chairperson.

6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive

Governance and Democracy

 

Sceptre:

A decorated
rod carried
by a king

or queen at
ceremonies
as asymbol
of their
power

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

SE |

<q DON T MISS OUT

The Sengol, a gold-plated, silver sceptre was
symbolically handed over to Pt. Jawaharlal
Nehru, the first Prime Minister of India,
on 14 August 1947 on the occasion of Indian
Independence as a powerful symbol to mark
the transfer of power. It is now placed near
the Speaker s chair in the new Lok Sabha,
and served as a symbol of righteous and
just rule. Dating back to the Chola period,
the Sengol was handed to new rulers as a
reminder that power must be guided by
dharma and righteousness. At its top sits
Nandi, symbolising justice.

Fig. 6.7. The Sengol

To help make Parliamentary discussions accessible to all,
translation services are provided in multiple Indian
languages. Previously, simultaneous interpretation was
available in 12 languages, namely, Hindi, English, Assamese,
Bengali, Gujarati, Kannada, Malayalam, Marathi, Odia, Tamil,
Punjabi and Telugu. Recently, six more languages were
added: Bodo, Dogri, Maithili, Manipuri, Urdu, and Sanskrit.
More languages are expected to be added in the future.

The executive responsibility of the Parliament (i.e., ensuring
that laws are implemented and enforced) is as important as
its legislative function (i.e., the making of laws). The Union
Executive gives life to the legislative functions and power of
the Parliament. The Union Executive consists of the following
members:

= The President,
= The Vice President, and
| The Council of Ministers headed by the Prime Minister.

The Council of Ministers is chosen from among the MPs of
both houses of Parliament. These ministers are collectively
responsible to the Lok Sabha.

Let us now discuss the Legislative and Executive functions of the
Parliament.

LEGISLATIVE FUNCTIONS OF
THE PARLIAMENT

The Constitution lays down the key functions that the Parliament
needs to fulfil. They can be broadly classified under the following
heads:

1. Constitutional functions
2. Lawmaking

3. Executive accountability
4. Financial accountability

We explore them briefly in the sections below.

1) Constitutional function

 > LET'S REMEMBER

From your previous lessons on the theme of Democracy and
Governance, name a few Constitutional functions of the
Parliament. Did you list the election of President and Vice
President? What about amendments to the Constitution?
Indeed, these are vital constitutional functions of the
Parliament. There are other important functions that we will
explore in higher grades.

The Parliament is directly entrusted with upholding the core
values of the Indian Constitution, including:

a. Enabling parliamentary democracy through universal adult
suffrage,

b. Following the separation of powers between the legislature,
executive, and judiciary,

c. Ensuring federalism, and

d. Upholding Fundamental Rights and Directive Principles of
State Policy by framing laws and policies.

6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive

Governance and Democracy
Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

S

Chapter 6.indd 146

Bill:
Abillis a
draft of a
proposed

law that
needs to be
approved
by the
parliament
before

it can be
enacted
into law.

CC

2) Lawmaking

Among the primary responsibilities of the legislature is to make
laws. The Constitution has laid out an elaborate and rigorous
process for lawmaking. A law is generally brought into force
through an instrument called an act. A bill, which is a draft of
a proposed law, is introduced in Parliament and goes through a
long and effortful journey before it becomes an act. Given below
is the journey of how a bill becomes an act, and ultimately a
law, in the case of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory
Education Act, 2009 (RTE).

 Most people call me RTE. I came into existence in August 2009,
though the idea began almost a century before.

My roots lie in the Directive Principles of State Policy of the
Indian Constitution. Though the Constitution makers wanted me
implemented within a decade after Independence, this didn t
happen, leaving countless children without access to education.

In the early 1990s, someone argued in court that I was inherently
part of the Fundamental Rights in the Constitution, namely, the
Right to Life as education is important to lead a meaningful
life. Parliamentary action began some years later with the
introduction of the 86" Constitutional Amendment Act, 2002,
which mandated as Article 21A of the Constitution that the
state shall provide free and compulsory education to all children
between the ages of 6 and 14 years.

Six years later, I was tabled as a bill in the Rajya Sabha. A
committee studied me thoroughly and suggested modifications.

The major debate concerned funding new schools, infrastructure, and teachers for millions of children would be costly.
By 2008, the MPs determined it was time.

After the 2009 elections, the new government pursued the
matter, and in August 2009, I was passed in the Lok Sabha and
received the President s assent, becoming an Act.

Today, I ve enabled the creation of legal pathways for children to
attend school, facilitated new school construction, and ensured
free books and uniforms for children. 

05-07-2025 17:26:58

From bill to act the process of lawmaking
in the Parliament

Standing
: duction | Ref, d Committee:
ntroduction in : eferred to i
: Reading of Itisa
either House of the bill Standing permanent
the Parliament Committee committee

consisting of
MPs (the MPs
may change,
but the
committee as
a structure
remains) that
Taken up for scrutinises
consideration government
activities,
makes
recommendations and asks
questions

on actions
taken by the
government.

Clause-by-clause
discussion and
amendments
voted

Vote on the Bill

and passing

Process repeated Presidential Gazette
in other House assent notification

Note: All bills may not be referred to Committees.

Fig. 6.8. Process of lawmaking - a simplified diagram to illustrate key steps.

Reading: The origins are in the British Parliament. Many MPs
were illiterate, so a clerk would read out the contents of the
bill for the MPs to discuss. Today MPs read the bill before the
discussions take place.

Clause: These are parts of a bill that explain the specific details
of the bill; eg. RTE defines the age group to which it applies (6
to 14 years).

Gazette: This is an official government publication that
announces legal documents and official information.

6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive

Governance and Democracy

e

Chapter 6.indd 147 05-07-2025 17:26:58

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

S|

Draw a small chart to show the process of how RTE became an
act. What do you think the process would be if RTE had been
tabled in the Lok Sabha?

 DON'T MISS OUT

Some types of bills have to be tabled only in the Lok Sabha.
One example is a Money Bill that is concerned with
financial matters (including taxation, government
borrowing, etc.). It is essentially a draft law that can be
introduced only in the Lok Sabha; however, the introduction
of the bill requires the prior recommendation of the
President.

3) Executive accountability

The Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers are part of the
Union Executive. They are:

= primarily responsible for implementing and enforcing laws
and overseeing the effective running of the government;

= take decisions regarding the day-to-day functioning of
the government based on the principles laid out in the
Constitution and its laws;

= answerable to the Lok Sabha, through mechanisms like
the Question Hour which require ministers to justify their
actions and decisions. The Question Hour in the Lok Sabha
is a select period (typically the first hour of a Parliamentary
session) where MPs can ask the ministers questions about
government policies and activities. It is a process of the
Parliament that holds the Executive accountable (i.e., it
must justify all actions and decisions). Special committees
also hold meetings where ministries have to explain and
answer questions about their policies. These committees
may include MPs from different political parties.

Chapter 6.indd 149

The Parliament isn t always formal and serious. Sometimes, the
atmosphere is set through poetry and humour!

Example 1: Verse in the Parliament
While presenting the Union Budget for the year 2025-26 on
the 1*tof February, 2025, Smt. Nirmala Sitharaman recited the

following verse from Tirukkural (an ancient Indian treatise in
Tamil on ethics and morality):

Vaanokki vaalum ulakellaam
Mannavan koalnokki vaalung kudi.
It means:
Just as living beings live expecting rains,
Citizens live expecting good governance.

On hearing this, there was an enthusiastic thumping of desks
from the Treasury Benches.

*

Example 2: Humour in the Parliament

In 2011, during a spirited debate in the Lok Sabha, Parliamentarian Sushma Swaraj quoted a poetic verse to criticise the
government:

 Tu idhar udhar kina baat kar, yeh bata ki kafila kyun luta,
humein rahjano se gila nahi, teri rahbari ka sawal hai. 

Don't change the topic, just say why the caravan was looted. We
have no complaint with the robbers, but this is a question on
your leadership.

In response, the then Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh
calmly replied with another poetic line:

 Maana ki teri deed ke qabil nahin hoon main, tu mera shauq
dekh mera intezar dekh. 

I admit that Iam not worthy of your sight; you should look at my
zeal and my perseverance.

6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive

Governance and Democracy

 

08-07-2025 10:12:06

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

 

"re
fa: 33)
ae

Pe

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAIYA SABHA

DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE

ONE HUNDRED SIXTY SECOND REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
156 REPORT ON REVIEV) OF NATIONAL AYUSH MISSION

(Presented (o the Rajye Sabha on 20" December, 2024)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4" February, 2025)

ao GUE oe
Fae CS
bos Kd
 Car riNgR.
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Dethi
December, 2024/Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka)

Fig. 6.9. Extract froma
report of the Standing
Committee on Health and
Family Welfare

1.2 Co-location of Ayush facilities
at Primary Health Centers (PHCs),
Community Health Centers (CHCs)
and District Hospitals (DHs)

Recommendation:

1.2.1 The Committee, at this juncture,
notices that in some states and UTs,
a separate Department of Ayush has
not been opened. The Committee, to
boost the Ayush system and for better
coordination in Ayush Healthcare,
recommends the Ministry of Ayush to
impress upon and persuade the States
and UTs with no separate department of
Ayush to create such a department for
speedy development and implementation
of Ayush sector and schemes respectively.

(Para 2.13 of the Report)

Action Taken:

1.2.2 Public Health is being a state subject,
creation of separate Department of Ayush
in the States/UTs comes under purview
of respective State/UT Governments.
However. Ministry of Ayush has requested
State/UT Governments in _ different
meetings to create separate Directorates,
deployment of manpower in SPMU
& DPMU in the States/UTs for speedy
development and implementation of
NAM scheme As on date, separate Ayush
Directorate is available in 24 States/UTs.
(SPMU=state project management unit;
DPMU=district project management unit)

(Para 2.23 of the Report)

Given here is an extract from the report of meetings between

the Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare and

the officers from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
Observe the screenshots above and discuss the following
in small groups Who is reporting to whom? What is the
subject that has been reviewed? Identify the Committee s
recommendation. What is the government s reply?

4) Financial accountability

The Parliament approves and monitors government expenditure
through the annual budget, and examining the distribution of
funds to different ministries.

LET'S EXPLORE

Why do you think that Parliament keeps an eye on
government expenditure? (Hint: Whose money does the
government spend?)

The government is expected to provide the necessary
information to Parliament in a timely and accurate manner.

EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS OF PARLIAMENT

We have uncovered a few points on the role of the executive in
the previous sections. We look at this a little more closely now.

 yg, DON'T MISS OUT

Part V of the Indian Constitution begins with Chapter I 
The Executive. It looks at the roles and responsibilities of the
President, Vice President, and Council of Ministers, among
others. It is in Chapter II that the role and functions of
Parliament are listed. Why might this be so?

1) The President

The President is the Head of State and the nominal head of the
Executive. The Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers
are responsible for running the government. The President
appoints the Prime Minister and other ministers, summons the
Parliament, and gives assent to bills, among other functions. The
Council of Ministers aids and advises the President. However, in
specific circumstances, the President can exercise discretionary
powers, particularly during political crises, like when no party
holds a clear majority in a Lok Sabha election.

6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive

Governance and Democracy

@

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
2) The Prime Minister and the Council

of Ministers
The Prime Minister is the de facto executive authority in India s
Parliamentary system. The President appoints the leader of
the majority party or coalition in the Lok Sabha as the Prime
Minister. The Prime Minister serves with the support of the
majority of the MPs in the Lok Sabha.

The Prime Minister s key functions include:

= Leading the Council of =" Coordinating the work of
Ministers different ministries
=" Advising the President = Shaping national policies

The Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers take decisions
and run the government. They are collectively responsible to
the Lok Sabha. Most of the bills that come to the Parliament for
discussion are initiated by the government. A permanent group
of officials called civil servants help in implementing
laws and policies. These officers, often called administrators or
bureaucrats, work under the direction of ministers and ensure
that government departments function smoothly.

LET'S EXPLORE

If the Executive is part of the Legislature, how do we say
that there is separation of power? (Hint: revisit the section on
legislature above)

In 1956, Railway Minister Lal Bahadur
Shastri resigned after a train accident.
Although he was not blamed for the accident,
he believed that a minister must take moral
responsibility for anything that happens in
their ministry. He offered his resignation to Fig. 6.10. Lal Bahadur
the then Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru; Shastri (Minister for
Nehru declined at first, but Shastri insisted. ia and later

. . . . Prime Minister
Finally, his resignation was accepted. of India)

Chapter 6.indd 153

Differences Between the Legislature and the Executive

It is important to understand some key differences between the
Legislature and the Executive. The following table briefly summarises

the distinctions.

Composition

Main Role

Functions

Legislature

The Parliament of
India is the supreme
legislative body of the
country, composed of
the President, the Lok
Sabha and the Rajya
Sabha.

Making laws and
overseeing the work
of the Executive

Can introduce some
bills in the Parliament

Keeps a check on

the activities of the
Executive by asking
questions and seeking
explanations

Sanctions all
government-related
expenses

Consults different
Parliamentary
committees

Executive

The Executive is composed

of the President, the VicePresident, and the Council of
Ministers headed by the Prime
Minister.

Enforcing the laws made by the
Legislature

Most of the bills are introduced
by the Executive in the
Parliament

Provides information and
explanations to the Legislature
on its decisions and actions.
Aids and advises the

President on important
matters, including calling
sessions of Parliament.

Prepares and implements
the budget approved by
Parliament.

Can function independently
in day-to-day matters and
may consult committees when
required.

6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive

Governance and Democracy

 

05-07-2025 17:26:59

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

 

Chapter 6.indd 154

THE JUDICIARY ROLE OF CHECKS
AND BALANCES

The Judiciary is the branch of government that is responsible
for interpreting and applying the laws of the land, including
in specific cases of disputes. The Judiciary functions through
a system of courts and plays a pivotal role in maintaining the
democratic nature of society and governance. The Judiciary acts
as the custodian of the Constitution, ensuring that all branches
of the government operate within the principles and parameters
enshrined in the Constitution. It keeps a check on the effective
functioning of society and institutions of the government
by interpreting laws, resolving disputes, and safeguarding
fundamental rights.

The Constitution not only describes how the Legislature and
Executive are given power to govern the country, but it also
lists the specific responsibilities of these organs. To ensure
that the powers of the Legislature are used properly and
responsibilities are followed, the Judiciary is given the unique
and critical responsibility of checking that the laws passed by
Parliament have not violated the Constitutional framework.
Similarly, if a violation of the Constitution occurs when the laws
are implemented by the Executive, the Judiciary again has the
power to step in. Just as the Parliament functions through its
Legislature and the Executive arms, the Judiciary functions
through its Courts.

In this chapter, we have explored how the organs within the
Parliament balance making of the law and executing it, and how
the Judiciary checks these actions. These are all examples of the
separation of powers and the system of checks and balances
among the Legislature, the Executive, and the Judiciary, ensuring
that no one organ becomes too powerful.

LET'S EXPLORE

> What might happen if one of the organs Legislature,
Executive, Judiciary had all the power? How could it
affect the rights of people? Discuss with your classmates

05-07-2025 17:26:59

how each organ checks the others. For example, how does
the Legislature question the actions of the Executive? How |
does the Judiciary make sure that laws and government |
actions respect the Constitution? Do you think there might

be ways in which the actions of the Judiciary itself are
reviewed?

> Can you find examples where the Judiciary has asked
lawmakers to review a law? Can you find any instances
when the implementation of a law has been questioned
by the Judiciary?

We will learn more about the Judiciary in a later chapter.

LEGISLATIVE AND EXECUTIVE FUNCTIONS
AT THE STATE LEVEL

As discussed, the Union Government has a Parliament with
legislative and executive functions. Similarly, each state has its
own legislature and executive, called its State Assembly . Just
as the Parliament has Members of Parliament (MPs) who make
laws, there are Members of Legislative Assembly (MLAs) who
formulate laws on subjects that are on the State List and on the
 Concurrent List .

Union List, State List, and Concurrent
List
The Constitution has lists that help to clarify
the areas on which the Union and State
governments can exclusively legislate, called
the Union List and the State List, respectively.
There is also a Concurrent List that has CONCURRENT LIST
subjects on which both the Union and State Specific matters, like
overnments can legislate. However, in the | dUcation and environmental
 . ? policy, require collaboration
case that the Union government legislates | between the union and states,
on a subject in the Concurrent List, the state exhibiting the patercependent
government is bound to follow it. In the case ,
of RTE, for example, the Act is applicable all Fig. 6.11
over India even though education is in the Concurrent List.

6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive

Governance and Democracy

 

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Chapter 6.indd 156

Parallel Structure of Union and State Governments in India

The structure at the state-level imitates the one at the union-level. You can
see this structure across both levels in the table:

Feature Union Government State Government

Constitutional The President of India Governor of the State
Head elected by an electoral appointed
college by the President

Term of 5 years 5 years
Office (Head)

Executive Head The nominal head is the | The nominal head is the
President, but the Prime | Governor, but the Chief
Minister is the de facto Minister is the de facto
executive authority at the | executive authority of the
centre state

Selection of Leader of majority party/ | Leader of majority party/

Executive coalition in Lok Sabha coalition in Vidhan Sabha

Council of Selected by Prime Selected by Chief Minister

Ministers Minister

Responsibility Collectively responsible | Collectively responsible to
to Lok Sabha Vidhan Sabha

Legislature Bicameral - Lok Sabha Can be unicameral (Vidhan

Structure and Rajya Sabha Sabha only) or bicameral
(Vidhan Sabha and Vidhan
Parishad)

Lower House Lok Sabha (House of the | Vidhan Sabha (Legislative
People) Assembly)

Upper House Rajya Sabha (Council of | Vidhan Parishad (Legislative
States) Council) - in some states only

Term of Lower 5 years 5 years

House

Presiding Officer | Speaker Speaker

(Lower House)

Legislative Makes laws on subjects Makes laws on subjects in
Powers in Union List and State List and Concurrent List
Concurrent List

Financial Powers | Money bills originate Money bills originate only in
only in Lok Sabha Vidhan Sabha

05-07-2025 17:26:59

Structure of State Legislatures

Unlike the Centre, the State legislatures can be unicameral 
(having only one house) or bicameral (having two houses). The
legislative assembly is called the Vidhan Sabha, and the legislative
council (the upper house) is called the Vidhan Parishad. The
states having a bicameral system are Andhra Pradesh, Bihar,
Karnataka, Maharashtra, Telangana, and Uttar Pradesh, while
the remaining states have a unicameral system.

Fig. 6.12. Vidhana Soudha houses the legislature in Karnataka.
This building was envisioned by Kengal Hanumanthaiah, who
was a freedom fighter and a member of the Constituent Assembly,
Chief Minister of Karnataka, and later a Member of Parliament.

LET'S EXPLORE

What type of legislature does your state have?

CHALLENGES TO THE EFFECTIVE
FUNCTIONING OF THE LEGISLATURES

As discussed, the Indian legislature (including the Parliament at
the Centre and the State Assemblies) has the critical and vital
role of enacting laws, overseeing administrative processes, and
approving the budget. It also provides a platform for discussing
national policies, development plans, international relations,
and addressing public grievances. However, the legislature
also faces several challenges in its effective functioning.

6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive

Governance and Democracy

 

Productivity:
In the
Parliamentary
context,
productivity is
measured by
the number of
hours either
the Lok Sabha
or Rajya
Sabha actually
functioned
against the
time it was
scheduled to.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

 

Some of these can include regular absenteeism of members, noncooperative conduct or communication of members, reduced
quality of important debates, and disruptions of the Question
Hour.

The Parliament typically meets three times a year. These
meetings are called sessions Budget Sessions, Monsoon
Sessions and Winter Sessions. Each of these has sittings , where
the Parliament meets to deliberate upon proposed laws, discuss
important matters of governance, and seek explanations from
the Executive onits decisions and actions. Usually, the Parliament
sits for 6 hours a day during sessions. This can be extended on
special occasions or when there is a need to complete urgent
business. The State Assemblies too, have similar schedules.

LET S EXPLORE

> Study the data given in the following table. What
conclusions can you draw about the functioning of
Parliament over time? Compile data for more recent years.

Number of
sittings

Number of

Period of Lok Sabha :
sessions

1* Lok Sabha (1952-1957)

2" Lok Sabha (1957-1962)
10 Lok Sabha (1991-1996)
13% Lok Sabha (1999-2004)

> Read the following statement of the former chairman
of the Rajya Sabha, M. Venkaiah Naidu given in 2021:
 the productivity of Rajya Sabha during 2004-14 has
been about 78% and it declined to about 65% since then.
Of the 11 sessions [that he presided over], four of them
clocked low productivity of 6.80%, 27.30%, 28.90% and
29.55%; during the year 2018, the Rajya Sabha recorded
the lowest ever productivity of 35.75% under the impact
of disruptions. What conclusions can you draw from this
statement? What implications does this have for the role
that the Rajya Sabha is expected to play?

The Parliament and the State Assemblies have been envisioned
as spaces for thoughtful debates and discussions where laws are
made in the interest of the people. However, when debates are
disrupted, sessions are cut short and some bills take years to be
discussed and passed, it becomes a matter of concern.

LET'S EXPLORE

> Take up a small group project. Compile data regarding ;
the functioning of the legislature in your state or union
territory.

> Seekan appointment with an MLA and gather information
about challenges with respect to the state legislature.

Concerns have been expressed by sections of the society about |
the fact that a substantial proportion of their representatives in
the Lok Sabha have criminal cases against them, and that many
sessions are marked by angry or biased debates that do not
seriously address issues affecting the people.

The media also plays an important role in communicating the
concerns of the electorate. These cartoons express them with
humour, a practice common to all healthy democracies.

CRIMINAL ELECTIO

N
COMMISSIONER

| 

Fig. 6.13.a. Monsoon Session: Expect Fig. 6.13.b. Scrutiny of papers filed
thunder, lightning, storms, breaches by candidates
etc. It s Monsoon Session.

6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive

Governance and Democracy

 

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

3 |

Yet, our democracy grows stronger when citizens stay informed
and engaged. By asking questions, sharing their views, and
participating in public discussions, people help shape better
policies. Therefore, one of the best ways to overcome the
challenges India faces regarding its legislature, is to ensure that
many more citizens stay informed on matters of importance
to society, participate in discussions through public debate
on digital spaces that various government departments offer
during policymaking processes, and constructively engaging
with political representatives on policies.

Many more young leaders and diverse voices are entering public
life, and technology is making it easier to stay connected and
involved with governance. As future voters, your choices, and
participation will play a key role in strengthening our Parliament
and the assembly of the state you belong to, ensuring that they
truly serve all people.

DON'T MISS OUT

> Atal Bihari Vajpayee, a
former Prime Minister of
India, said during a speech
in the Lok Sabha,
 Sarkaarein aayengi,
jJaayengi. Paartiyaan
banengi, bigadengi.

Lekin yeh desh rehna
chaahiye,
is desh ka loktantra

amar rehna chaahiye. Fig. 6.14. Atal Bihari Vajpayee
(Governments will come

and go, parties will rise and fall. But the nation must
endure, and its democracy must live on.)

> What message do you think this gives about the role
of Parliament and leaders in a democracy? Why is it
important to protect democratic values even when
political power changes?

Before we move on...

>

>

India s Parliamentary system ensures that power is shared,
decisions are debated, and leaders are held accountable.

The Legislature makes laws, the Executive implements
them, and the Judiciary ensures that they follow the
Constitution.

The Parliament represents the voice of the people and
reflects the federal spirit of our democracy.

Both at the Centre and in the states, structures are
designed to balance representation, responsibility, and
unity.

Checks and balances between institutions help protect
citizens rights and uphold democratic values.

The functioning of the Parliament needs to become more
efficient and productive so that the country s progress is
not thwarted.

Questions and activities

1.

Find out how many representatives from your state are in
each House of the Parliament.

. What makes the Indian Parliament the voice of the

people ? How does it ensure that different opinions are
heard?

Why do you think the Constitution made the Executive
responsible to the Legislature?

Why do you think we have chosen the system of bicameral
legislature at the Union level?

Try to track the journey of a recent bill passed by the
Parliament. Identify in which House it was introduced.
Were there any major debates or disagreements? How long
did it take for the bill to become a law? Use newspaper
archives, government websites, and Lok Sabha debates, or
ask your teacher for help.

6 - The Parliamentary System: Legislature and Executive

Governance and Democracy

@

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

e

Chapter 6.indd 162

. Choose a recent law passed by the Parliament. Divide

into teams to role-play different parts of the process 

MPs debating in Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha, ministers
answering questions, and the President giving assent.
Present a short skit showing how a bill becomes a law; enact
a model Parliament .

. The Women s Reservation Bill, 2023, was passed with wide

support. Why might it have taken over 25 years for this bill
to be passed, despite being discussed for so long?

. Sometimes the Parliament is disrupted and does not

function for the number of days it is supposed to. What
impact do you think this has on the quality of laws and the
trust people place in their representatives?

. Can you create interest groups among students and list

questions related to any policy that you may want to ask
your MP and / or your MLA? How would these questions
be different if it is to the MP instead of the MLA, and vice
versa?

10. What is the role that the Judiciary plays in Indian

democracy? What could happen if we didn t have an
independent judiciary?

05-07-2025 17:27:01