Universal Franchise and
India s Electoral System

[India] adopted the principle of adult franchise with an
abundant faith in the common man and the ultimate

success of democratic rule...never before in the history

of the world has such an experiment been so boldly
undertaken. 

 Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar
November 1949, Constituent Assembly Debates

From Gir forest for lone voter to village on IndoBangla border: How EC conducts polls at remotest,

66% wom
en electo; "i
the Ors Voted in thi
inaccessible places iia Sender gap in Voting Gouse 's election. How dig
eanwhile, the representative <p .
e 5 * 18 Share of women in
 Senne Kumite & incaspeng
Syncpals 
Videos

Politics has barely grown

&
rz
- a, \ it
Travelling through jungles and snow J

oP sin urb
- nm priaging gaps : =) (an) (remo

eer > ECT tocus sore) (QS

capped mountains, wading through we : jon

rivers, carrying EVMs on he ae participat 

103 1ST
rir. | WOW BIRT y i
nisho

" " ai
a ol

d 64 say
orld - CEC Raj! |

India meer Lok Sabha polls - Home V

people vott sence of alle

Kumar

si nn oting for eligible vote

ah
: 024: ime te 2024 Genet
ions 2 + tl pisabulties |
of General Elect ia for che firs ens and persons with
ition leaders t = ded an | di e voting for Seno Ses woting process
ar in
 fing, he als0 asked Opes exten incites innroauees pe accessibility "

gsing a press briefings commission Of TO entvance ine
addre: process He this initiative a
to influence { Elections.
ypsared
en
av 

a

QRickit

Oreo

0881CHOS

It s just cag oe
voting! == S
~ Why is everyone 
so excited? 4

Just voting? It s the
biggest celebration of
our democracy 

the general elections!

sg

Fig. 5.2.

UNIVERSAL ADULT FRANCHISE

Franchise: The Constitution makers decided that universal adult franchise
granted by one would be a feature of Indian democracy right from the outset.
constitution or This means that every adult citizen gets one vote, and all votes

government have equal value. Hence, every Indian citizen aged 18 and

that is used above has the right to vote irrespective of caste, creed, race,

+ enone ct religion, gender, education, income, etc. The word universal 
franchise. connotes this.

LET'S EXPLORE

India changed the minimum age for voting from 21 to 18 in
1988. Discuss whether this was a good move.

Universal franchise is a cornerstone of Indian democracy.
Elections to the Lok Sabha, the legislative assembly of every
state and union territory, and all the local elections in villages
and cities are based on universal franchise (Article 326 of the
Constitution). Remember that no one can vote on another s

behalf.
/ > Can you calculate how long you have to wait before you
can vote?

To be able to exercise your right, you need to be registered as a
voter in your constituency. However, one is barred from voting
if found guilty of committing certain serious crimes.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Do you remember India had a general election in the summer
of 2024? About 980 million voters were eligible to exercise their
franchise for the 543 constituencies of the Lok Sabha.

-%, DON'T MISS OUT

India has 3.1 million elected representatives (1.3 million of them
women) in more than 250,000 local government bodies across
India. All these are democratically elected through universal
adult franchise.

We need an elaborate and well-organised system to manage this
massive exercise and ensure that the elections take place fairly
and freely. In this chapter, we will briefly explore who can vote,
a few of the types of elections we have, the electoral system, and
how it is organised.

=) DON T MISS OUT

> Before Independence, only 13 per cent of Indians were
allowed to vote, and franchise was not universal. We will
delve more into this in another part of the textbook.

> India was among
the early nations
to grant women
the right to vote,
ahead of many
others around
the world. For
example, women
were given the a
right to vote in Fig. 5.3. Women s suffrage parade, USA, 1913
Switzerland only in 1971. Women fought long and hard in
many countries to win this fundamental democratic right.
In India, on the other hand, a progressive constitutional
vision and deep democratic values rooted in India s
ancient traditions ensured women had voting rights from
the very beginning.

Constituency:
An area whose
voters elect a
representative
to a legislative
body.

System:

A group of
interconnected

or interdependent
elements that
work together

to achieve a
common purpose
or function.

5 - Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System

Governance and Democracy

 

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

SS

_ In 1947, our literacy rate was about 14 per cent, only about
8 per cent among women. Some argued that the right to vote
should be given only to literate people. Discuss in your group
why the Constitution makers may have decided on universal
franchise from the time of Independence itself.

There are several reasons why universal franchise is so
important. A few are illustrated in the mindmap below. Can you
add some more?

No
discrimination
based on caste,
creed, sex,
education,
wealth etc.

People (
participate in
solving problems
in their area

Everyone is
WN Fosters civic
engagement

All can
Everyone's participate
< voice matters in deciding

Power to universal the nation s
determine adult future.

People
decide what

type of future : franchise? Elected
they want and fata : representatives
who can best =_ answerable to

represent electorate

them People

vote
them out in
elections

Fig. 5.4. Importance of universal franchise in a democracy. Add two reasons
of your own in the empty boxes.

BRIDGING BARRIERS, ENABLING
| PARTICIPATION: ENSURING UNIVERSAL
| FRANCHISE

Democracy thrives when every eligible citizen can freely and
fairly participate in the electoral process. Voting in elections is
a powerful way for people to express their will. How does this
take place in India?

India is a large, diverse, and complex country. To illustrate,
the population of eligible voters in India is fifteen times the
population of the United Kingdom, and in terms of area, India is
six times larger than France. Geographic diversity is a challenge,
too. Thus, elections in India need to be organised taking this
complexity into account.

The Election Commission of India organises elections in India.
(We will learn more about ECI later in the chapter.) The ECI
has taken several innovative accessibility measures to remove
barriers to exercising the franchise and ensure no voter is left
behind.

Electoral officials travel to remote locations to ensure every
citizen can exercise their democratic right. In 2024, for the first
time, the elderly and people with disabilities could cast their
votes from home, and the postal voting option was available for
a specific category of voters. Assistive technologies like brailleenabled voter cards and app-based requests for assistance,
including wheelchairs and ramps, were also made possible.

LET S EXPLORE

> Discuss in groups What role do such measures play in a
democracy? Do you know of anyone who benefited from
these improved accessibility measures? How might they
increase voter participation in your neighbourhood? How
can technology assist?

> Ifyou have access to the
internet, visit the ECI
website (https://www.
eci.gov.in/persons-withdisabilities). Read and
identify the various
interventions that the
ECI has taken to facilitate
voting by people with
disabilities.

5 - Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System

Governance and Democracy

 

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Fig. 5.6. India s electoral system endeavours to enable every citizen to exercise
their franchise. This includes measures such as organising a polling station for a
single woman voter, postal voting and providing wheelchair assistance.

 

Chapter 5.indd 122 05-07-2025 17:42:14

LET'S EXPLORE |

About 34 per cent of eligible voters did not exercise their |
right to vote in the 2024 elections. Why do you think this is
so? What are some challenges people face in exercising their
rights? Design and conduct a short survey among adults in
your family and neighbourhood to answer these questions.
Analyse the data and write a report with suggestions on how

it may be possible to ensure everyone votes.

~ DON T MISS OUT

The Uttaramerur inscriptions from the 10" century describe a
transparent process for the selection of representatives. Eligible
candidates names were written on fragments of palm leaves
and placed in a pot, which was then sealed. On the selection day, _ |
it was opened publicly and a young boy drew the palm leaves
randomly one by one; a respected individual, after showing his
empty hands to the public, would read out each name of the
selected candidates.

Election for class representative Grade 8,
Suryodaya School

It was time for the annual election
of the Class Representative
(Class Rep). The Class Rep would
represent the class in meetings
with teachers, organise events,
and act as a bridge between the
students and school authorities.
Three students Ahmed, Gurmat,
and Ravi decided to contest for
the position. The class teacher,
Ms. Usha, was appointed as the Election Officer to ensure the
election process was fair, transparent, and followed all the
necessary rules.

Fig. 5.7.

5 - Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System

Governance and Democracy

 

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

S|

Here s a brief introduction of each of the candidates:

Ahmed promised to improve the cleanliness of the classrooms and the
playground.

Gurmat was interested in helping all her classmates learn better. She
proposed creating a system of peer coaching and mutual support.

Ravi wanted to make more space in their class timetable for the arts
curriculum music, theatre, and visual art in line with the new
curriculum.

Campaigning:

Ahmed put up posters, Gurmat used the noticeboard and spoke to
classmates, while Ravi held a lunchtime music performance to promote
his idea. As the Election Officer, Ms. Usha had to organise the elections
and ensure it was conducted fairly. She explained the rules to the class,
ensuring everyone understood how the secret ballot voting process would
work; no one would know who voted for whom, ensuring the process was
private and fair. She set up the voting booths in the corner of the classroom.

Voting day:

On election day, each student was given a ballot paper with the names of
the three candidates. The students were asked to mark an X next to the
name of the candidate they wished to vote for. Ms. Usha also ensured that
there was a ballot paper in braille for Neha. After all the students voted,

Ms. Usha collected the ballots in a box and sealed it until the counting
session.

The results:

After all the 33 votes were cast, Ms. Usha called Ms Sheeba from
the next class to witness the counting process. One of the ballot
papers was not marked, so it was declared invalid. The results
were announced: Ahmed received 8 votes, Gurmat 12 and Ravi
10. Gurmat, with the most votes, was declared the new Class
Representative. She thanked her classmates and promised to fulfil
her commitments. Ahmed and Ravi congratulated her and offered
to support her.

LET'S EXPLORE

>

What are the most important aspects of the election process
in this caselet?

Why was it important to have a secret ballot?

What considerations might the students have had while
exercising their choice?

Do you think the students have any responsibility after
Gurmat was elected as the class rep? If yes, what are they?

What was the role that Ms. Usha played? Why was it
important?

Why was it important for Ms. Usha to organise a braille ballot
paper for Neha?

What would happen if many students in the class chose not
to mark a preference?

ciQ,, DON'T MISS OUT

Imagine if a student did not want to vote for any of the candidates
 Ahmed, Gurmat, or Ravi. What option would they have? Some
countries, including India, offer an additional option, NOTA None
Of The Above. This option allows voters to reject all candidates if
they are not satisfied with any of them. It doesn t change the result
but sends a message voters want better choices. NOTA is a quiet
but powerful tool in a democracy.

5 - Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System

Governance and Democracy

 

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

S|

THE ROLE OF THE ELECTION COMMISSION
OF INDIA (ECD

We have seen the size and diversity that needs to be kept in
mind in the organisation of the election process in India. In this
section, we will look at the different types of elections that the
ECI organises and oversees.

f LET'S REMEMBER

India is a parliamentary democracy where, at the national
level, citizens choose representatives for the Lok Sabha (the
lower house of the Parliament). They focus on issues affecting
the entire country. In addition, voters elect representatives
from their constituencies to the legislative assemblies in the
state and union territories where they are registered. These
members focus primarily on regional issues.

These are just two of the elections that the ECI manages; we will
see more in the later sections. However, before we get a glimpse
of the election process, let us get introduced to the Election
Commission of India, the institution that oversees it.

LET'S REMEMBER

In Grade 6, youread about direct elections to gram panchayats
and urban local bodies. The State Election Commissions
manage these.

Election Commission of India 
A brief introduction

The Election Commission of India (ECI) is an independent
constitutional body responsible for conducting free and fair
elections. It was established in 1950 and conducts elections to
the Lok Sabha, Rajya Sabha, State Legislative Assemblies in
India, and the offices of the President and Vice President. The
first general elections in independent India were held in 19511952.

The ECI performs crucial tasks like:

SA,
Setting Registering

election dates political
parties

Enforcing the Overseeing the

Model Code entire electoral
of Conduct process

Fig. 5.9. Tasks performed by the Election Fig. 5.10. Office of the the Election
Commission of India Commission of India in Delhi

Election Commission of India

At national

At State/UT level At District level
level

Chief Election Chief Electoral District Election
Commissioner Officer Officer

Two Election

Commissioners Electoral Registration

Officer (ERO)
(manages voter list)

Returning Officer (RO)
(conducts elections)

Fig. 5.11. Structure of the Election Commission of India

5 - Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System

Governance and Democracy

 

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

SS

Managing the electoral process

Managing elections in India is a mammoth task. The ECI has been
upgrading its capacities to keep pace with the needs of modern
India in conducting free and fair elections. The electoral system
is massive and needs to work efficiently. We take the example of
the Lok Sabha elections to illustrate this. Note that the elections
to the state assemblies follow a similar process. All elections take
place at different times but with some periodicity; so every year,
several polls are conducted in various parts of the country based
on when they are due.

Be Be Be
Be BS BE
Gp Gp.
Gp Op
Gp Gp.
Oi i i
iB BS BB

About 543 Over

3B BS BE BS

980 million parliamentary 1 million
voters constituencies polling stations

Fig. 5.12. A few numbers showing the scale of the 2024 Lok Sabha elections.

As you can see, the numbers are very large. Many people are
deployed to assist the whole process, including teachers.

LET'S EXPLORE

Identify teachers in your school or vicinity who may have
performed election duty. Invite them to your class to share
their experiences.

DON'T MISS OUT

84 of the Lok Sabha constituencies are
reserved for persons from the scheduled
castes, while 47 are reserved for scheduled

; general
tribes.

Process of voting for the Lok Sabha
and State assemblies

Ry 4 . 7
Fig. 5.14. Managing the elections 
extensive use of technology

1 * polling officer:
Checks name on voter
list and ID proof.

2 polling officer:
Inks finger, gives
chit and takes your
signature.

34 polling officer:
Takes chit and checks
your finger. NOTA
(None Of The Above)
option is also available.

4th Press button to
vote on the electronic
voting machine (EVM);

you hear a beep Fig. 5.15. Shyam Saran Negi, a school
sound. Also check the teacher in Himachal Pradesh, was the
printed slip in VVPAT. first voter in India s general elections of
1951. Here, in 2017, he cast his vote at
Fig. 5.13. the age of 100.

5 - Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System

Governance and Democracy

 

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

 

LET'S EXPLORE

> India s electronic
voting machines
(EVMs) and_ Voter
Verifiable Paper Audit
Trail (VVPAT) systems
have been used in
countries like Namibia
and Bhutan with
support from _ the
ECI. Other countries a
have also studied this Fig. 5.16. Electronic voting machines
technology and have received training from India to
adopt it in their countries.

> VVPAT isa system that produces a physical paper record,
allowing voters to verify that their electronic votes were
cast correctly. This paper trail provides a backup for
verification and recounting purposes in case of disputes
or failures of the electronic system.

Model Code of Conduct (MCC)

The code is followed to ensure free and fair elections, listing the
dos and don ts for leaders, political parties, and candidates that
must be adhered to.

A few elements of the code:

i. There are rules that the party in government must follow;
this ensures that the resources available to the government
are not used for the purpose of the elections. For example,
no new schemes and projects are to be announced that may

| influence voters.

| li. All candidates are expected to exercise discretion and
restraint to ensure that the elections take place peacefully.

iii. Influencing voters through gifts in return for votes is
punishable.

LET'S EXPLORE

> Here area few types of complaints that the ECI handles.

Fig. 5.17. A candidate distributed Fig. 5.18. Abusive language used by
sarees and household appliances the candidate of one party against the
to women voters. candidate from an opposing party.

1 wae 
Fig. 5.19. Officials of the Fig. 5.20. Bundles of 500/- notes
government campaigning for found in the car of a candidate
the ruling party. during inspections.

> Why do you think these might be violations of the code of
conduct?

cy, DON T MISS OUT

The Model Code of Conduct was adopted in Kerala in 1960,
voluntarily approved by representatives of the major
political parties of the time. The ECI circulated it to political
parties during the 1962 general elections, and from 1991,
the ECI became proactive in ensuring the observance
of the MCC.

5 - Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System

Governance and Democracy

@

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

 

|-, DON'T MISS OUT

T.N. Seshan became the Chief Election
Commissioner in 1990. He brought in
reforms to ensure free and fair elections,
among them: campaigning to follow
precise rules, voter IDs to eliminate proxy |
voting, and strict vigilance on spending .
by candidates. T.N. Seshan worked hard 
to protect the rights of voters and is often S

remembered as the officer who made Indian ee 3
elections fairer, transparent and fearless! _Fig. 5.21. TN. Seshan

LET'S EXPLORE

When is the next election in the region where you are
located? Is it to the state, urban local body or panchayat?

UNDERSTANDING ELECTIONS IN INDIA 
A VERY BRIEF OVERVIEW

Election to the Lok Sabha and State
Legislative Assemblies

Elections in India are often referred to as the Festival of
Democracy a time when citizens exercise their right to choose
representatives freely, fairly, and responsibly.

We know that India follows a parliamentary system of
government where citizens participate in various levels
of elections Lok Sabha (national level), state legislative
assemblies (state level) and local bodies (city and village level).
The country is divided into 543 constituencies for the Lok Sabha
elections. The elected candidates to the Lok Sabha are known
as Members of Parliament (MPs), whereas candidates elected
to state assemblies are known as Members of Legislative
Assembly (MLAs). India uses the First-Past-the-Post electoral
system, wherein the candidate receiving the most votes in a

constituency wins. This means that a candidate can win without
securing even 50 per cent of the total votes (like Gurmat won
despite getting only 12 out of the 33 votes).

J, DON'T MISS OUT

The legislative assembly is called by several names in regional
languages, for example, Vidhan Sabha and Niyama Sabha.
What is it called in your state?

After the voting process is completed, the process of government haroup 
formation begins. The political party or coalition winning of two

a majority of the seats in the Lok Sabha forms the national ial ly
government. The leader of this majority typically becomes the working
prime minister. Similarly, at the state level, the leader of the | together

majority party becomes the chief minister. |

Vo

\

Fig. 5.22

As we saw in Fig. 5.11, the State Election Commission is a part
of the election apparatus. It plays an important role not only in
general and state elections but also in conducting elections to

5 - Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System

Governance and Democracy

 

Dissolution:
Expiry or
termination
due to the
end of its
term or other
Constitutional
reason

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

 

local bodies at the grassroots level. It works in consultation with
the ECI in these matters, and universal adult franchise, and all
other Constitutional provisions applicable in the case of direct
elections by the people are pertinent here too.

) > Whoare the MP and MLA/ MLAs of the constituency you

L > Which party does each of them belong to?
> Whatare the concerns of the MP and MLA, respectively?

are located in? (A Lok Sabha constituency may have two
or more assembly constituencies.)

Election to the Rajya Sabha

The candidates elected to the Rajya Sabha are also known as
Members of Parliament (MPs), but they are chosen through
indirect elections.

Let us revisit the example of Suryodaya School. Imagine that the
school is setting up a special council at the school level. If the
members of this council are elected by the class representatives, it
would be an indirect election.

Of the 245 members of the Rajya Sabha, 233 are elected by the
elected members of the state legislative assemblies (MLAs),
while the President of India nominates 12. Each state is allotted
a different number of Rajya Sabha seats based on population.
For example, more populous states like Uttar Pradesh have more
seats than less populous states like Arunachal Pradesh.

The Rajya Sabha is also called the Permanent House it is never
dissolved. A member of the Rajya Sabha has a six-year term. Onethird of its members retire every two years, and new members
are elected.

There is a difference, however, in the voting process. It uses what
is called a single transferable vote system . This is a special way
of ensuring that smaller states also get fair representation in the
Rajya Sabha. You will learn more about the exact mechanism of
how this works in higher classes.

MLAs President of

India
Vote in

indirect Nominates
elections 12 members

Elect 233
Rajya Sabha
members

Rajya Sabha members are elected
by MLAs through indirect elections,
while the President nominates 12
distinguished individuals.

Rajya Sabha is a permanent
body; one-third of its members
retire every two years, ensuring

continuity.

Seat allocation is based on state
populations; more populous states
like Uttar Pradesh have more
seats.

MLAs vote using a single
transferable vote system, ranking
candidates by preference.

Bicameral
legislatures:
A bicameral
legislature

is asystem
where the
legislative body
is divided into
two separate
chambers or
houses.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
Election of the President of India

The President of India is not directly elected by the common
people. Instead, an electoral college is formed to carry out the
election. This Electoral College consists of:

Members of Parliament (MPs) from both the houses of the
Parliament Lok Sabha (Lower House) and the Rajya
Sabha (Upper House)

Members of the Legislative Assemblies (MLAs) from each
of India s states and the union territories of Delhi and
Puducherry

The single transferable vote system is followed in this election.
Since the president represents the whole country, this method
ensures the support of both the central and state governments.
The rules for voting and counting are very elaborate; the more
populous states have a greater say. (We need not go into the
details at this stage.)

The following group of people is not involved in electing the
President of India:

Nominated members of Rajya Sabha (12)
Nominated members of State Legislative Assemblies

Members of Legislative Councils (both elected and
nominated) in bicameral legislatures

Nominated members of union territories of Delhi and
Puducherry

Y THINK ABOUT IT

Why do you think the above group of people is not involved in
electing the President of India? Why are the common people
not involved in the election of the president?

It

is because this ensures that only directly elected

representatives vote to elect the President. This maintains
democratic legitimacy, as the President is meant to represent the
will of the people, indirectly but meaningfully.

Election of the Vice President of India

The Vice President of India is elected by an electoral college
consisting of the elected and nominated members of both
Houses of Parliament; again, the system of single transferable
vote is used.

The vice president is the chairperson of the Rajya Sabha. If there
are situations when the president is not able to discharge their
function, the vice president steps in to play the role.

CHALLENGES AND THE ROAD AHEAD

India s electoral system is celebrated as the world s largest
democratic exercise. However, like all systems, it faces its share
of challenges. Issues such as the growing influence of money in
elections, a significant proportion of candidates with criminal
records, and voter apathy, (particularly in urban areas),
raise important questions about the health and future of our
democracy.

The way forward lies in empowering voters with the information
they need to make thoughtful and responsible choices. Media,
education, and awareness campaigns must work together to
help people, especially the youth, understand the importance
of voting wisely. An aware and vigilant voter is the strongest
safeguard of a democratic system. It starts with asking the right
questions and ends with casting a responsible vote.

Before we move on...

+> Universal adult franchise is the cornerstone of Indian
democracy.

> The right to vote is a responsibility, too. It needs to be
taken seriously by every voter. Voter awareness is an
important aspect of the right to vote.

> Itis important to facilitate the participation of all
eligible voters.

> The Election Commission of India is the Constitutional
body that conducts elections in the country.

5 - Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System

Governance and Democracy

 

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

 

Chapter 5.indd 138

The ECI oversees all the elections in the country, including
those of the president and vice president.

Indian democracy faces challenges that call for the voters 
vigilance and awareness.

Questions and activities

1.

Why is universal adult franchise important for a healthy
democracy?

What is the meaning of secret ballot ? Why is this important
in a democracy?

3. Give examples of direct and indirect elections.

How is the election of members to the Lok Sabha different
from that to the Rajya Sabha?

What, in your view, are the advantages of the EVM over
paper ballots?

Voter turnout has been declining in some urban areas of
India. What could be the reasons for this trend, and what
steps can be taken to encourage more people to vote?

Why do you think a proportion of seats in the Lok Sabha is
reserved for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes? Write a
short note.

Social media is changing the way we experience elections
 from catchy campaign reels and live speeches to political
debates on Instagram and Twitter. But is this strengthening
democracy or confusing it? Discuss in pairs: What are the
benefits, what are the challenges, and what might the future
of elections be in a digital age?

. Visit the website https:/www.indiavotes.com, and choose

a parliamentary constituency election from any year
and explore its results. Do the same for an assembly
election in your state.

05-07-2025 17:42:30