The Colonial Era in India

Nearly two centuries ago the early Britons in Bengal and the sister
Presidencies regarded the land and the people as fair game for
plunder. ... Under the later Britons, as administrators ... the plunder
is proceeding far more outrageously today than at any preceding
period. ... Modern England has been made great by Indian wealth, ...
wealth always taken by the might and skill of the stronger.

 William Digby (1901)

Fig. 4.1. A painting entitled The East offering its riches
to Britannia , by a Greek painter, Spiridione Roma, 1778.
(The painting is discussed later in the chapter.)

0881CHO4

1498: Vasco da
Gama s arrival at
Calicut (Kozhikode)

1560: Establishment
of the Inquisition
at Goa

 >
ae

1612-1690: The
English East India
Company establishes
trading posts at Surat,
Madras, Bombay and

In the previous chapter, we saw the Marathas considerably
weaken the Mughal Empire, before they themselves succumbed
to the British forces early in the 19" century. And yet, military
campaigns were only one factor in India becoming the jewel in
the Crown of the British Empire indeed, the empire s largest
colony.

THE AGE OF COLONIALISM

Before we get there, we must step back a little in time and
consider the phenomenon of colonialism. Its usual definition
is the practice where one country takes control of another
region, establishing settlements there, and imposing its political,
economic, and cultural systems. This is not a recent occurrence:
colonialism can be traced to the time of the great empires in
the 1% millennium BCE; in the 1* millennium CE, the spread
of Christianity and Islam also involved the colonisation of the
territories converted to the new faiths.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Chapter 4.indd 84 05-07-2025 17:14:35

1674: The French East India 1757: British 1835: Macaulay's
Company sets up a trading H victory in the Minute on
post at Pondicherry Battle of Plassey Indian Education

1858: The British
Crown ends the rule
of the East India
Company; start
of the British Raj

1741: Defeat
of the Dutch
at the Battle
of Colachel

1818: Third
Anglo-Maratha
war ends
Maratha power

1770-1772: First
great famine in
Bengal

1848-49: Fall of the Sikh
Empire; the East India
Company annexes Punjab

1746-1763: 1829-1833: The
The Carnatic Khasi Uprising 1857: The. Great
Wars between (in present-day IndiafRebeliion
the British and Meghalaya)
the French

But the Age of Colonialism usually refers to Europe s expansion
from the 15" century onward, which, within a few centuries,
extended to large parts of the world. As you will discover in
higher grades, European powers in particular, Spain, Portugal,
Britain, France, and Netherlands established colonies across
Africa, Asia, the Americas, Australia and many Pacific islands, Enslavement:
after conquering large parts of those regions of the world Turning
q p & - a someone into
Often, the conquests were achieved through military campaigns a slave.

that involved the massacre or enslavement of native populations.

What impelled those nations to undertake such campaigns?
Political competition between European powers created a
race for territorial expansion and global influence. Territorial
expansion had obvious economic advantages: access to new
natural resources, new markets and new trade routes and,
often, plunder, as we will see. Converting indigenous populations to Christianity was another powerful motivation. A lesser
one, but significant nonetheless, was scientific inquiry the

4 - The Colonial Era in India

Tapestry of the Past

 

Chapter 4.indd 85 05-07-2025 17:14:36

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

|

Chapter 4.indd 86

Demonise:
To falsely
portray an
individual
or agroup
of people
in avery
negative
light.

desire to explore unknown lands so as to accumulate knowledge
of the planet s geography and natural history.

While colonisers often claimed they had the civilising mission 
of bringing progress to the colonised peoples, who were often
demonised as savage , primitive or barbaric , the reality was
very different: loss of independence, exploitation of resources

alremteiny Lise tnite et 8 S85
 

Fig. 4.3. A cartoon depicting a British business magnate straddling
Africa while he holds a telegraph wire (Edward Linley Sambourne in
Punch magazine, London, 1892).

by the colonisers, the destruction of traditional ways of life,
and the imposition of foreign cultural values. It is true that the
colonial age brought the world together, saw a rapid growth of
economies and technologies, but the benefits were mostly for
the colonisers; many historical studies have documented the
immense hardships that the colonised people had to endure.

05-07-2025 17:14:36

LET'S EXPLORE

What do you think the cartoon (Fig. 4.3) is trying to express?
(Keep in mind that the telegraph, which permitted instant
communications for the first time, was then a recent
invention.) Analyse different elements of the drawing.

In many of the colonised regions, resistance built up against
the colonisers. The phenomenon of colonialism declined in the
mid-20" century, especially after World War II; many factors
contributed to rapid worldwide decolonisation, with most
colonised countries attaining independence. Here, however, we
will focus on the special case of India.

EUROPEANS IN INDIA

India traded with the Greeks and the Romans over two
millennia ago. Indian goods spices, cotton, ivory, gems,
sandalwood, teakwood, wootz steel, among other commodities
 were highly sought after in the Mediterranean world. Until
the 16" century CE, when European powers began sailing
to the Indian Subcontinent, India was a vibrant economic
and cultural powerhouse. Historical estimates (by economist
Angus Maddison, in particular) suggest that India contributed
at least one-fourth of the world GDP during this whole period,
making it one of the two largest economies globally alongside
China (whose contribution was of the same order). It is
remarkable that from the 16" century onward, many European
travellers to India described her as flourishing and noted her
manufacturing capabilities, diverse agricultural output, and
extensive internal as well as external trading networks. However,
this economic prosperity also made India an attractive target for
European colonial ambitions.

Let us survey Europe s first colonial powers in India.

The Portuguese: commerce and atrocities

The Portuguese explorer and navigator Vasco da Gama s arrival
at Kappad (near Kozhikode in Kerala) in May 1498 paved the
way for the beginning of European colonisation in India.

GDP:
Abbreviation
of gross
domestic
product , a
measure of
the value of
goods and
services a
country (or
the world,
in this case)
produces in
one year.

 

4 - The Colonial Era in India

Tapestry of the Past

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

 
[>]

Chapter 4.indd 88

A few centuries ago,
the port town of
Ullal (in present-day
southern Karnataka)
was an_ important
trading point controlled by Rani Abbakka I.
In the latter half of
the 16" century, the
Portuguese repeatedly attempted to take it
over, but Rani Abbakka I formed strategic
alliances with neighbouring kingdoms
and thwarted their attempts. She was
eventually captured and died fighting in
prison. Her successor Rani Abbakka II is
reported to have created fireballs out of
coconut shells and set several ships of the
Portuguese navy on fire. Their inspirational
stories are remembered even today
through the Yakshagana, a traditional form
of dance-drama.

Though he was well received,
his aggressive ways failed to
establish friendly relations
with the local rulers. During
his second voyage four years
later, he seized, tortured and
killed Indian merchants, and
bombarded Calicut from the
sea. The Portuguese captured
strategic ports, including Goa
(in 1510), which became the
capital of their colony in India,
as well as several trading
posts along the Malabar and
Coromandel coasts.

The Portuguese implemented
a system known as cartaz
(pass), requiring all ships in
the Arabian Sea to purchase
Portuguese permits for
navigation. Ships without
these permits were seized.
This naval dominance

allowed them to monopolise the spice trade between

Inquisition:
A tribunal set up
by the Roman

India and Europe for nearly a century.

Catholic Church
to judge heretics
(i.e. Christians
suspected of
holding opinions
contrary to the
Church's doctrine).
Over some 600
years, across
Europe many
thousands of
supposed heretics
were tortured and
executed.

Alongside commercial

exploitation, the Portuguese 4a 

presence in western ASCO,- DA> GAMA

India was_ characterised Pel

by religious persecution. KhorKatavy

In Goa, they established IN "WHE YEAR

the Inquisition in 1560, 1498.

which severely persecuted

Hindus, Muslims, Jews,

and Christian converts Oo
Fig. 4.4. A plaque in

suspected of practising Kozhikode marking Vasco

their original faith. Such

da Gama s arrival in 1498

05-07-2025 17:14:36

Chapter 4.indd 89

persecution was accompanied by forced conversions and the
destruction of many Hindu temples, among other forms of
abuse of the native population. (The Goa Inquisition was only
abolished in 1812.)

The Dutch: commerce and competition

The Dutch arrived in India in the early 17" century and, unlike
the Portuguese, focused primarily on commercial dominance,
particularly in the spice trade. They established a Dutch East
India Company, with trading posts in various parts of India,
including, on the west coast, Surat, Bharuch, Cochin (Kochi), and
on the east coast Nagapattinam and Masulipatnam (presentday Machilipatnam). Their most significant presence was in the
Malabar region of Kerala, where they displaced the Portuguese
from several trading centres.

Fig. 4.5. A depiction of the surrender of Dutch forces to King Marthanda Varma of
Travancore after the Battle of Colachel, 1741 CE (Padmanabhapuram Palace).

4 - The Colonial Era in India

Tapestry of the Past

 

05-07-2025 17:14:37

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

S|

Chapter 4.indd 90

The Dutch presence in India was ultimately limited; it declined
significantly after their defeat at the Battle of Colachel in
1741, where the forces of Travancore under King Marthanda
Varma decisively defeated the Dutch both on land and at sea
(the Travancore kingdom was in the southern part of presentday Kerala). This battle was a rare instance of an Asian power
successfully repelling a European colonial force.

The French: colonial ambitions

The French entered India later, establishing their first trading
post at Surat in 1668 and subsequently at Pondicherry (presentday Puducherry) in 1674, where they established their East
India Company (Compagnie des Indes Orientales) and developed
ambitious plans to establish a French empire in India.

Dupleix, who served as Governor-General of French India from
1742 to 1754, pioneered several colonial strategies that would
later be adopted by the British. In particular, he trained Indian
soldiers in European military techniques, creating disciplined
infantry soldiers known as sepoys. Dupleix also developed
the strategy of indirect rule through puppet Indian rulers,
who were installed through interventions in local succession
disputes.

The French colonial ambitions in India were ultimately checked
during the Carnatic Wars (1746-1763), a series of conflicts
between Britain and France. Despite initial successes under
Dupleix, who captured Madras (present-day Chennai) in 1746,
the French ultimately lost ground to the British and their colony
was reduced to Pondicherry and a few smaller enclaves.

Like the Dutch, and unlike the Portuguese, the French colonial
powers did not much intervene in Indians social and religious
life. A rare exception was the destruction in 1748 of Pondicherry s
large Vedapurishwaran temple, ordered by Dupleix on the
persistent request of Pondicherry s Jesuit priests and Dupleix s
own wife, with a view to asserting the dominance of Christianity.
Generally, however, the French had to be content with a modest
amount of trade with India.

05-07-2025 17:14:37

Chapter 4.indd 91

SINAN ABN } MUA UUVPURTNELTRELOLIAGALEARLLOEELUELELCCUADEL DUS SSUEUOGUOLOLEIIE O00 010. AEE bi la re poet
...__ PLAN DE LA VILLE DE PONDICHERI___--7

Ad

 "

tact eae EE TT hs 43
S A Le Fort P. Bastion de la Rene uCrmetere des Malabares
B.Ouvrage a Corne Q.Baston de l'Hopital 12.Cometere des Francois.

 c. Bastion de 3 Laurent R. Bastion Goudelour 23. Grand Marche...
D. Bastion de S* Louis 8. Petite Batterie 14.Prison des Malaber es:
. 8, Bastion d' Anjou, 1, UBiglise des Capucins 45, Ouvrages neufs, fatts en?

 . Bastion d Orleans . 2.lhiglhise des Testes 4740 et 1742. 9

LGHDECGTOANUUREAASGANQOQIUEEUGUEECPETURAD GEAR PETA ETOC EAN EHH

Bastion dela Porte de Madras3. Jardins de la Compagnie 16. Ouvrages de i740, y

H. Bastion du Nord Quest . 4.Jardins des Jesuttes 47 Marche'de StLaurent |} |
: 1, Bastion de S! Joseph &. Jardins des Capuctns 48. Batterie des Toilles

K. Porte de Valledaur 6.l Hopital Via Place du Mas

 L. Bastion Valledaur 7Ancen Jardin de la Ce ompag 2o.Les Misstonatres

M. Bastion sans peut 8. L'Hotel de la Compagnie u.La grande Pagode
 ow Lorte Villenour g9-Maison du Gouverneur =
- 0.Bastion de Fillenour 10. Hotel de la Monneye

mT
CROUCH eee TTRESTAEHU ES CCLTETT

Echelle de Cing Cent Toises.

Loo 200 doo yoo Jeo

LA MeR DES INDES

ECMO {UCIT GRMRHSAAH ERTL AREPNATUYDUESCUACEPUNUUALAAL AE

Fig. 4.6. A 1764 plan of Pondicherry showing the city enclosed in
fortifications and grid planning. The large structure facing the sea (at
the bottom) was the fort. (The top of the plan points to the west.)

ENTER THE BRITISH

Britain dominated the Indian subcontinent for nearly two
centuries. How did this happen? Many books have dissected
the methods of the British rulers; we will not attempt to tell
a complete story, but will focus on the main aspects of their
colonial presence in India.

4 - The Colonial Era in India

Tapestry of the Past

05-07-2025 17:14:37

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

 

From traders to rulers

The British conquest of India is one of history s most remarkable
examples of how a trading company could transform into an
imperial power. Unlike classic conquests, the British takeover of
India was gradual, calculated, and often disguised as commercial
enterprise rather than military invasion.

The English East India Company was established as a trading
company and was granted a royal charter by Queen Elizabeth I,
which gave it special powers to raise a private army, for
instance. Nevertheless, its agents initially kept up a pretence of
being mere traders, which allowed them, in the 17" century, to
establish footholds along India s coast with minimal resistance:
Surat, Madras, Bombay and Calcutta among the first. Local rulers
did not mind these trading posts, as they generally welcomed
foreign trade (which, let us recall, was a longstanding practice in
India). These modest beginnings concealed the Company s longterm ambitions.

LET US EXPLORE

Before you read further, have a good look at the painting on
the first page of this chapter. It was specially ordered for the
London headquarters of the East India Company and is over
three metres long. Observe every aspect of it the people in
it, the objects, the symbols and the attitudes. Form groups of
four or five students and let each group present its conclusions
as regards the messages the painting conveys.

 

(You will find our answers a few pages down, when we return
to the painting, but avoid looking at them right now!)

The strategy of divide and rule 

While maintaining an appearance of traders, the Company s
agents cultivated political relationships with local rulers,
offering military support to some against their rivals, thus
inserting themselves into Indian political conflicts and emerging
as power brokers rather than foreign invaders. They would also

Chapter 4.indd 93

play on rivalries between
regionalrulers or succession
disputes within ruling
houses, so as to benefit from
these conflicts the divide
and rule policy. The
British were equally skilled
at exploiting existing
divisions within Indian
society: they identified
and often encouraged
tensions between religious
communities, for instance.

The Battle of Plassey (1757)
exemplifies this approach.
When tensions arose
between _ Siraj-ud-daulah,
the Nawab of Bengal, and
the East India Company
officials led by Robert
Clive, the latter identified

disgruntled elements within Fig. 4.7. Clive leading the East India Company s troops

the Nawab s court. Clive at Plassey, 1757 (painting by William Heath, 1821)

hatched a conspiracy with

Mir Jafar, the Nawab s military commander, promising to install
him as the new Nawab in exchange for his betrayal. The battle
took place at Palashi (Plassey as the British spelt it), some 150
kilometres north of present-day Kolkata. Some French forces
assisted the Nawab, but Mir Jafar s forces constituting the
majority of the Nawab s army stood aside, ensuring a British
victory despite their smaller number. Even today, Mir Jafar in
India remains a synonym for traitor !

By positioning themselves as a kingmaker, the East India
Company gradually established control over increasingly
large territories. In the 19 century, it went a step further
and introduced the infamous Doctrine of Lapse, according
to which any princely state would be annexed if its ruler died

4 - The Colonial Era in India

Tapestry of the Past

 

05-07-2025 17:14:37

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

 

without a natural male heir. This deliberately disregarded the
Hindu tradition of adoption, which was a legitimate means of
succession in Indian royal houses.

 DON'T MISS OUT

In the Indian context, a princely state was a region that
remained under the rule of an Indian prince, maharaja
or nawab, but which had accepted British protection and
guidance in exchange for maintaining internal autonomy.
There were hundreds of them, from large ones (such as
Hyderabad, Mysore, Travancore or Jammu & Kashmir) to
smaller ones. At the time of India s Independence, there were
over 500 princely states, covering about 40 per cent of the
Subcontinent.

The Doctrine of Lapse led to the annexation of numerous states,
contributing to the expansion of the territorial control of the
British. This created much resentment in sections of Indian
society and contributed to the 1857 Rebellion (to which we
return below).

Another stratagem (known as subsidiary alliance ) was to
install a British Resident in the courts of Indian rulers to
protect them against internal or external threats; in exchange,
they would have to maintain British troops at their own expense
and conduct foreign relations only through the British. While
appearing to preserve the sovereignty of princely states, the
system effectively transferred real power to the British while
burdening Indian rulers with the costs of their own subjugation!

The ruler of Hyderabad was among the first to enter such an
alliance in 1798; several others soon followed. These so-called
alliances allowed the British to control vast territories without
the administrative costs of direct rule, creating what was called
 an empire on the cheap . Once a state entered the system, exiting
it was virtually impossible, as any attempt to break free would
face overwhelming British military response.

Chapter 4.indd 95

FROM PARADISE TO HELL?

Devastating famines

A few years after its victory at Plassey, the East India Company
secured the right to collect revenue in Bengal, Bihar, and Odisha
 some of India s richest regions. Clive described Bengal in
particular as the paradise of the earth . The Company s agents
extracted maximum revenue while investing minimally in
governance or development, with devastating consequences for
the population.

In 1770-1772, coming on top of two years of crop failure, the
harsh revenue collection targets imposed by the East India
Company in Bengal requiring farmers to pay a high rate of
cash taxes on the produce of their lands, regardless of harvest
conditions caused a catastrophic famine which killed nearly
one-third of its population or an estimated 10 million people. In
fact, the Company maintained harsh revenue collection targets,
even increasing the land tax during the famine. Such cruelty
was denounced later not only by Indian personalities but by
some British officials and public intellectuals (such as William
Digby whom we quoted at the start of this chapter). For instance,
a century later, W.W. Hunter, an official, wrote:

C C While the country every year became a total waste, the

English government constantly demanded an increased
land-tax. ... All through the stifling summer of 1770 the
people went on dying. The husbandmen [farmers] sold
their cattle; they sold their implements of agriculture;
they devoured their seed-grain; they sold their sons and
daughters, till at length no buyer of children could be
found; they ate the leaves of trees and the grass of the
field. ... Day and night a torrent of famished and diseasestricken wretches poured into the great cities. 

Such tragic famines were going to recur throughout the British
rule in India. During the Great Famine of 1876-1878, for instance,
up to 8 million Indians perished, mostly in the Deccan plateau.

Paradise:

Ina religious
context,
heaven. Here,
an ideal,
wealthy or
perfectly

happy place.

Tapestry of the Past

4 - The Colonial Era in India

 

05-07-2025 17:14:37

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Chapter 4.indd 96

Ae, it \ ieee Weta

Fig. 4.8. Grain bags on Madras beach, ready for export,
| while people were dying of hunger in large numbers.

Fig. 4.9. People waiting for famine relief in
Bangalore (today Bengaluru) during the 1877
famine (Illustrated London News)

Disregarding the severity ofthe crisis,
some Indian traders would hold onto
their stocks in the hope of price rise,
causing an artificial scarcity, and the
British administration continued to
export grain to Britain about one
million tonnes of rice alone per year
during the three years of the famine
(Fig. 4.8).

Apart from the factors mentioned
above, the British economic policy
of free market , which left prices
of commodities free to fluctuate,
contributed to the severity of the
famines. Thus Lord Lytton, Viceroy of
India during the 1876-1878 famine,
issued an order that there is to be no

interference of any kind on the part of the Government with the
object of reducing the price of food. At the same time, in 1876, at

05-07-2025 17:14:38

the height of the Great Famine, Lytton organised an extravagant durbar
in Delhi which involved a week-long feast for 68,000 officials, satraps
and maharajas .

Precise numbers of severe famines during the entire British rule vary
from a dozen to over 20. According to several Famine Commissions and
other reports, it has been estimated that the total number of human
victims ( human since millions of cattle and other animals also died) is
anywhere between 50 and 100 million nearly the number of deaths
caused by World War II.

The British administration did open famine relief camps in some cities
(Fig. 4.9), but far too few and with inadequate supplies. Some officials
argued that famine relief should be deliberately kept very low; the
Famine Commission of 1878-80, for example, stated: The doctrine
that in time of famine the poor are entitled to demand relief ... would
probably lead to the doctrine that they are entitled to such relief at all
times. 

We should note that famines in India had occurred throughout history,
caused by droughts, floods, military campaigns and other factors, but
never on such a scale. During the colonial era, India, especially rural
India, sank into deep poverty and never recovered.

The drain of India s wealth

As we saw earlier, economic exploitation of India formed the
foundation of British colonial policy. In 1895, the U.S. historian and
political scientist Brooks Adams noted:

C C Very soon after [the Battle of] Plassey, the Bengal plunder

Chapter 4.indd 97

began to arrive in London, and the effect appears to have been
instantaneous, for all authorities agree that the industrial
revolution ... began with the year 1760. ... Possibly since the
world began no investment has ever yielded the profit reaped
from the Indian plunder. 

In other words, according to Adams, the Industrial Revolution in
Britain, which required much investment, was made possible at least
partly by the stolen wealth from India (this phrase is by the U.S.
historian Will Durant).

4 - The Colonial Era in India

Tapestry of the Past

 

08-07-2025 10:00:05

House of
Commons

is the name
for the
elected lower
house of the
bicameral
parliament
of the United
Kingdom.
Dadabhai
Naoroji was
the first
Indian to be
elected to the
British House
of Commons.

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

=

Fig. 4.10. Brooks
Adams Digby

Y THINK ABOUT IT

Taking his cue from scholars such as Adams and Digby, Dadabhai
Naoroji, a respected political figure, authored in 1901 Poverty
and Un-British Rule in India, in which he compiled from British
reports the wealth estimated to have been drained out of India.
About the same time, Romesh Chunder Dutt, a historian, did
a similar exercise in his Economic History of India. All these
studies showed that the colonisers had extracted many billions
of pounds from India. A more recent estimate (by Utsa Patnaik)
for the period 1765 to 1938 comes to 45 trillion U.S. dollars (in
today s value), or about 13 times Britain s GDP in 2023! This was
extracted not just through taxes, but by charging Indians for
the colonial power s expenditures on building the railways, the
telegraph network, and even on wars!

Had this wealth remained invested in India, it would have been
a very different country when it attained Independence.

LET S EXPLORE

Why do you think Dadabhai Naoroji means by un-British rule
in India ? (Hint: he was an MP in the House of Commons in
1892.)

Fig. 4.11. William Fig. 4.13. R.C. Dutt

Fig. 4.12. Dadabhai
Naoroji

Let us return to this painting (Fig. 4.14), but now with some
clues to its symbolism. Note how Britannia (a symbolic

Britannia, with the
lion symbolising

God Mercury,
symbolising
commerce and
travel

 Old Father = > Two dark figures
Thames , (Indians?) offering
symbolising London bales of cotton

Fig. 4.14. The East offering its riches to Britannia 
 making sense of the painting s symbolism

figure for Britain) sits higher than the colonies, pointing to
her superior power; contrast with the lower position and bent
posture of the colonies. Did they really offer their wealth? Or
did Britain seize it by force or ruse? Note also the Indians dark
complexion (in contrast with that of Britannia), reflecting the
belief in the superiority of white people over the dark-skinned
 natives .

CHANGING LANDSCAPES Ey &
The expanding colonial rule impacted nearly every aspect of zs
Indian life, as the rulers were convinced that India should be vt
reshaped according to their superior conceptions. Let us briefly a

Ft

look at a few of those impacts.

 

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

|

Embossed:
With a
design

stamped
on the
cloth in
sucha
way that it
stands out
in relief.

Decline of India s indigenous industries

Before the 18" century, India was renowned for its
manufacturing capabilities, particularly in textiles cotton, silk,
wool, jute, hemp and coir being the chief ones. Indian cotton
textiles, in particular, with rich and intricate designs, bright
colours, and textures ranging from ultra-thin muslins to richly
embossed fabrics were in high demand in many parts of the
world.

Do you understand all the terms used above to list and
describe Indian textiles? If not, form groups of four or five
and try to find out more, then compare your findings with
the help of your teacher.

British policy imposed heavy duties on Indian textiles imported
into Britain while forcing India to accept British manufactured
goods with minimal tariffs. Moreover, Britain now controlled
most of the sea trade as well as exchange rates, so Indian traders
found it difficult to export as earlier. The result was the ruin of
Indian textile industry. In the 19 century, India s textile exports
fell sharply, while Britain s imports into India grew even more
sharply. Communities of skilled artisans who had practised their
craft for generations were reduced to poverty and forced to
return to subsistence agriculture on increasingly overtaxed land.
As William Bentinck, then Governor-General of India, observed
in 1834, The bones of the cotton weavers are bleaching the
plains of India. 

Similar scenarios unfolded for India s manufactures of iron,
steel, paper and other goods. India s share of the world GDP kept
declining throughout the colonial rule, reaching hardly 5 per
cent at the time of Independence. In less than two centuries, one
of the richest lands of the world had become one of the poorest.

Dismantling traditional governance structures

Before British colonisation, India possessed well-organised
systems of local self-governance. Village councils managed

community affairs, resolved disputes, and organised public
works such as irrigation, roads, etc. Regional kingdoms
maintained complex administrative structures that had evolved
over centuries to address local needs and conditions. Charles
Metcalfe, an acting Governor-General in the 1830s, described
the system and its efficiency in this important statement:

C C The village communities are little republics, having

Chapter 4.indd 101

nearly everything they want within themselves. They
seem to last where nothing else lasts. Dynasty after dynasty
tumbles down; revolution succeeds to revolution; but the
village community remains the same. ... This union of the
village communities, each one forming a separate little
state in itself, has contributed more than any other cause
to the preservation of the people of India. 

The British systematically dismantled these indigenous
governance systems, replacing them with a centralised
bureaucracy designed primarily to facilitate tax collection
and maintain order, rather than promote public welfare.
This transformation destroyed centuries-old mechanisms of
community decision-making.

The introduction of British codes of law disregarded customary
laws and practices that had governed Indian communities for
generations. While presented as modernisation, this imposition
of a foreign system unsuited to India alienated ordinary Indians
from the judicial system, creating courts that were expensive,
time-consuming, and conducted in a foreign language.

Transforming Indian education:
creating brown Englishmen 

Education became a powerful tool for the creation of a class of
Indians who would serve British interests. In earlier centuries,
India had diverse educational traditions pdathashalas,
madrasas, viharas, and many forms of apprenticeship learning.
These institutions transmitted not only practical knowledge but
also cultural values and traditions. Even in the early 19" century,

4 - The Colonial Era in India

Tapestry of the Past

@

05-07-2025 17:14:39

Orientalist:

A largely obsolete
term to designate
a scholar of the
 Orient , that is,

regions from
West Asia to

the Far East. In
India, Orientalists

(now called

 Indologists ) were
often scholars

of Sanskrit, Pali,
Persian and other

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

e

languages.

British reports reported hundreds of thousands of village schools
across India (for instance, 100,000 to 150,000 of them in Bengal
and Bihar up to 1830!) where young natives are taught reading,
writing and arithmetic, upon a system so economical, ... and at
the same time so simple and effectual... 

A sharp turning point in India s educational history was marked
by the notorious 1835 Minute on Indian Education of British
historian and politician, Thomas B. Macaulay. In it, although
he admitted that he had no knowledge of either Sanskrit or
Arabic, he expressed his conviction that European knowledge
was vastly superior to India s: I have never found one among
them [Orientalists] who could deny that a single shelf of a good
European library was worth the whole native literature of India
and Arabia. Indians, therefore needed British education, whose
objective would be to create a class of Indians who would be
 Indian in blood and colour, but English in taste, in opinions, in
morals, and in intellect. 

Although a few prominent British Orientalists argued that
Indian students should be left to study in their own languages,
Macaulay s policy gained the upper hand and India s traditional
schools slowly disappeared, while English became a language of
prestige associated with the colonial masters, resulting in lasting
divisions in Indian society between English-educated elites and
the masses.

The new education system served multiple colonial objectives.
It created a pool of Indian clerks and minor officials who could
staff the lower ranks of the colonial administration at a fraction
of the cost of British personnel. It also sidelined traditional
sources of knowledge and authority, creating generations of
Indians disconnected from their own cultural heritage.

VY THINK ABOUT IT

What exactly did Macaulay mean when he wrote that
 a single shelf of a good European library was worth
the whole native literature of India and Arabia ? And
why should he want to make Indians English in taste, in

Chapter 4.indd 103

opinions, in morals, and in intellect ? How does this relate to
the civilising mission mentioned at the start of the chapter?
Ask your teacher to guide a class debate on these questions.

Reshaping economic structures to serve imperial
needs

The British transformed India s economy from a self-sufficient
agricultural system supplemented by craft and manufacture
production into a supplier of raw materials for British industry
and a market forced to buy British goods. Without going into
the technical details of this economic transformation, let us take
the example of the construction of India s vast railway network,
often cited as a colonial blessing. While the railways did bring
people closer together and integrated India s internal market, it
was designed primarily to move raw materials from the interior
to ports for export and to distribute British manufactured goods
throughout India. Railway routes largely ignored existing trade

=]

WY Voi =

4 2

- =~, . ~ 
| _W\ Ase

> A

Fig. 4.15. A steam locomotive of the Madras Railway (one of the companies

operating the rail network in British India) in 1860

4 - The Colonial Era in India

Tapestry of the Past

e

05-07-2025 17:14:39

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

=

patterns to serve colonial economic interests. Another purpose
was to move armies quickly from their cantonments if they had
to fight a distant rebellion or war.

Besides, the construction of India s railways was not a gift from
the colonial rulers to India. Most of it was paid for by Indian tax
revenue, which means that Indian funded infrastructure that
primarily served British strategic and commercial interests,
instead of being focused on serving the people s needs. The same
can be said of the telegraph network.

Even the administrative costs of colonialism were borne by
Indian subjects. The colonial administrative apparatus, military
installations, and the lavish lifestyles of British officials in India
were all financed by Indian taxation. In short, Indians funded
their own subjugation.

EARLY RESISTANCE MOVEMENTS:
CHALLENGING COLONIAL AUTHORITY

India was such an enormous source of wealth, natural and
human resources for the British that they nicknamed her the
jewel in the crown of the British Empire . And they asserted
that India would forever remain part of the British Empire, on
which the sun never sets. 

Y THINK ABOUT IT

What is meant by the sun never sets on the British Empire ?
Do you think this was a correct statement?

However, almost from the beginning of the British conquest of
India, resistance movements manifested to try and repel this
self-imposed guest . We will briefly survey a few such
movements, but before we do so, let us have a good look at the
map of the British Indian Empire (Fig. 4.16). The red and pink
territories are those directly under British administration, while
the yellow ones are the princely states we discussed earlier. (The
black lines stand for the railway lines.)

mperial Gazetteer Adas of India. Flate 20.

|

NATIVE STATES AND TERRITORES
ALWAYS GHOWN THUS

Fig. 4.16. A map of the British Indian Empire in 1909

LET'S EXPLORE

Examine the map. What are the main differences with the |

map of today s India, in terms both of borders and of names? | 3
The Sannyasi-Fakir rebellion oz
One of the earliest organised resistance movements, often 33
called the the Sannyasi (or Sannyasi-Fakir) Rebellion , ee
began in Bengal after the terrible famine of 1770. Groups of cm

sannyasis (Hindu ascetics) and fakirs (Muslim ascetics), who

 

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

S

Chapter 4.indd 106

traditionally travelled freely for pilgrimage and charity, found
their movements restricted by the British East India Company
policies, especially by the new land and taxation policies. The
precise motivations of the sannyasis and fakirs have been
debated, but over the next three decades they attacked British
treasuries and tax collectors. The British called them bandits ,
executed some of them and used their superior forces to
eventually defeat them. This rebellion later inspired the Bengali
writer Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay s novel Anandamath
(1882); it contained the song Vande Mataram , which would
inspire Indians during the struggle for freedom in the early 20"
century and, after Independence, became India s national song.

Tribal uprisings

India s tribal communities faced unique threats as the British
expanded into forests and hills, disrupting their traditional way
of life. The British described tribals as primitive , restricted their
access to forests and forest produce, sometimes acquiring tribal
land or turning it into private property, imposing cash taxes,
catching tribals in debt traps, replacing traditional tribal councils
with the British legal system and encouraging missionaries to
 civilise and convert tribals to Christianity. Besides, a colonial
law categorised hundreds of tribal communities as criminal
tribes , causing them to be unjustly harassed for decades.

Some of the above abuse led some tribes to rise in rebellion
against the colonial power. Among the first such events, the
Kol Uprising (1831-1832) in Chota Nagpur (in present-day
Jharkhand) started when the British introduced land policies
that favoured outsiders over the original tribal inhabitants.
The Kol tribes (which included the Mundas and Oraons, among
others) temporarily established their control over significant
territory before being defeated by the British forces. The Santhal
Rebellion of 1855-1856, a widespread uprising of the Santhal
people across parts of present-day Jharkhand, Bihar and West
Bengal, was led by two brothers, Sidhu and Kanhu Murmu, and
rebelled against moneylenders and landlords who were taking
away their ancestral lands with British support. The Santhals

05-07-2025 17:14:40

declared their own government and vowed to fight to the last
drop of blood . The British response was brutal; after some
initial losses, they burned entire villages and killed thousands
of Santhals, including, eventually, the rebel leaders. However,
the daring Santhal rebellion inspired other tribal communities
to resist colonial rule.

Fig. 4.17. An 1856 sketch in the Illustrated London News depicting an unequal
confrontation between Santhal rebels and gun-wielding sepoys

LET'S EXPLORE

Note how the Santhals are depicted in the 1856 sketch
(Fig. 4.17) drawn from an artist s imagination: observe their
complexion, dress, weapons and draw your conclusions as
regards the image this depiction would create in the popular
mind in Britain.

Peasant uprisings against economic exploitation

Even without famines, peasants suffered under the unfair
British revenue collections, often losing their lands to
moneylenders or new landlords. The Indigo Revolt (1859-1862)

4 - The Colonial Era in India

Tapestry of the Past

@

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
Mutiny:
In this
context,
mutiny
refers toa
rebellion
by soldiers,
or sailors
in the case
of anavy,
against
their
officers.

illustrates this exploitation. European planters forced peasants
in the northern parts of Bengal to abandon food crops and,
instead, grow indigo plants, as the indigo dye was then in great
demand in Europe. From planters to traders, everyone earned
huge profits except the peasants, who were so poorly paid
that they got trapped in debt slavery. When they refused to
grow indigo, they faced imprisonment, torture, and destruction
of their property. Their uprising was directed mostly at the
planters, who retaliated by hiring mercenaries to attack the
peasants. Their cause was supported by educated Bengalis and
the Bengali press; the British authorities were eventually forced
to restrict some of the worst abuses.

'_LET S EXPLORE |

Indigo is a natural deep blue pigment used in dyeing. Can you

think of other natural substances that have been traditionally
used in India to dye cloth?

There are several more notable examples of uprisings across the
Subcontinent, which, along with the other aspects of the British
rule that we saw earlier, built up to the largest uprising of the
19" century. Let us turn to it.

THE GREAT REBELLION OF 1857

The British called it the Sepoy Mutiny . Sepoys , let us recall,
were the Indian soldiers enrolled in the East India company s
British Army; its officers, of course, were almost all British.
After India s Independence, historians rejected the term Sepoy
Mutiny , proposing a few others instead; following many
scholars, we will call the event the Great Rebellion of 1857 . But
what exactly happened?

Why do you think was the term Sepoy Mutiny rejected after
Indian Independence? Write one paragraph explaining your
reasons.

Fig. 4.18. Imaginary depiction of the sepoys rebellion at Meerut
(Illustrated London News, 1857)

Even earlier, there were several signs of severe discontent
among the sepoys, beginning with the so-called Vellore Mutiny 
of 1806, which erupted when the British introduced new
uniform regulations that violated the religious practices of both
Hindu and Muslim sepoys. For example, they were forbidden
from wearing religious marks on their foreheads and were
required to shave their beards. The sepoys seized the Vellore
fort (in present-day Tamil Nadu) and killed many British officers
and troops; the British however crushed the revolt, killing or
executing hundreds of sepoys.

We should also keep in mind that most sepoys were from
agricultural families, which had been suffering great hardship
owing to the British policies on land revenue. After decades of
increasing frustration, in 1857 rumours spread across northern
and central India that rifle cartridges were greased with cow
and pig fat, offending the Hindu and Muslim sepoys religious
sensibilities. At Barrackpore (in present-day West Bengal), the
sepoy Mangal Pandey attacked British officers. His execution
spread further discontent among the sepoys. In Meerut (in

4 - The Colonial Era in India

Tapestry of the Past

 

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

Chapter 4.indd 110

present-day Uttar Pradesh), some of them killed their British
officers and marched to nearby Delhi, where they proclaimed
the elderly but politically powerless Mughal emperor Bahadur
Shah Zafar as their leader (his empire was limited to a small
area in Delhi). The military decisions were, however, taken by
the commanders. The revolt quickly spread across northern
and central India, with sepoys capturing key cities like Kanpur,
Lucknow and Jhansi. At Kanpur, rebel forces under Nana Saheb
initially agreed to give safe passage to British civilians, but then
massacred over 200 men, women and children for reasons that
are still debated.

The British response was systematic and extremely brutal,
beginning with the recapture of Delhi in September 1857,
where the British forces conducted house-to-house massacres.
At Kanpur, they conducted mass executions designed to strike
terror in the population. Ina long punitive campaign they burned
villages and destroyed crops, causing countless deaths vastly
more than those inflicted by the rebels.

According to some historians, the Great Rebellion failed because
the sepoys lacked a unified command and a consistent strategy,
despite some heroic leaders.

The uprising failed, but it marked a turning point, especially
in sowing a seed for the idea that foreign domination was
unacceptable. The seed would grow early in the 20" century
into a full-fledged struggle for freedom, though with different
methods. Meantime, in 1858, the British Crown took direct control
of India from the East India Company, initiating the period of the
British Raj. British policies shifted from aggressive territorial
expansion to consolidation of control. The Indian Army was
reorganised so as to prevent unified resistance in the future.

THE LEGACY OF EUROPEAN COLONIALISM
IN INDIA

The European (mostly British) conquest and rule of India
was not a civilising mission India s own civilisation was
much older than Europe s. It was a process of subjugation and

05-07-2025 17:14:40

. Twoheroines |

_ Rani Lakshmibai of Jhansi fought bravely tosave ~
herkingdom from British annexation; assisted
y the Maratha Tatia (or Tantia) Tope, Nana
Saheb s military adviser, Rani Lakshmibai
managed to escape a besieged Jhansi and
- to conquer the Gwalior fort, seizing the
treasury and the arsenal. She was killed on
18 June 1858 on the battlefield. The British

army officer who commanded the attack on

; . Fig. 4.19. A miiacgee P
Jhansi noted that the Rani was remarkable _ portrait of Rani Lakshmibai_
for her beauty, cleverness, perseverance (1853 or earlier)

_ [and] generosity to her subordinates. These \ = =

qualities, combined with her rank, rendered her most aenher ete of

hh
$
*
ge all the rebel leaders. ... [She was the] best and bravest of the rebels. ; ;

Tatia Tope continued fighting until early 1859 but was betrayed and
handed over to the British, who hanged him.

Begum Hazrat Mahal of Awadh (north- | 
central portion of Uttar Pradesh) also
resisted the British-led resistance after
her kingdom was annexed and joined the
rebels during the 1857 uprising, leading
the defence of Lucknow when the Britis! 7
attempted to recapture the city. Sh
rejected British offers of safe passage
if she surrendered and ultimately 
had to take refuge in nearby Nepal. In |
November 1858, Queen Victoria issued

F Fig. 4.20. Detail ofa

 a proclamation marking the end of the
portrait of Begum Hazrat = : : : _ =
Mahal in the 1850s East India Company s rule in India; s
4 <> promised non-interference in seu 8
atters and greater inclusion of Indians in the administration. Begu 
<Be 5
rat Mahal issued a counter-proclamation, warning Indians ni tte <
: Q 2
ust such assurances, as it is the unvarying custom ee oe 3
iJ
i

er to forgive a fault t be it great or pute v

4 - The Colonial Era in India

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

SS

exploitation executed systematically, with brutal repression if
necessary. Except for a small Indian elite who accepted British
rule as inevitable, the Indians suffered the fate of many of the
world s colonised populations: abuse, exploitation, violence and
uprooting.

At the same time, the colonial rule had some largely unintended
consequences. It opened (or re-opened) India to the world and
the world to India. The British (and the French to a much smaller
extent) were systematic in documenting every aspect of their
conquest, from its geography (they conducted meticulous surveys
of the Subcontinent). They created impressive lists of all ethnic
groups, although the lists were flawed because of the unscientific
but prevalent notions of race (as genetics has shown, races do
not exist). They also documented India s monuments, studying
their art and architecture, restoring some of the ruined ones,
and initiating the discipline of archaeology. But in the process,
they (and other colonial powers) stole thousands of statues,
paintings, jewels, manuscripts and other cultural artefacts from
India and sent them to European museums or private collections.
While this represented a profound cultural loss and violation of
India s heritage, it also promoted some appreciation of Indian
art in the European public. Such massive theft took place over
much of the colonised world; today, there are ongoing debates
and efforts to repatriate some of these cultural treasures to their
countries of origin.

LET'S EXPLORE

> In the sentence It opened (or re-opened) India to the
world and the world to India , why do you think we
added re-opened ?

> Some argue that stolen cultural heritage has been better
preserved abroad than it would have been in India.
What is your view on its repatriation? Discuss in groups.

Finally, although British scholars were not the first Europeans to
master the Sanskrit language, they started publishing some of the

THE

BHAGVAT-GEET A,

OR

DIALOGUES

or

KREESHNA anv ARFOON;

IN EIGHTEEN LECTURES;

witht

N oO Ay E S.

TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL, IN THE Sdnferi@t, OR ANCIENT

LANGUAGE oF THE Brabmdns,

BY

CHARLES WILKINS,

SENIOR MERCHANT IN THE SERVICE OF THE HONOURABLE THE EAST INDIA

COMPANY, ON THEIR BENGAL ESTABLISHMENT.
pe

LONDON:

PRINTED FOR C. NOURSE,
OPPOSITE CATHARINE-STREET, IN THE STRAND.

M.DCC.LXXXY.

Fig. 4.21. The
title page of the
first English
translation

(in 1785) of a
Sanskrit text:
 The Bhagavad
Gita or Dialogues
of Krishna and
Arjuna (using
modern spelling).
The translator
was Charles
Wilkins.

first translations of Sanskrit texts into a European language; the
French, the Germans and others soon followed. The motivations
were mixed: some scholars were genuine students or admirers
of India s ancient culture, while others were convinced that
by studying Indian languages and texts, it would be easier to

demonstrate the superiority of Christianity.

The spread of Sanskrit studies and texts in Europe (followed
later by other Indian languages) was like the discovery of
a new continent , in the words of the German philosopher
Georg Hegel. Indian texts had a great impact on European
philosophers, writers, poets, artists, and sometimes statesmen;
this influence extended to the United States of America in the 19"
century. This is a reminder that although political domination
may flow in one direction, cultural influence sometimes flows in

the opposite direction.

4 - The Colonial Era in India

Tapestry of the Past

 

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1
Chapter 4.indd 114

Before we move on...

>

The Portuguese, the Dutch, the French and the British were
attracted to India primarily because of her great wealth.
They fought among themselves for dominance of the
Subcontinent, with the British gaining the upper hand.

The British ruthless taxation policy inflicted great misery
on the people, causing severe famines in particular and

millions of deaths. The deliberate deindustrialization of

India devastated her once-thriving manufacturing sector.

Gradually, the British imposed their administrative
structures, legal systems and educational institutions to
ensure total colonial control over the Indian society.

The Portuguese focused on religious conversion and cultural
transformation in Goa created long-lasting social divisions.

The French policy of assimilation created a small elite of

culturally French Indians in Pondicherry.

Several uprisings took place from the late 18" century
onward, with the Great Rebellion of 1857 threatening the
colonial rule for a while. Most of these uprisings were
brutally repressed.

In the 19 century, India s classical culture (in particular
through translated Sanskrit texts) flowed back to the West,
creating a lasting influence.

Questions and activities

1.

What is colonialism? Give three different definitions based
on the chapter or on your knowledge.

Colonial rulers often claimed that their mission was to
 civilise the people they ruled. Based on the evidence in
this chapter, do you think this was true in the case of India?
Why or why not?

How was the British approach to colonising India different
from earlier European powers like the Portuguese or the
French?

08-07-2025 10:42:12

Chapter 4.indd 115

. Indians funded their own subjugation. What does this

mean in the context of British infrastructure projects in
India like the railway and telegraph networks?

. What does the phrase divide and rule mean? Give

examples of how this was used by the British in India?

. Choose one area of Indian life, such as agriculture,

education, trade, or village life. How was it affected by
colonial rule? Can you find any signs of those changes still
with us today? Express your ideas through a short essay, a
poem, a drawing, or a painting.

. Imagine you are a reporter in 1857. Write a brief news

report on Rani Lakshmibai s resistance at Jhansi. Include a
timeline or storyboard showing how the rebellion began,
spread, and ended, highlighting key events and leaders.

. Imagine an alternate history where India was never

colonised by European powers. Write a short story of about
300 words exploring how India might have developed on its
own path.

. Role-play: Enact a historical discussion between a British

official and an Indian personality like Dadabhai Naoroji on
the British colonial rule in India.

10. Explore a local resistance movement (tribal, peasant, or

princely) from your state or region during the colonial
period. Prepare a report or poster describing:

 What was the specific trigger, if any?
e Who led the movement?

e What were their demands?

 How did the British respond?

* How is this event remembered today (e.g., local festivals,
songs, monuments)?

4 - The Colonial Era in India

Tapestry of the Past

 

05-07-2025 17:14:42

Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1

*'Noodles is our abbreviation for Notes and Doodles !

=

Chapter 4.indd 116 05-07-2025 17:14:42