HAMARA BHARAT 
INCREDIBLE INDIA!

Let us read the following passage. Q

Bharat has been known
worldwide as a land of wise
and heroic individuals. Its
rich and diverse culture has
attracted numerous travellers
- since ancient times. The
people here live in unison,
presenting to the world unity
in diversity. Bharat is a land
rich with rivers, lakes, and

~ high mountains. Its green
forests are home to many
plants, insects, birds, and
animals. All these elements
ensure that Bharat prospers
and is respected globally. As

- its inhabitants, we need to
 continue working hard and
make sure that it prospers.

| Unit 5.indd 131 09-Dec-24 3:56:29 pM

Poorvi GRabDeE 6

Let us discuss
1. What has Bharat always been known for?

What is attractive about Bharat?
What is special about the fact that the people live here in unison?

What geographical features does the passage mention?

ao FF WN

What is the advice given to everyone?
Kalakritiyon ka Bharat

Let us do these activities before we read.

Our country is beautiful and every state has its own uniqueness. The
words given below are part of our identity. Complete these words with
the correct vowels (A, E, I, O, U).

1. We like to decorate our homes with ourf 1k_ rt.

2. Ourc__1t__ reconsists of our ideas, customs, traditions, values,
arts, and languages.

3. All of us celebrate our f__st__v__1s together.

4. We tell stories to our children to teach them about ourc__It_ re,
h_st_ry,and]l_g_nds.

5. We have ourownl__ng__ag__ sto talk to each other.

CULTURE AND TRADITION

Let us read

I

 So, are youready to meet your friends from all over the country? 
the teacher asked the students sitting in the big hall.

 Yes! was the loud answer from the class.

 Can someone tell me for which programme are we here? 
the teacher asked.

 Ek Bharat, Shreshtha Bharat , the students answered together
again.

 Please raise your hand to tell me what it is all about, the
teacher said.

Many hands went up and some were jumping to answer. The
teacher asked Renu. With a smile on her face, she said, It is to
know that we all belong to one nation and that is the bond we
share. And our unity in diversity makes us the most wonderful
country in the world. 

Let us discuss
1. What is the Ek Bharat, Shreshtha Bharat programme all about?
2. Why is this programme being conducted?

Il

The teacher smiled at her as everyone clapped. Just then, Bala
pointed out, Look! The video has started! The big screen now
had little windows each with a smiling child. Each child had
something to share.
Reprint 2025-26 ye

Unit 5.indd 133 09-Dec-24 3:56:39 PM |

Poorvi GRabDE 6

Pranam! I am
Aakansha from
Uttarakhand. I am
going to tell you
about Aipan, our folk
art, that we draw on
family functions and
festivals. It is done H&
with white rice flour Aipan Folk art
paste on_ brick-red
walls coloured with geru. It is made on floors
and walls of puja rooms, and outside the main
door of the home. It is an art form made by
the women in the family. The designs are very
beautiful and mathematical, and are based on
our cultural traditions, and observations of
nature.

Suprabhat! I am
Priyaranjan from Odisha.
My tribe practises a
4000-year-old metal craft
named Dhokra. To begin,
we make a figure with
clay, dry it, and cover
it with a layer of wax. Dhokra Pare Torani
Then, we carve the fine design with
details on the wax. After that, we cover the figure _ sharp tool
with clay, and put it in the fire. The wax melts and
comes out of small openings. Next, brass scrap scrap: small
is melted and poured into the empty space. The wanted pieces
liquid metal takes the same shape as the wax.

geru: red clay
used as colour
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 134 09-Dec-24 3:56:41 PM

Finally, we remove the outer layer of clay and
finish the metal figure as we want.

Suprabhaatam! I am
Chitra from Kerala. I want
to tell you about coconut
shell craft. First, we clean
the outside and inside of a
brown coconut shell. After
that, we make it smooth by using sandpaper or
a machine. Then we give it the shape we want,
and make it stable by fixing a base under it.
At last, we polish it using wood polish to make
it shine. We make household things like bowls
and even jewellery from the coconut shells. It

Coconut shell craft

is a biodegradable craft.
Subhodayam! I am _ Balamurali from
Andhra Pradesh. I

want to tell you about
the 400-year-old art
of making toys in my
village, Kondapalli.
To make the toys, we
take soft wood from
the nearby hills. After
that, we carve each part of the toy separately.
Then, we use makku- a paste of tamarind
seed powder and sawdust to join the pieces
together. Next, we add details and finish the
toys. Finally, we use oil and water-colours or
vegetable dyes and enamel paints to colour
them. These toys are based on folk stories,
animals, birds, bullock carts, rural life, etc.

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 135

CULTURE AND TRADITION

stable: not able
to move

biodegradable:
something that
will not harm the
environment

tamarind: an
edible sour fruit

AS

sawdust: dust of
wood

dyes: colours
enamel: paints
that forma
protective layer
a

09-Dec-24 3:56:42 PM |

Poorvi GRabDE 6

Let us discuss

On the basis of what the speakers said about the art forms, complete the
table given below.

Name of the child Art form

clay, brass scrap, wax,
fire

Andhra Pradesh

Let us think and reflect

I Fill in the blanks to complete the following sentences.

1. The designs for Aipan are taken from and

2. Dhokra metal craft is very old because it is old.

3. A base is needed for coconut shell craft to make it

4. Soft wood, and colours are used to make Kondapalli
toys.

II Why does Akanksha s family make Aipan?
Ill In Dhokra, why does wax come out of the small openings?

IV What is common in the toys made in Balamurali s village and coconut
shell craft in Kerala?
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 136 09-Dec-24 3:56:42 PM

CULTURE AND TRADITION

Unit 5.indd 137

I Priyaranjan, Chitra and Balamurali share how art works of their states
are made. They use some words to show the order of making it. Those
words are given in the box below.

to begin first then after that
next finally at last

Now, use some of these words to complete the paragraph given below.
Use one word only once.

How I Get Ready for School

1. I get up and go to take a shower. 2. , | wear
my school dress. 3. , leat my food. 4. , | wear my
shoes. 5. , [pick up my bag and go out of my home.

II The children from different states each speak about one art form from
their state. When they speak, they use the first form of the verb. It shows
something that happens regularly. It is called the present tense. With
he, she and it, -s/-es is used with the verb to show the present tense.
Make five sentences with the help of the words given in the table below.
Use -s/-es wherever necessary. Two examples are given.

Pronouns Part of a sentence Complete Sentences

I NN how to dance. I know how to dance.
You know questions to understand. | We
He tell beautiful flowers.
a story every day. He speaks very loudly.
She draw
very loudly. She
It make
paintings in free periods. | They
We practise
They speak spellings on Friday. It

Reprint 2025-26

09-Dec-24 3:56:42 PM

Poorvi GRabDE 6

you
fe Let us listen

I Listen to the description of gakkad bharta and complete the notes
given below. (refer to page 162 for transcript)

Gakkad Bharta
1. Name of the speaker
2. The town of the speaker
3. The state he belongs to
4. The name of the food item

5. Vegetables roasted for bharta :

I

-_

Now, listen to the description again and complete the flowchart on how
to make gakkad bharta.

(4) To make gakkad, make balls of dough and
___) them on high heat.

("> | To make bharta, brinjal and tomatoes and garnish
| with onions, coriander, green chillies and salt.
(3 | To serve, crumble the gakkad, put some on it and
________/ | add one spoon of ghee.

Let us speak

1. Speak about a local art form of your region. It can be any one out of
painting, rangoli, metal craft, embroidery, music, dance or drama.
Remember to include:

* the name of the art form
 what things do they need for it
* how do they make/present it

2. You may use the words given below when you speak.
 I know about the art form called ...
 They need ...
 To make it, first ... after that ... next... then... at last ...
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 138 09-Dec-24 3:56:42 PM

CULTURE AND TRADITION

Let us write

You heard children from different states speak about the art forms from
their state. Discuss in pairs which art form you liked the most.

Now, write a paragraph with five sentences giving your reasons for
liking it.

- Let us explore

1. Madhubani painting is a traditional art form from Bihar. The artists use
natural colours to make them on the walls of their houses. You can also
make and use natural colours as given below.

* yellow from haldi

* green from leaves

 red from red flowers/geru/sindoor

* orange from flowers

 blue from neel/indigo powder
Given below is a Madhubani painting. Colour it with natural colours or any
other colour.

y
<<

LIONS SI Ah
BOLL

Reprint 2025-26 ve

Unit 5.indd 139 09-Dec-24 3:56:43 PM |

Poorvi GRabDE 6

2. Ek Bharat, Shreshtha Bharat Programme

Bharat has diverse languages, cuisines, music, dance, theatre, movies
and films, handicrafts, sports, literature, festivals, paintings, sculptures,
etc. The Ek Bharat, Shreshtha Bharat programme aims to enhance
interaction and promote mutual understanding between people of
different states/UTs through the concept of state/UT pairing. This is to
celebrate the unity in diversity and strengthen the emotional bonds
between its citizens. The vision is to enable people to develop a sense
of common identity by sharing best practices and experiences. The
programme aims to contribute to nation building by highlighting the
inter-connectedness between various cultures and traditions.
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 140 09-Dec-24 3:56:44 PM

CULTURE AND TRADITION

Tue KITES

Let us do these activities before we read.
I Answer the following questions and share them with your teacher and
classmates.

1. Have you ever flown a kite or seen someone fly it? Where? When?
2. Describe the kite colour(s), shape, design of tail, any other detail.
3. What did you think when you saw the kite up in the sky?
II Search the internet for videos on Kite Festivals and watch them with
your teacher and classmates.

1. Share the things with your teacher that you saw and what the people
were doing.

2. Would you like to participate in this kind of festival? Why?
3. What kind of kite would you like to fly?

III Look at the picture and complete the sentences. Share your responses
with your teacher.

1. Ican see ; and
in the picture.

2. The weather in the picture is

3. The kiteis__ high in the sky.
4. The child is from below.
5. The tail of the kite

IV Now, think and answer.
1. List two more things that you want to add to the picture.
2. If I were the child, I would
3. If I were the kite, I would

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 141 09-Dec-24 3:56:44 PM

Poorvi GRabDE 6

wens 

ae Let us read

Up in the air
See the kites fly,

Like coloured birds . |
In the wind-whipped sky.
I wish I were small
And light as air,
I would climb on a kite
And sail up there.
Then I would drift upon
The paper wings,
And hear the songs
That the wild wind sings.

What fun it would be
To look right down,
Over the park
And the rooftops of town.

The people below
Would stand and stare,
And wish they were me

High, high in the air.

eo 4

Reprint 2025-2

DAPHNE LISTER

09-Dec-24 3:56:47 PM

Unit 5.indd 142 \

CULTURE AND TRADITION

Let us discuss

I Read the poem silently. As you read, mark the given statements as True
or False.

II Complete the following sentences.

1. The poet says that the kites are like coloured birds 
See the kites fly/Like coloured birds in the sky.

The kites have been compared tob____ _ Ss C iD ec they

2. The child wishes to be like air I wish I were small / And as light

as air.
The child wishes to beas]___= = ittas____. The child wishes this
to beabletoc____m_ ona kite and fly.

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 143 09-Dec-24 3:56:47 PM

Poorvi GRabDE 6

Do you think that the use of simile in this poem helps us imagine better
when we read the poem? Share your thoughts with your teacher and
classmates.

II

-_

Find a set of words from the poem that begin with the same consonant
sound.

Stanza 1
Which consonant sound do both words begin with? aa
Stanza 3
Which consonant sound do both words begin with? [

This is called alliteration. For example, big bright blue bag, funny fan,
etc.

Create 4 other sets of words using alliteration.

IV In the last stanza, the two words that the poet repeats are ,
to tell us that the kite is flying __ _ swy' high.

V Study each stanza and underline the rhyming words from the end of
each line. Also, circle the end words in the stanzas that do not rhyme.

Let us think and reflect
I Read the given lines from the poem and answer the following questions.

What fun it would be
To look right down,

Over the park
And the rooftops of town.

1. Circle the word that does not share the same feeling as fun :
joy, excitement, care, happiness.
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 144 18-Mar-25 3:05:55 PM

CULTURE AND TRADITION

2. Which line tells us that the poet was somewhere above?
3. Choose the scene the child saw.

AEDS,

age.

II Answer the following questions.
1. How does the poet describe the kites in the first two lines?

2. Why does the child say that they have to climb a tree first to get onto
the kite?

3. What are the songs that the child hears when flying atop the kite?

4. Why did the people look up at the child and stare? If you looked up
and saw that, what feelings would you have?

5. If you were the kite carrying the child high up in the air, what would
you tell them?

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 145 09-Dec-24 3:56:50 PM

Poorvi GRabDE 6

'
wa
De ~ 2
pS

w?
 Let us learn

I Lookat the picture of the kite and read what some of its parts are named.

Nose

Spine

Cover

+m@ Kite line

Tail ~

Now, complete the given conversation by filling the blanks with some
 parts of a kite from above.

Bina : I like the long t__ _ at the end of my kite. What is your
kite like?

is bright. Thes___ eis black.

Saroj : My kite sc

Bina : Ohwonderful! My kite s1]___ is attached to the r__ 1 that
wraps it. I really like it.

Saroj : Did you know that the tip of a kite is calleda__s_?

Bina : Wonderful! Thanks for letting me know. Let's go and fly our
pretty kites.
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 146 18-Mar-25 2:57:43 PM

CULTURE AND TRADITION

II Let us create a poem using words in a kite!

The first line is the subject. Keep this to one kite
word. Use a noun.

The second line is two describing words for the
noun pretty, colourful

Line three includes three action words. flying, floating, soaring

Line four uses two words that describe the action

words. quickly, happily

Line five is one word that has the same meaning

as the subject/synonym. paper-bird

Kite
pretty, colourful
flying, floating, soaring
quickly, happily
paper-bird

This is called a cinquain poem. It is a five line poem that describes
a person, a place or a thing.

Now, create a cinquain poem yourself on anything you like.

III The poet uses the word fly and drift to tell us about the kite s movement.

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 147 09-Dec-24 3:56:52 PM

Poorvi GRabDE 6

1. Circle the words that match with the drift? movement. You can
choose more than one word.

slow fast quick upward
downward round and round float

2. Study some other words about the kite s movement and share
what type of movement they show. You can look at 1 for the type of
movement.

IV The poet has used expressions like 
up in the air; look right down; stay up there; stand and stare
1. Read how these expressions are used in the poem.

2. In pairs, make sentences using these expressions. Discuss with
your teacher and then write in your notebooks.

Let us listen

Listen about the Kite Festival in India. As you listen, circle the words that
are not correct. Then, listen again and write the correct words. (refer to
page 163 for transcript)

1. Kite Festival is celebrated during the month of June.
2. The International Kite Festival is named Uttarayan in Eastern India.

3. Uttarayan is mainly celebrated in Gujarat, but also in Maharashtra
and Telangana.

4. During the Kite Festival, we can see kites of different shapes, sizes
and colours.

5.In Karnataka, the Tourism Department organises the Kite Festival
every year.
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 148 18-Mar-25 3:06:01 PM

CULTURE AND TRADITION

6. The Punjab region celebrates Basant Panchami and Baisakhi by
flying kites.

7. People of India also enjoy flying kites on Earth Day.

Let us speak

Share a kite-flying experience with your classmates. If you have not
flown a kite yet, share an experience of watching kites fly. Give details 
Where? When? Why? How? Speak in complete sentences.

Let us write

1. Imagine yourself as a kite. In pairs, first discuss all the following hints.

 What shape of kite are you? What colours do you have? What other
parts of yourself are you happy about?

 Where are you? Who do you belong to? What activities do you do?
Who are your friends?

* Do you have any message for humans?
2. Now, write a paragraph of about 100 words, with the title I am a Kite.

, Let us explore

I The mention of kites exists in ancient Indian texts. It can be found
in the poetry of the thirteenth-century Marathi saint and poet,
Namadeva. In his poems or gathas, he called a kite a gudi, and there
is a mention that the kites were made from kaagad (paper).

II Have a look at some of the different types of kites. Choose which
one is commonly seen.

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 149 09-Dec-24 3:56:52 PM

Poorvi GRabDE 6

~

Rokkaku

Parafoil

\

;

Diamond-shaped kite Box kites

1. Find out the steps to make a kite.

2. Follow the steps and create your own kite. Bring it to school to show
your teacher and classmates.

3. Write a message on the kite. For example: Happy Independence Day!
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 150 18-Mar-25 3:00:59 PM

CULTURE AND TRADITION

ILA SACHANI:
EMBROIDERING DREAMS WITH HER FEET

Let us do these activities before we read.

I Look at the given picture and information. Discuss the questions with
your teacher and classmates.

Pranav M. Balasubramaniam is
from Palakkad in Kerala. Though
he was born without both hands,
he has excelled as an artist, a
singer, and a para-sportsperson.

1. Do you think Pranav s task is simple? Why or why not?
2. How does Pranav s special ability make you feel?
3. What qualities do you think were important for Pranav to become
successful?
4. What message does Pranav s story give us?
II Look at the picture of Kathiawar embroidery. Discuss in pairs.

1. List the steps you think are needed to
create this embroidery.

2. Discuss if these steps can be done
with feet, instead of hands.

3. What efforts would be needed if
someone has to embroider with their
feet? Do you think it is possible?

Kathiawar embroidery

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 151 09-Dec-24 3:56:55 PM

Poorvi GRabDE 6

~% Let us read

1. When you enter a tiny room in Moti Vavdi
village, Bhavnagar, Gujarat, you will see
lots of bright colours. There are many
lovely things like cushions, bedcovers,
pillows, and more, with beautiful designs.
Ila Sachani, a wonderful lady with a big
smile, makes all these using a shiny needle
to create these designs. She is very good at
Kathiawar embroidery a style that needs
a lot of skill.

2. Ila Sachani s journey began in the quiet
settings of Amreli, Gujarat, where she
was born into a farmer s family. From the
beginning, life presented its challenges, challenges:
as Ila was born with her hands hanging difficulties
loose by her sides. Unlike other children,
she could not use her hands in the usual
way. While other small hands drew figures
in the sand or plucked wild flowers, she
wondered why she could not join them.
She too wanted to hold a chalk in her hands
and draw figures on a slate.

Ila Sachani

3. Ila s mother and grandmother
encouraged the little girl and
were single-minded to help her
overcome her challenge. They
were Skilled in the traditional art
of Kathiawar embroidery and
decided to share this art with Ila.
They taught her to create many

single-minded:
focused
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 152 09-Dec-24 3:56:56 PM

Unit 5.indd 153

beautiful patterns using her feet! It was
certainly not an easy task, but Ila accepted
the challenge with determination. Her
parents also helped her learn to do things
with her legs, like eating and combing her
hair.

. Threading a needle was hard, but Ila did

not give up and became an expert at a
young age. Her younger brother and sister
helped her too. She learned many styles,
even ones from outside Gujarat Kachhi,
Kashmiri, Lucknawi and others.

. ForIla, embroidery becamea way to express

herself. At first, she crafted fine designs
only for her family and friends, who were
awestruck by her talent. They talked about
those designs to others. Soon, the people in
the village, too, discovered Ila s special skill
and the admiration for her work began to
spread.

. Word reached the government office in

Surat. They were moved by Ila s story and
impressed by her work. They decided to
display some samples of her embroidery
at a state exhibition. This experience
opened new doors for Ila. People observed
the beauty woven by her feet and readily
purchased the creations. Ila was no more a
hidden talent, but famous!

Reprint 2025-26

CULTURE AND TRADITION
a

09-Dec-24 3:56:56 PM |

Poorvi GRabDE 6

7. Encouraged by this popularity, Ila popularity:

participated in more exhibitions, not just fame
within the state but at the national level.
She received many awards and honours,
not just for her art but also the willpower
and creativity that her work showed. Ila
Sachani, once a farmer s daughter facing a
tough challenge, worked hard and became
a celebrated artist and receiver of the
President s Medal.

8. The most important change for Ila was
the new independence. Through her skill,
she not only earned a regular income but
also found joy in doing what she loved.
She proved, through her creations, that
challenges can be turned into victories
with focus, hard work, positivity and never
giving up.

9. Her embroidery, created with her feet,
reminds us that art has the power to rise
above physical boundaries and touch
the soul.

Kachhi embroidery
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 154 09-Dec-24 3:56:57 PM

CULTURE AND TRADITION

Let us discuss

Read the paragraphs and write the main idea for each. Then, match the
main idea with two supporting details.

Main idea

(i) Examples of embroidered things

(ii) Ila s use of shiny needle

(i)
(ii)
(i)
(ii)
@)
(ii)
(i)
(ii)
(i)
(ii)
(i)
(ii)

(i) Financial independence and joy

8-9

(ii) Challenges can be turned into

victories

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 155 18-Mar-25 3:01:44 PM

Poorvi GRabDE 6

Let us think and reflect

I Read the following lines and answer the questions that follow.

Unlike other children, she could not use her hands in the usual way. While
other small hands drew figures in the sand or plucked wild flowers, she
wondered why she could not join them. She too wanted to hold a chalk in
her hands and draw figures ona slate.

1. Choose the correct option to fill in the blank.

Unlike other children means that Ila was . (unaware/
different/simple)

2. What could Ila have felt when she could not join others in things
they did?

3. Complete the following with a suitable reason.
Ila could not draw figures on the slate because

II What creative ways did Ila and her family use to overcome the challenges
she faced?
III How did new independence help Ila?
IV Why was the first state exhibition an important event in Ila s life?

V What does the sentence, art has the power to rise above physical
boundaries and touch the soul , tell us about the power of art?

VI How can we be helpful and encouraging like Ila s family and friends
when someone faces challenges?

VII How can Ila s story help others to overcome challenges in their lives?

'

wa,

De ~ o
ae
S$ L

~ Let.us learn

I Read the words from the text given in Column A. Then, try to understand
what they mean by reading the sentences in Column B. Now, match the
word to its correct synonym in Column C. There are two extra synonyms
given. You may refer to the dictionary.
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 156 09-Dec-24 3:56:57 PM

CULTURE AND TRADITION

Column A Column B Column C
Word Sentence Synonym
tiny The garden was tiny but the park was | silent
really big.
work
wonderful | The wonderful artwork made everyone
clap.
P happy
quiet The quiet library was a better place to
study than the noisy classroom. small
task Completing the Science homework difficult
was a challenging task as it had many
questions. faptasWic
tough We know that tough times can be
overcome, if we try sincerely. dangerous

II Unscramble the antonyms of the words in Column A. An example has
been given for you.

Example: display -E DIH (HIDE)

1. tny-EGHU (H____ s+ds

2. wonderful-REEBLITR (TR B__ BEB)
3. quiet-IYNSO (NU

4. takk-SIAEMTP (P_ST___E)

5. tough -SEYA (E_ isd

Use these antonyms in sentences of your own.
III Read the sentences from the text and focus on the highlighted words.
 You will see lots of bright colours.
 There are many lovely things like cushions and bedcovers.
 They taught her to create many beautiful patterns using her feet!
 She learned many styles.

 She received many awards.

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 157 09-Dec-24 3:56:57 PM

Poorvi GRabDE 6

1. The highlighted words tell us about the quantity. Choose what the
words show.

(i) Unmentioned quantity
(ii) Large quantity
2. Let us now understand what words of quantity tell us.

Fill in the blanks to complete an example for each word of quantity.
Hints are given in the brackets.

(i) |Wesaw____ buses on the road. (countable noun)
(ii) |How ___ milk do you want? (uncountable noun)
(ii) |Thereis _ s milk needed. (uncountable noun)
(iv) |Ineed___ examples. (countable noun)
(v) I Hae energy left. (countable and
She picked___ flowers. uncountable nouns)
(vi) |Iate__rice. (uncountable noun)

Now, create two sentences for each word of quantity (i-vi), and
share them with your teacher and classmates.

Let us listen

You will listen to a talk about Kathiawar embroidery. As you listen, circle
the correct option. (refer to page 164 for transcript)

1. Form 2. Colours
(i) old (i) soft
Gi) new (ii) bright
3. Stitches 4. Seen on
(i) running stitch (i) children s caps
(ii) chain stitch (ii) pants
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 158 09-Dec-24 3:56:57 PM

CULTURE AND TRADITION

5. Things used 6. Designs
Gi) small mirrors (i) elephants and horses
(ii) shapes of buttons (ii) squares and triangles

Let us speak

In pairs, write down two questions you would like to ask Ila Sachani.

1. Look at two examples.

X A
Where were you born? Did you go to school?
The Yes/No questions use a rising tone at the end.

2. Speak the example questions aloud as a peer activity at least five
times.

3. Now, take turns to ask your questions to another classmate.
Speak clearly and with the correct rising tone as shown in 1.

rN Let us write

SS

* Collect four/five items (such as flowers, leaves, pins, waste paper, old
cards, cardboard boxes, straws, twigs, etc.).

 Use these items to create any kind of artwork.

Now, write a paragraph describing the artwork that you have created.
Give a suitable title to your paragraph.

- Let us explore

1. Does anyone in your family or neighbourhood do embroidery? Find out
what type of embroidery they do and how they learnt it.

2. Try asimple stitch on cloth with the guidance of a family member.

3. Visit the given link to find out about embroidery types from different
parts of India. Share with your teacher and classmates which one you
liked the most and why.
https://indianculture.gov.in/textiles-and-fabrics-of-india/type-oftextile/embroidery

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 159 18-Mar-25 3:03:31 PM

Poorvi GRabDE 6

NATIONAL War MEMORIAL

National War Memorial, New Delhi @Sa wR RG, as feech)
was established in February 2019. It is a national monument
built by the Government of India in honour of our brave soldiers.

t}:

ay
cs
oy

4;

 <b

Let us read

In Bharat s heartland, a grand sight to behold,

The National War Memorial, honours brave stories retold.
With respect and grace, it stands with pride,

Each name etched, each stone, each story to confide.
From battle fields to skies, and to oceans wide,

They stand for Bharat, side by side.

The eternal flame, in silence it glows,

Paying homage to their courage that shows.

Their sacrifice, always in our mind,

In blessed memory, forever remind.

With pride and respect, let s always remember,

At the National War Memorial, their sacrifice forever.

National War Memorial Amar Jawan Jyoti
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 160 09-Dec-24 3:57:00 PM

CULTURE AND TRADITION

Let us do these activities.
1. Read the poem aloud.
2. Recite the poem with your classmates and teacher.
3. Remember the poem.

 Let us explore

1. Visit the website of the National War Memorial and learn more about it.
https://www.mygov.in

2. Plan a visit to the National War Memorial with your teacher/parents.

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 161 09-Dec-24 3:57:00 PM

Transcript

re) Let us listen (refer to page 138)

KALAKRITIYON KA BHARAT

Namaste! You must be tired and hungry after listening to so
many people. Iam Sushil from Jabalpur in Madhya Pradesh.
Let me tell you a unique dish of my district. Itis called gakkad
bharta. First, we make gakkad from wheat dough. Then, we
make balls with that dough and roast them on high heat.
To make bharta, we roast brinjals and tomatoes. Then we
garnish the bharta with chopped onions, coriander, green
chillis and salt. This food item is made without frying. To eat
it, you simply crumble the gakkad and drizzle it with some
bharta and a spoonful of ghee. Come to Jabalpur and try it!

You will listen to the audio or narration once again. As you
listen, check your answers.
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 162 09-Dec-24 3:57:01 PM

Transcript

(refer to page 148) Q

You will listen to the audio or narration once again. As you
listen, check your answers.

[Source: https://utsav.gov.in/view-event/kite-festival-2 (Ministry of Tourism)]

Reprint 2025-26 y q

Unit 5.indd 163 09-Dec-24 3:57:01 PM |

Transcript

re) fe Let us listen (refer to page 158)

ILA SACHANI:
EMBROIDERING DREAMS WITH HER FEET

Hello everyone! I m here today to share some simple
information about Kathiawar embroidery. This is a very old
form of embroidery. Ituses many bright colours and also uses
many types of stitches, like the chain stitch. The embroidery
is commonly seen on clothes and home decoration items.
On clothes, it is seen on children s caps, ghagra skirts and
men s traditional shirts. In this embroidery, a lot of mirror
work is done by fitting small mirrors along with the stitches.
Most commonly, the designs used are geometric shapes like
squares and triangles. The design of flowers is also used.
There is much more to share but I'll do that some other time.

Thank you!

You will listen to the audio or narration once again. As you
listen, check your answers.
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 5.indd 164 09-Dec-24 3:57:01 PM