CHANGE OF HEART as

Let us do these activities before we read.
I Which games or sports do you play?

II Read the questions given below. Talk about them and make a list.

1. Which games or sports do you play for fun?
2. Which games or sports do you play for competition?
III How do you feel when you win or lose?
IV Work in pairs. Tick the correct meaning of the following:
1. friendly matches
(i) matches played to win a trophy
(ii) matches played without competition
2. opponent
(i) someone who you compete with
(ii) someone you want to be a partner with
3. tally of marks
(i) final marks on a report card
(ii) record of points in a game/match
4. sporting spirit
(i) following all the rules in a game

(ii) being fair and respecting each player in a game

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 4.indd 103

05-Dec-24 3:59:50 PM

Poorvi GRabDE 6

= Let us read

I

Prabhat always wanted to win. His parents,
teachers, and friends said that he did not
know how to accept defeat. The fact was that
he could not bear losing, not even at marbles.
He felt so good when he won that he never
wanted to give up that feeling. On the contrary,
losing made him feel terrible. He thought that
losing was the worst thing that could happen
to anyone.

If Prabhat sensed that he would lose a game,
he would not play it. He would take part only
when he was sure of winning, even if the game
lasted only for a minute. You could not stop
him from playing the kind of games he was
really good at, like badminton.

A new student joined Prabhat s school, and
his name was Surya. Surya was an excellent
badminton player. Prabhat waited for the last
Friday ofthe month. Last Friday was significant.
This was when the coach conducted friendly
matches in the games period. The teams were
decided on Monday and it was no surprise
when Prabhat and Surya were chosen to play
a round against each other. Prabhat was given
the responsibility of keeping score for their
match. On one hand, Prabhat prepared for the
match with great seriousness. Surya, on the
other hand, seemed relaxed, not taking the
things seriously at all. He walked about the
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 4.indd 104

defeat: loss

on the contrary:
just the opposite

terrible:
unhappy

sensed: had
known

significant:
important

conducted:
organised

05-Dec-24 3:59:50 PM

SPORTS AND WELLNESS

whole time, smiling and cracking jokes about all
sorts of things. But on Friday, atthe badminton phenomenon:
court, Surya was a real phenomenon. He won = someone who
points again and again, laughing and joking all 2s special
the time. However, Surya was paying so little 4"*s
attention to the match that Prabhat managed
to change the scoreboard while his opponent
was looking elsewhere.

Prabhat managed to win by cheating. He
made a big thing of his win, but it did not
matter to Surya.

 It s been fun. We should play again some
other time, said Surya.

Reprint 2025-26 N \ o

Unit 4.indd 105 05-Dec-24 3:59:51 PM|

Poorvi GRabDE 6

Let us discuss
1. State whether the following is True or False.
Prabhat would accept losing to anyone easily. a,
2. What was special about the last Friday of each month?
3. Who was responsible for maintaining the score for the match?

4. Do you think Prabhat wished to play another match with
Surya? Why do you think so?

Il

On that day, everyone was discussing their game and how Prabhat
had played so well. Surprisingly, Prabhat could not sleep well that
night. He had won the game but he did not feel as happy as he
usually did. What was surprising was that Surya did not feel bad
about losing. What was more surprising was that Prabhat saw

Unit 4.indd 106 05-Dec-24 3:59:52 PM

SPORTS AND WELLNESS

Surya playing basketball the next day. Surya
was so hopeless at it that he could not score a
basket for ten minutes. Yet, he enjoyed playing
the game. His happy smile never left his face.

Prabhat kept a close watch on Surya for
some days. He was great at some things,
terrible at others but what was common was
the enjoyment. He enjoyed everything equally.
As Prabhat went on with his observation, he
realised that to enjoy a game, you did not need
a scoreboard to keep a tally of your scores.
Neither did you have to worry about winning
nor losing. You needed to enjoy the game for
its own sake. What matters is trying to do well,
and enjoying every moment of it.

Prabhat learnt something through the
observations every day, soon realising the
change in himself. He had even begun playing
hide and seek, and felt sad whenever it was
about to end. He also started joking while
playing badminton. Soon, the other students
started talking amongst themselves, Good fun
playing with Prabhat, that fellow definitely has
a great sporting spirit. 

Let us discuss

1. How did Surya feel about playing?
2. What was it about Surya that Prabhat observed?
Reprint 2025-26 ye

Unit 4.indd 107 05-Dec-24 3:59:52 PM|

Poorvi GRabDE 6

o>
ot Let us think and reflect

I Read the lines given below and answer the questions.

1. If Prabhat sensed that he would lose a game, he would not play it. He
would take part only when he was sure of winning, even if the game
lasted only for a minute. You could not stop him from playing the kind
of games he was really good at, like badminton.

(i) Complete the sentence suitably.
Prabhat would play a game only if____
(ii) Which game was Prabhat good at playing?
(iii) Select the most suitable option to complete the sentence.
This behaviour of Prabhat tells us that he was
A. good atthe game _ B.suretowin C. afraid of losing

2. Surprisingly, Prabhat could not sleep well that night. He had won
the game but he did not feel as happy as he usually did. What was
surprising was that Surya did not feel bad about losing. What was
more surprising was that Prabhat saw Surya playing basketball the

next day.
(i) Select the one option that tells us about the way Prabhat was
feeling that night.
A. hurt B. unhappy C. afraid D. focused

(ii) Why does Prabhat find Surya s behaviour surprising ?

(iii) Fill in the blank by choosing the most suitable option given in
the bracket.

We can say that Surya s reaction to not winning was
(similar to/as serious as/different from)

Prabhat s.
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 4.indd 108 05-Dec-24 3:59:52 PM

SPORTS AND WELLNESS

II Answer the following questions.

1. How did Prabhat s attitude towards winning and losing affect his
enjoyment of games in the beginning?

2. Why do you think Prabhat cheated in the beginning to win the
badminton match against Surya?

Go

. How did Surya s attitude differ from Prabhat s?

ws

. Do you think Prabhat s approach to games was healthy? Why or why
not?

. Why do you think sporting spirit is important?
6. Explain how the title of the story, Change of Heart , is suitable.

 Let us learn
I Make as many words as possible using consecutive letters, without
changing the order of the letters, from the words in the boxes. One has
been done for you.

2. PHENOMENON |] A |
[3. BASKETBALL GA) Gs |

Now, you can choose words of your own and create such puzzles. Share
them with your class and try solving others.

II Read the following sentences and circle the verbs.

1. Everyone was discussing their game and how Prabhat had played
so well.

2. He had won the game but he did not feel as happy as he usually did.
3. What was more surprising that Surya had not felt bad about losing.

Reprint 2025-26

Yi

Unit 4.indd 109 18-Mar-25 2:43:56 PM |

Poorvi GRabDE 6

III Arrange the circled verbs as the first action (old action) or second
action (new action). One has been done for you.

S.No Column A Column B
yy FIRST ACTION (OLD) SECOND ACTION (NEW)

1. had played was discussing
2.
3.

The verbs in column A that refer to the first action or the old action
are past perfect.

IV Fill in the blanks with the past perfect form of verbs given within
the brackets.

1. Prabhat already his homework before
going to the badminton match. (finish)

2. Surya basketball for years before joining the school s
badminton team. (play)

3. Bythetime Prabhat arrived, Surya already
several matches. (win)

4. The new student, Surya, Prabhat before coming to
the school. (never meet)

5. Before the games period, Prabhat badminton
extensively. (practise)

Let us listen

I You will listen to an announcement. As you listen, circle the pair that
was chosen to play chess. (refer to page 128 for transcript)
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 4.indd 110 05-Dec-24 3:59:52 PM

SPORTS AND WELLNESS

II You will once again listen to the announcement. As you listen, fill in the
notes with important details.

Answers

1. How many Friday matches will be
played?

2. What was put up on the sports 
notice board?

3. Who will sponsor the kho-kho
team s refreshments?

4. Who will be the scorekeeper for
chess?

5. Who will be the referee for
kho-kho?

6. Which Friday periods are meant
for kho-kho?

g Let us speak

Look at the situations given below. In pairs, take turns to use the three magic
words please , thank yow and sorry for the situations given below. Use
the prompts given in the table to learn how to thank and apologise properly.

1. You are Vani You want to request your friends to take you in their
team during games period.

2. You are Somiwon You want to tell Hitesh to help you with the cleaning
of the classroom cupboard.

. You are Sumit You accidently spilled water on Nupur s desk.
. You are Hitesh You forgot to get Simran s Art file to school.

. You are Kriti You spoke rudely to Nupur.

rn nan FF WwW

. You are Mohan You wish to thank Hitesh for helping you practice for
the Inter-House speech competition.

Reprint 2025-26

Yi

Unit 4.indd 111 05-Dec-24 3:59:52 PM |

Poorvi GRabDE 6

7. You are Meher You are grateful that Simran helped you understand a
chapter taught at school when you were absent.

8. You are Rima You are thankful to Gita for helping you collect the
notebooks from the staff-room.

* Could you please ...

* Please can you help me with...

 Kindly , please.

For rude behaviour For a mistake
 I m very sorry for the way I behaved. I m sorry, that was my fault.
* I apologise. I was out of line.

For being grateful/thankful

 Thank you. It means so much to me that you...

* I truly appreciate your help with ... Thank you.

* I wish to thank you from the bottom of my heart because you ...

oe
 Is
SE

=~ Let us write

Prabhat managed to change the scoreboard while Surya was looking
elsewhere. Yet, he did not feel so happy that night. Unable to sleep, he decided
to write down his feelings in his diary.

Given below is the page where he wrote his feelings that night. Complete it
with the help of the phrases given in the box below.

I won the match I do not feel happy about it
Iwill lose the match I managed to change the scoreboard
I felt very happy Everyone congratulated me after my win
Surya did not feel bad He had fun playing with me
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 4.indd 112 05-Dec-24 3:59:52 PM

Unit 4.indd 113

SPORTS AND WELLNESS

Saturday
17 August 20XX 8:00 p.m.

Today, I defeated Surya in a badminton match but
1. . He was playing very well and was getting the
points easily. I was sure that 2. . So, when everyone
was laughing at a joke he cracked, 3. . No
one noticed the change and 4. . What
surprised me the most was that he said 5. and we should
play again. How could he be so relaxed after losing a match? He should
have been sad if not crying over his loss!

Though 6. , 1 did not enjoy as I usually do. It
really disturbed me that 7. about losing the match. It
is still bothering me. Is it because I changed the score? I do not understand
myself.

Let me sleep now. I feel that it may make me feel better.

Goodnight!

. Let us explore

. Read the following brief bio-sketches of sportspersons from India.

Deepika Kumari

 Archer from Jharkhand

 Father, an auto-rickshaw driver and
mother, a nurse

 Practised archery while aiming for
mangoes with stones

 Practised archery with homemade
bamboo bows and arrows

* Joined Tata Archery Academy

 Won a gold medal in the 2010

Commonwealth Games Deepika Kumari

Reprint 2025-26

T

05-Dec-24 3:59:53 PM |

Poorvi GRabDE 6

Neeraj Chopra

 Young athlete from Khandra village in
Haryana

Family largely involved in agriculture

 First Asian athlete to win an
Olympic gold medal in javelin throw

 Worked hard for several years to
achieve his passion

 Second Indian to win an individual q
gold medal in Olympics at the age of 23 Neeraj C

Neat
 Won a silver medal in javelin throw at
the 2024 Paris Olympics

2. Visit the given link to know more about other Indian sportspersons.

https://yas.nic.in/sites/default/files/LIST %200F%20ARJUNA%20
AWARDEES.d0cx%2061%20-%2017_0_0.pdf

Arjuna Awardees January 2024
https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaselframePage.aspx?PRID=1988607
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 4.indd 114 05-Dec-24 3:59:53 PM

SPORTS AND WELLNESS

THE WINNER

Let us do these activities before we read.
I Look at this picture.

1. What are these children doing?
2. Where do you think they are?
3. What is the time of the day?

II Discuss the given questions with your classmates and teacher. You may
begin your sentences with 

I goto...
I play with...
The place I go to for playing ...
I like playing ...
Sometimes I come back...
. When do you go to play after school?
. Who do you play with?
. Where do you go to play in the evening?
. Which games do you like playing?

a FPF worn &

. When do you come back home?

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 4.indd 115 05-Dec-24 3:59:55 PM

Poorvi GRabDE 6

Let us read

Evenings,

we play ball

next to the creek

in our neighbour s field.

We run so fast
I vis
can t
even
catch
my
breath.

When blue dark turns to black,
cold grass aches our feet,

trees creep close 

game s over.

Night wins!

GrorRGIA HEARD

Let us discuss

I Read the given lines from the poem. Write the meaning of the lines by
identifying the words/expressions in them.
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 4.indd 116 05-Dec-24 3:59:56 PM

SPORTS AND WELLNESS

Lines from the poem

II Read the poem. Complete the following based on the poem.

The children play in the in the neighbour s
. They run so that they run out of breath. They

continue to play till the evening when the blue sky turns
and the trees are not clearly visible. They can feel their feet

I

I

now that it is cold. Finally, they stop and go home as it is

night.

Let us think and reflect

I Read the given lines and answer the questions that follow.
1. Werunso fast
I
can t
even
catch
my
breath.

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 4.indd 117

05-Dec-24 3:59:56 PM

Poorvi GRabDE 6

(i) Complete the sentence given below with the correct option.
The speaker needs to catch her breath because

. everyone decides to walk
. all the friends wish to go home

Ow LS

. running fast results in being breathless

o

. they need to do breathing exercises
(ii) Is the speaker alone? Why do you say so?
(iii) What does the pattern in the lines tell us?
2. When blue dark turns to black,
cold grass aches our feet,
trees creep close 
game s over.
Night wins!
(i) Give one reason why the grass is cold.
(ii) Complete the sentence suitably.
The children s feet are aching because_
(iii) Why does Night win?
Night wins because the
A. time for play has ended
B. children are tired
C. time to play at home begins
D. night follows day
. Let us learn

1. Read the information given in the table and see what the poet has done
in the poem The Winner .
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 4.indd 118 05-Dec-24 3:59:56 PM

Unit 4.indd 119

SPORTS AND WELLNESS

a6 . What the poet has done Other examples

I This tells us that the The leaves are
can t children are really out of | falling,
even breath. The pattern is used falling,
catch to highlight them being falling.
my out of breath.
breath
Night wins! The poet has used human _| The sun played hide-and-seek
qualities for inanimate with the clouds.
things.
Here, night has been
shown as winning.
This is called
personification.

Now, try to write some examples of your own for both. Use your
imagination when creating these examples.

. The poet has talked about a creek in the poem.

You now know that creek is a water body.
Complete the word web given below by writing
which other water bodies you can think of.
Discuss with your teacher.

water
bodies

Let us listen

Listen to the riddles and write which sport is being referred to in the
table below.

Riddle 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 |
Sport

Reprint 2025-26 oe

a

05-Dec-24 3:59:56 PM |

Poorvi GRabDE 6

Riddle 1

Run and pass, run and pass
Kick a black and white ball
Kick it straight into the goal
Watch for mud don t fall.
What sport am I?

Riddle 2

Hold your breath, say Hu-tu-tu,

till you touch one or two.

Take care to keep a distance wide
As you run back to your team s side.
Which sport am I?

Riddle 3

In the water, hold your breath,
The water is very cool,

Arms turn, legs kick

In the blue pool.
Which sport am I?

Riddle 4

Breathe in, breathe out!
Practise every day just right,
You will be healthy and fit

Get energy and grow in might.
What am I?

Try to create a riddle about your favourite game/sport/activity. Share
your riddles with your classmates. Let s see who all are able to guess
it right.
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 4.indd 120 05-Dec-24 3:59:56 PM

SPORTS AND WELLNESS

Let us speak
Enact the roles of a parent and a child.

Situation 1: Coming home late after play.

(Parent upset/Child explaining)

Situation 2: Sharing details of the games you played.
(Child excited/Parent asking details with interest)

Situation 3: Bring a new friend home after playtime.

(Child introducing/Parent welcoming)

Let us write

Write a paragraph about your playtime, using the clues given below.

 What time do I go out to play?

 Who do I play with?

 What games do we play?

 Which is my favourite game?

 What do we gain from playing together?
 When do we finish playing and go home?
Now, give a title to your paragraph.

oz - Let us explore

There are many indigenous games in India. Kho-kho is an example of an
indigenous game. Indigenous games are native to a region. Find out some
native games of your state and other parts of India. Learn the rules of
one such game and play it with your classmates under the supervision of
your teacher.

Reprint 2025-26

Yi

Unit 4.indd 121 05-Dec-24 3:59:56 PM|

Poorvi GRabDE 6

Yoca A Way oF LIFE

Let us do these activities before we read.

1. What do you know about yoga? Discuss
in pairs and share with the whole class.

2. What is 21st June known for? What do
we do on this day?

3. List as many words you know related to g
yoga. Share them with your classmates.

4. Let us play the game of Antakshari. The first word is yoga . The next
word must then begin with the letter a . This activity will go on and the
whole class will participate and write the words on the blackboard. How
many new words have you learnt?

Yoga is a physical, mental, and spiritual practice

that originated in ancient India. The word originated:

 Yoga comes from the Sanskrit root yuj , which _ started

means to join or to unite . This symbolises the

unity of mind and body; thought and action;

harmony between human and nature. It is a harmony:

holistic approach to health and well-being. balance
Sage Patanjali presented the ancient

tradition of yoga in a systematic way in Yoga

Sutras of Patanjali . He described yoga as the

means to make the mind quiet and free from

all distractions. AieTenOne:
Yoga has become increasingly popular disturbances

around the world due to its many health

benefits.
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 4.indd 122 05-Dec-24 3:59:57 PM

SPORTS AND WELLNESS

Here are some of the benefits of yoga 

Yoga postures (asanas) help to stretch and
strengthen the muscles, increase flexibility,

endurance and balance. This can improve endurance:
overall physical fitness. This can also help to capacity to

reduce body pains, such as lower back pain. Comtmue _
. . . without giving
* Yoga involves breathing techniques and yp

meditation, which can help to calm the mind

and reduce stress and anxiety. It relaxes anxiety:
the mind, improves the quality of sleep and worry
increases concentration.

Yoga has been shown to boost the immune boost:
system. It can improve heart health by increase
lowering blood pressure and improving
circulation.

Yoga can aid in weight loss by burning
calories, and maintaining health.

Yoga promotes a sense of overall well-being. Wa
This is the reason why the benefits of practising \ VY }
yoga are internationally recognised. The World ee, (Z.
Health Organisation (WHO) on 20 June 2021,
launched an App called WHO mYoga. The app
contains a collection of videos and audio files to teach and support
yoga practice. The aim was to have an easy-to-use and free tool
for people across the world to encourage them to practise yoga.
We can start practising yoga at any given moment of time. We
must remember that when we practise yoga asanas (postures),
we do not just stretch the body. The mind has to be with the body.
This is the reason why it should be practised without distractions.
If each stretch is coordinated with the breath and awareness,
our practice will become a yogic practise.

WHO mYOGA

Reprint 2025-26 i

Unit 4.indd 123 26-Mar-25 9:48:25 AM |

Poorvi GRabDE 6

Hala CASAL ATHOTTTT 118 8
hathasya prathamangatvadasanam purvamuchyate
kuryattadasanam sthairyamarogyam changalaghavam

Being the first accessory of Hatha-Yoga, asana is described first. It should be
practised for gaining steady posture, health and weightlessness of body.

Source: Hatha Yoga Pradipika

Let us discuss

Read the passage again and fill in the blanks with words from the box.

Yoga is a practise that not only improves physical flexibility but also
improves mental 1. and leads to ahealthier 2.

It involves a series of asanas, which increase muscular 3.

Practising yoga also leads to a better body and mind 4.

and reduces body pain such as the lower back. Moreover, the focus on
breathing techniques and meditation makes the mind 5. ,
lessens 6. , and improves the quality of 7.

This helps to adopt a more positive lifestyle.

1. What is the aim of yoga?

2. Explain the idea of unity in yoga.

3. What does the launch of the WHO mYoga app tell us about the
importance of yoga?

4. Describe one long-term effect that the practice of yoga can have ona
person s qualities.
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 4.indd 124 18-Mar-25 2:47:24 PM

Unit 4.indd 125

SPORTS AND WELLNESS

Let us learn

I Read the extract given below and focus on the highlighted words.

The app (WHO mYoga) contains a collection of video and audio files to
teach and support yoga practice. The aim was to have an easy-to-use and
free tool for people across the world to encourage them to practise yoga.

The word practice and practise sound the same but have different
spellings and usage.

1. Complete the sentences given below by filling in the blanks with
correct use of practice (as a noun) or practise (as a verb). Share the
answers with your classmates and the teacher.

(i) It is important to have a regular of stretching
every morning to stay flexible.

Gi) I Yoga every day to keep my mind and body
healthy.

(iii) The teacher said, you can join the school hockey team but it
requires a lot of to improve your skills.

(iv) Our athletics coach asked us to running on grass
to strengthen our grip while running.

(v) I deep breathing exercises when I feel stressed to

calm myself down.
(vi) Developing a good habit of eating fruits and vegetables should
be a daily .
2. Another common word that has the s and c variation in spellings
is advice (noun) and advise (verb).

Make two sentences each using advice and
 advise and share with your classmates and the

teacher.

E
II Make as many words as you can using the letters

shown. Use the letter A in all the words that you
make.

Reprint 2025-26

05-Dec-24 3:59:58 PM

Poorvi GRabDE 6

Let us listen

You will listen to a girl talk about practising yoga. As you listen, select
four true statements from the sentences given in the table. (refer to page
129 for transcript)

Statements

1. The girl sees people at the park doing breathing exercises.

2. Her grandfather began practising yoga sixteen years ago.

3. The girl practises some easy yoga exercises with her grandfather.

4. The girl practises breathing exercises to relax.

5. Her grandfather is fit even though he has untimely meals.

6. Her grandfather s regular yoga practise has kept him strong.

7. The girl wishes to learn asanas over the weekend.

Let us speak

1. Participate in groups of four to share your yoga thoughts .

ou have tried yoga If you have not tried yoga, yet
 I practise yoga because ... I wish to practise yoga because ...
* My favourite thing about yogais... I hope that once I begin practising
I feel ft yoga, I...
ee = amer a yosa), The kind of exercise I want to try in
session because ... .
yoga is because ...

e The one thing in yoga that I want to
practise is because ...

2. Take turns to speak and listen to others when they share their thoughts.
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 4.indd 126 18-Mar-25 2:47:53 PM

SPORTS AND WELLNESS

Let us write

Write a short paragraph on The Benefits of Yoga . You may use the following
sentence starters along with your own ideas to create the paragraph.

Opening line Yoga is important because ...

Supporting ideas * One benefit of yoga that interests me is...

* Practising yoga can help people ...
 A popular yoga pose is because ...

* Yoga is not just physical exercise; it also ...

Concluding line Finally, yoga can be a great way to...

Let us explore

1. Do you know?

 A few seals of the Sindhu-Sarasvati Civilisation, dating back to
2700 BC, indicate that yoga was prevalent in ancient India. Many
people contributed to its development and now, yoga has spread
all over the world. On 11th December 2014, the United Nations
General Assembly (UNGA) with 193 members accepted the proposal
to celebrate 21st June as International Yoga Day .

2. Find out about two asanas and their benefits, and share your findings
with your classmates and teacher. You may visit the following websites
to learn more about yoga.

https://www.mygov.in/campaigns/international-yoga-day/
https://www.un.org/en/observances/yoga-day

https://www.mygov.in/campaigns/international-yoga-day/

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 4.indd 127

Transcript

(refer to page 110)

You will listen to the audio or narration once again. As you
listen, check your answers.
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 4.indd 128 05-Dec-24 3:59:58 PM

Transcript

i (refer to page 125) 5

Unit 4.indd 129

You will listen to the audio or narration once again. As you
listen, check your answers.

Reprint 2025-26 8 \ 

05-Dec-24 3:59:58 PM |

Who An I?

@
@

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 4.indd 130 05-Dec-24 3:59:58 PM