FRIENDSHIP

THe UNLIKELY
BEstT FRIENDS

Let us do these activities before we read. qQ

I Friends are an important part of our lives. Why do you think so? Share
your ideas with your friend. What do you do when you are with your
friends and how do you feel?

Now, complete the following sentences by writing in the shapes given
below. Share your completed sentences with your classmates and
teacher. One has been done for you.

play happy

With my friend

I feel

II The title of the chapter is The Unlikely Best Friends .

1. What can be the meaning of unlikely ? Discuss in groups, and then
discuss with your teacher.

2. Can you think of some unlikely friends? Share your answer with
your teacher.

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 2.indd 39 09-Dec-24 3:49:59 PM

Poorvi GRabDE 6

I

Gajaraj, the elephant, lived in the best booth of
the royal stables. The king was fond of Gajaraj,
and he had ordered that the elephant should
be well looked after.

In spite of royal comforts, Gajaraj was sad
because he had no friends. The mahout, or
elephant trainer, was the only one he ever
interacted with. The mahout was a kind man
who served Gajaraj food, and gave him a bath
in the elephant pond daily. He was a good
caretaker, but not a friend.

 IT wish I had a friend I can play with, 
thought Gajaraj. One late evening, a dog
strayed into the stable. Gajaraj could see that
the visitor was tired and hungry. He pushed
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 2.indd 40

booth:
rectangular
space

stables: living
spaces for
animals

interacted with:
communicated
with

strayed: came
by mistake

09-Dec-24 3:50:00 PM

some of the food he was munching towards
the dog. The visitor wagged his tail, looked up
at the elephant to convey his thanks, and then
turned his full attention to the food in front
of him. As soon as he finished eating, he fell
asleep.

The next morning, the mahout found the
stray dog in the stable. He did not mind the dog.
He also noticed that Gajaraj seemed to like the
company. So, he threw some crumbs to the dog,
which the animal accepted wagging his tail.

When the elephant went out for a bath,
the dog accompanied his friend. Plunging into
the water, the elephant gave himself a shower
using his long trunk, as the dog watched.
The elephant took a trunkful of water and
playfully splashed the water on his friend. The
dog yelped for he hated taking showers. The
mahout laughed.

. << a 7 = Zip 

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 2.indd 41

\

at

A1

FRIENDSHIP

munching:
chewing
wagged: moved
from side to side
convey:
communicate

crumbs: small
pieces of food

accompanied:
went with
someone

plunging:
jumping in
trunk: long nose
splashed: threw
yelped: cried

 ON
a

i y
i\)

el.

09-Dec-24 3:50:01 PM |

 
SS

sy

Poorvi GRabDE 6

On their way home, the elephant picked up
the dog with his trunk and placed him on his
back. The dog was delighted to get a ride. delighted:

A farmer passing by saw the dog. Buntee, happy
he yelled. The dog ran to him. The farmer
hugged the dog and told the mahout that he was hugged: held
looking for his dog ever since he disappeared _qjosely
from his house. He was glad he found him now. eae
The mahout had no objection to the farmer was not =)
taking the dog home. The farmer tossed a g,
rope round the neck of the dog, saying, Come
Buntee, let s go home. WN

Let us discuss

1. Talk about the things that Gajaraj and Buntee did together. Now, write
in the shapes given below. One has been done for you.

Buntee and

Gajaraj

2. Why did the farmer hug Buntee?
3. Do you think Buntee will leave Gajaraj and go home with the farmer?

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 2.indd 42 09-Dec-24 3:50:01 PM

Il

Only when the farmer pulled the rope did the
dog realise that he was being taken away from
his friend. He yelped, the elephant winced, but
neither the farmer nor the mahout noticed that
the two friends were in tears.

The next day at lunch time the mahout
served Gajaraj his favourite food. When the
mahout came back after finishing his other
chores, he was surprised to see that the food
had remained untouched.

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 2.indd 43

FRIENDSHIP

realise:
understand
winced: shrunk
back in pain or
distress

chores: daily
duties

Poorvi GRabDE 6

 Why Gajaraj, aren t you hungry? he asked
concerned. The elephant did not react. He
may have slight indigestion. Let me not force _ slight: a little
him to eat, thought the mahout. indigestion:

That night too, Gajaraj did not touch his Upset stomach
food nor the next day. Now, the mahout was
worried. He ran his hand on Gajaraj s tummy
and felt there was nothing wrong. Why was
he not eating then? Is he missing his friend,
that dog? the mahout wondered.

Meanwhile at the farmer s house, the dog
had also not touched his food ever since he
was brought home.

 Are you missing your friend? asked the
farmer remembering the happy look on Buntee s
face while sitting on the elephant s back. I cannot
see you go hungry, said the farmer, If you miss
your friend so much, go to him. 

tummy:
stomach

The farmer removed the rope with which
he had tied the dog. The dog, though weak,

te

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 2.indd 44 09-Dec-24 3:50:03 PM

FRIENDSHIP

sprang to his feet. He licked the farmer s hand sprang:
once and then ran. He stopped only when he jumped
arrived at the stable.

The elephant picked up the dog with his
trunk and gave him a joyous swing. The oe ;

. , swing: move side
mahout was relieved. He quickly brought the 4, ciqe or back
food. Both of you eat first, he said. smaval feral

By then the farmer who had followed the relieved:
dog, joined him. The two of them watched _ thankful
with satisfaction the two friends eating food. _ satisfaction:
 It s not only Gajaraj who has found a friend, happiness
said the mahout hugging the farmer, I ve also
found one. 

joyous: happy

SuBBA Rao

KATHAKIDS.COM

Let us discuss

1. Why did Gajaraj not eat his food?
2. Who were friends at the end of the story?

Let us think and reflect

I Read the following lines and answer the questions that follow.

1. In spite of royal comforts, Gajaraj was sad because he had no friends.
The mahout, or elephant trainer, was the only one he ever interacted
with. The mahout was a kind man who served Gajaraj food, and gave
him a bath in the elephant pond daily. He was a good caretaker, but
not a friend.

(i) Complete with one word:
mahout : kind : : Gajaraj :

Reprint 2025-26

Yi

Unit 2.indd 45 09-Dec-24 3:50:03 PM|

Poorvi GRabDE 6

(ii) The mahout was a good caretaker because he gave _
to Gajaraj anda in the pond.

(iii) What do you think is the difference between a friend and
a caretaker?

2. Are you missing your friend? asked the farmer remembering the
happy look on Buntee s face while sitting on the elephant s back. I
cannot see you go hungry, said the farmer, If you miss your friend
so much, go to him. The farmer removed the rope with which he had
tied the dog.

(i) The farmer uses the word to refer to the
elephant.

(ii) How did the farmer know that Buntee was hungry?

(iii) Why did the farmer remove the rope with which he had
tied Buntee?

(iv) Complete with one word:
Gajaraj : Buntee :: : farmer
II Give two examples to show that Gajaraj was very happy to have a friend.
III How did the mahout come to know that Gajaraj was sad?
IV Why do you think Buntee licked the farmer s hand?
V What was unlikely about the friendship of Gajaraj and Buntee?

 Let us learn

1. Gajaraj was sad without a friend and when he met Buntee, he was filled
with joy. Sad and filled with joy are opposites. Opposites can also be
formed by adding some letters before a word. For example, un- unhappy,
in- incorrect, dis- disconnect, mis- misuse.

Now, take help from the words given as hints and fill up their opposites
in the puzzle. (Note: All the words are from the story you have just read.)
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 2.indd 46 09-Dec-24 3:50:04 PM

FRIENDSHIP

We are opposites!

Across:

3. unkind
7. yelped
8. awake
9. relieved

10. missing

1. started
2. appeared
4. sad

5. untouched

6. hate

2. Now, complete the paragraph with some of the words you have used in

the puzzle.

My pencil was . | was very as it was a gift
from my friend. I woke up my elder brother who was on
the bed. I told him that my pencil seemed to have

He and told me to look under my pillow. I was

when I the pencil there.

Reprint 2025-26

T

Unit 2.indd 47 09-Dec-24 3:50:04 PM|

Poorvi GRabDE 6

3. The words that tell us about an action are called verbs. In the story,
the author tells us what happened before. To do that, the past form of
the action word (verb) is used. Let us learn about the three forms of
past tense.

ple Pa ense Past Progressive Tense Past Pe

Used to show that the Used to show that the Used to show that the

action had happened action did not finish action was completed.
earlier. and was going on. had + third form of
 second form of the T/He/She/It + was + the verb
verb+add-dor-edto| verb +ing
the verb

 We/You/They + were +
verb + ing

Given below are some verbs from the story. Put the verbs in their correct
column in the table given above.

* was looking e looked gave had ordered
* was missing e hated e had followed _ . noticed

* was munching went e hadremained served

* told e asked e felt e touched

 had tied e joined e arrived - threw

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 2.indd 48 09-Dec-24 3:50:04 PM

FRIENDSHIP

Select the correct form of the verb to complete the passage. Check your
answers with the teacher.

The farmer came back and (noticed/was noticing/had
noticed) that Buntee was sad. He _ (tied/ was tying/had tied)
Buntee with a rope the day before. He (asked/was asking/
had asked) Buntee why he was sad. The farmer (felt/was
feeling/had felt) that Buntee (missed/was missing/had

missed) Gajaraj and set him free.
4, ..neither the farmer nor the mahout noticed that the two friends were
in tears. 

The words neither , nor are used to state that the farmer and the
mahout did not notice the same thing. Neither, nor connect two negative
choices. For example: Neither Rohit nor I want to play football.

When youneed to choose between two things that you want, you may use
 either, or . For example: Rohit wants to play either cricket or kho-kho.
It means Rohit wants to play cricket or Rohit wants to play kho-kho.
Discuss the given sentences with your teacher to practise.

 Neither Shikha nor Anuj like to tell stories.
 Either Bhavesh or Abha made this painting.

Let us listen

1. You will listen to a story about Unlikely Friends . Use exact words from
the story to fill up the missing details in the paragraph. (refer to page 71
for transcript)

The leopard is a animal but it
became a friend of a cow. When the leopard
grew up, it left the village. It came in the

to meet the cow. The leopard

would sit _ the cow. Theyalso
played together. were surprised
at their friendship.

Reprint 2025-26

Yi

Unit 2.indd 49 09-Dec-24 3:50:05 PM|

Poorvi GRabDE 6

2. Now, listen to the story again and number the sentences in correct order.
The first one has been done for you.

The leopard stopped coming regularly.

The cow took care of the leopard cub as a mother.

The leopard came to meet the cow at night.

The leopard left the village after growing up.

UL)

Let us speak

Gajaraj and Buntee had a wonderful time with each other even if they
were unlikely friends. Talk to your friend and find out your common
likes and dislikes. Share your answers with the class.

7 N
Tam 4 _ \\ My friend is
I like: f Both of us like: \ My friend likes:
e \ 1 oe
\e /
e \ vi, e
N , 4

Now, tell your classmates about your friend. You may take help of the
cues given below.

 My friend and I like to play. Both of us want
 [like to but my friend likes to

 Weare different as she/heis __ and I am

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 2.indd 50 09-Dec-24 3:50:05 PM

FRIENDSHIP

Let us write

Write six sentences about your friend with the help of the facts collected
inthe above task. Mention how you are not only similar but also different.
You may take help of the words given below.

same different and but
both still like unlike
neither nor either or

. Let us explore

1. The story, The Elephant and the Dog is found in the Jataka tales. These
stories are ancient Buddhist stories of life values and wisdom. These
stories have been told from one generation to the next for over two
thousand years. Find and read another Jataka story.

2. Elephants have historically held significant roles in Indian culture,
spanning history, warfare, religion, festivals and more. However,
contemporary ecological challenges have strained the relationship
between humans and elephants. Have a discussion in the class.

3. Given below is a news report from an Elephant Sanctuary in the United
States about a real-life friendship between an elephant and a dog.

The elephant s name is Tarra and the dog s name is Bella. Bella came
inside a forest for elephants and became Tarra s friend. Tarra spent
most of her time with Bella. One day, Bella had an injury so she could
not walk. She was kept inside a building for three weeks. Tarra stood
outside for three weeks. Finally, they met and were very happy.

Reprint 2025-26

Yi

Unit 2.indd 51 09-Dec-24 3:50:05 PM|

Poorvi GRabDE 6

A FRIEND sS PRAYER

Let us do these activities before we read.
I Read the following sentences.
1. Iwish my friend brings idli in her tiffin tomorrow.
2. [hope my friend and I win the race tomorrow.
3. May my friend get well soon.

Which of the three sentences 1-3 is closest to a prayer? Explain to your
teacher and classmates.

II What would you pray for your friend? First speak about it and then
write it down.

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 2.indd 52 09-Dec-24 3:50:06 PM

FRIENDSHIP

Let us read

May my friendships always be
The most important thing to me.

With special friends I feel I m blessed,
So let me give my very best.

I want to do much more than share
The hopes and plans of friends who care;

Pll try all that a friend can do
To make their wishes come true.

Let me use my heart to see,
To realise what friends can be,

And make no judgements from afar,
But love my friends the way they are.

Jit WoLF

Let us discuss

1. Read the poem silently. As you read, underline the parts of the poem
that you agree with.

2. Now, share the details of your underlined parts of the poem in groups
and explain why you liked those lines.

3. Which line was underlined by most people in your group? Share it with
your teacher.

Reprint 2025-26

a

Unit 2.indd 53 09-Dec-24 3:50:06 PM|

Poorvi GRabDE 6

Unit 2.indd 54

Let us think and reflect

I Complete the summary of the poem by circling the correct
highlighted words.

The poet says a prayer for/speech on friendship and friends. She wants
that friendship should always be an important part of her complete life/
school days. She says that her friendship makes her feel brave/special.
She wishes to do the best she can, for her friends. She wants to clap for/
listen to the wishes of her friends. As a good friend, she prays/imagines
that she is able to make her friends wishes come true. She wants her
heart/mind to understand what a true friend is. She prays that she
loves her friends as they are/when they are happy. She tells us that
true/correct friends accept their friends for all their qualities.

II Answer in one word only.
1. How does the poet feel about special friends?

2. What does the poet use to realise what friends can be?

III Read the following lines from the poem and answer the questions
given below.

1. Iwant to do much more than share
The hopes and plans of friends who care;

I'll try all that a friend can do
To make their wishes come true.

(i) Complete the sentence with the most suitable option.

These lines tell us that the speaker is __

A. clever B. caring C. curious D. calm

(ii) How will the speaker make her friends wishes come true? (by
trying hard/by working a lot)

(iii) Fill in the blank with a suitable word.

My friends will feel if their wishes come true.

Reprint 2025-26

09-Dec-24 3:50:06 PM

FRIENDSHIP

2. Let me use my heart to see,

To realise what friends can be,

And make no judgements from afar,
But love my friends the way they are.

(i) The speaker says that feelings are important to understand
friendship. Which line tells us this?

(ii) Complete the sentence with the most suitable option.

These lines tell us that the speaker is___ .
A. helpful BB. thoughtful C. cheerful D. hopeful

(ii) Fill in the blank with one word.

The speaker does not wish to make any . She cares
for them just as they are.

IV Give one reason why we can say that this poem is a prayer.
V Why does the speaker want to do more for her friend?

VI Do you think that the speaker knows about the wishes of her friend?
How can we say so?

VII Do you also pray for your friend? What do you wish for? Discuss.

Unit 2.indd 55

loyal he__f_1l, k___d, c___ing, ho t

. Let us learn
I The poet says, With special friends I feel I m blessed .

Select the words that are similar to the meaning of being blessed, from
those given below.

II Good friends have a lot of qualities. Let us list some.

Reprint 2025-26

Yi

09-Dec-24 3:50:07 PM |

Poorvi GRabDE 6

Now, fill in the blanks with the words you just listed above.
1. My friend is always to me even when I make a mistake.

2. My friend shares things with me. She is very

3. My friend is because he always supports me.
4, My friend never lies. She is an person.
5. My friend and I believe in for each other.

III Think of any three of your friends. Write three sentences on why you
like each one of them.

Let us listen

I You will listen to a talk about some outdoor activities that two friends
spend their time doing. As you listen, answer the given question in one
or two word(s) only. (refer to page 72 for transcript)

1. What do the two friends purchase and use on the park bench?

II You will once again listen to the talk about some outdoor activities of the
two friends. As you listen, circle the pictures that show these activities.

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 2.indd 56 09-Dec-24 3:50:09 PM

FRIENDSHIP

1. In pairs, act the role of friends speaking to each other. Speak about the
following situations:

Awa e pa 2. Sharing tiffins at school

You can use the following- You can use the following
* Greet each ot Oo * Greet each other.

 Ask if y fay wishes to go/ Tell your friends what food items
with yo Sar park. you have brought in your tiffin.

* If yes, Ga)some activities. Ask them what they have brought.

 inno as what your friend would * Tell them you wish to share tiffins!
like to do. Listen and share what Next, share with your friends, how
you would also like to do together. it makes you feel.

Reprint 2025-26 i

Unit 2.indd 57 09-Dec-24 3:50:15 PM|

Poorvi GRabDE 6

 Tell your friend that you like|* Appreciate your friends food and
spending time with each other. ask what other food items they

like.

 Thank your friends for sharing.

2. Create a new situation and have another conversation.

OS Let us write

Describe how your friendship with your friend started.

 First list the answers for When? Where? How?
e Then, use your sentences to write a short paragraph of about 80 words.

* Give a title to your paragraph.

s---e

I There are many quotations about friendship. Read the ones given below.
 A friend in need is a friend indeed. 
 My best friend is the one who brings out the best in me. 

1. What do you think is the meaning of these quotations? Share it
with your teacher.

2. Think of an experience in your life with your friend that suits this
quotation. Share it with your friends.

II Look for some famous quotations on friendship; these can be in your own
language too. Read and share them with your teacher and classmates.

Write one quotation on paper, colour and decorate it. Put it up on the
class board.

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 2.indd 58 09-Dec-24 3:50:15 PM

FRIENDSHIP

THE CHAIR

Let us do these activities before we read.
I Write two words that come to your mind when you think of friendship.

1. Now, find some more words that are related to friendship from the
grid given below. You can search horizontally or vertically. There
are eight words. One word has been marked as an example. The
first letter of each word has been given in bold.

2. Fillin the blanks to complete the words, which mean the same as
 friend or friends with the help of the meanings.

Word

(i) a person with whom you do
activities together

Gi) an informal word for friends b d Ss

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 2.indd 59 18-Mar-25 2:12:02 PM |

Poorvi GRabDE 6

(iii) a person who you spend a lot of
time with

(iv) children who are in the same
class as you at school

3. There are so many words for a friend. What do you call a friend 

in your own language?

wee

Pas, Let us read
I

There was a boy called Mario who loved
to have lots of friends. He showed off a lot,
always talking about how many friends he
had at school, and how he was so friendly with
everyone.

One day his grandfather said to him, Mario,
I bet you a fruit chaat. You don t have as many
friends as you think you have. I m sure many
of them are nothing more than companions or
partners. 

Mario accepted the bet readily. However,
he wasn t sure how he could test whether his
schoolmates were real friends or not. So, he
asked his grandpa for help. He suggested, I
have exactly what you need. It s in the attic.
Wait here a minute. 

Grandpa left, soon returning as though
carrying something in his hand, but Mario
could see nothing there.

 Take it. It s a very special chair. As it s
invisible, it s rather tricky to sit on it. But if you
take it to school and manage to sit on it, then
Reprint 2025-26

Unit 2.indd 60

showed off:
boasted

accepted:
agreed to

readily: without
any problem
attic: a storage
space in a house

just under the
roof

invisible:
impossible to see

09-Dec-24 3:50:16 PM

the magic will work and you'll be able to tell
who your real friends are. 

Let us discuss

1. Mario was very proud of having so many friends.
State whether True or False.

2. What did the grandfather take from the attic?
3. Will Mario face any challenges?
4. Will Mario be able to use the magic?

I
Mario, brave and determined, took the strange
invisible chair and set off for school. At break
time, he asked everyone to form a circle. He
put himself in the middle, with his chair.
 Nobody move. You're about to see
something amazing. 

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 2.indd 61

qv

determined:
firm in decision

amazing: very
surprising

OX ban r

cue

ise

Mario tried sitting on the chair. Having 
difficulty seeing it, he missed and fell straight
onto his backside. His classmates had a pretty
good laugh.

 Wait, wait, just a slight technical

problem, he said, trying again. But again,
he missed the seat, causing more surprised
looks and laughter. Mario wouldn t give up.
He kept trying to sit on the magic chair and
kept falling to the ground until, suddenly, he
tried again and didn t fall. This time he sat,
hanging in mid-air.

Then he finally experienced the magic perienced:
that his grandfather had been talking about. !
Looking around, Mario saw Guneet, Asma, and
Deepa-three of his buddies holding him up,
so he wouldn t fall. Meanwhile, many others

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 2.indd 62 09-Dec-24 3:50:18 PM

FRIENDSHIP

he d thought of as friends had done nothing but made fun of him,
enjoying each and every fall.

Leaving with his three friends, he explained to them how
his grandfather had so cleverly thought of a way to show him
that true friends are those who care for us. A friend wouldn t be
someone who takes joy in our bad luck.

That evening the four children went to see Mario s grandpa
as he had won the bet. They had a great time listening to stories
and eating a lot of fruit chaat. From then on, they used the magic
chair test on many occasions and whoever passed became friends
for life.

Reprint 2025-26 1 o

Unit 2.indd 63 09-Dec-24 3:50:20 PM|

Poorvi GRabDE 6

Let us discuss

1. Mario successfully sat on the invisible chair on his first attempt. State
whether True or False.

2. Fillin the blank with a suitable word.
Mario s grandfather challenged him to a bet of

3. Match the following characters with their action.

(i) held Mario up, so he wouldn't fall

Guneet, Asma
and Deepa

(ii) made fun of Mario s attempts

Let us think and reflect
I Read the following lines and answer the questions that follow.

1. Take it. It s a very special chair. As it s invisible, it s rather tricky to
sit on. But if you take it to school and manage to sit on it, then the
magic will work and you'll be able to tell who your real friends are. 

(i) Fill in the blanks with two words that describe the chair.
The chair is and
(ii) Why was it tricky to sit on the chair?
(iii) Why does Mario s grandfather call the chair special ?

2. Wait, wait, just a slight technical problem, he said, trying again. But
again, he missed the seat, causing more surprised looks and laughter.
Mario wouldn t give up.

(i) Fill in the blank with a suitable reason.
Mario says there was a technical problem because

(ii) Mario s friends were very caring and helpful. State whether
True or False.

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 2.indd 64 09-Dec-24 3:50:20 PM

Unit 2.indd 65

FRIENDSHIP

(iii) Choose the correct option to complete the sentence.
Mario wouldn t give up. This shows he is

A. strong-willed C. loving
B. supportive D. hard-working

II Answer the following questions.

What was the bet about?

What happened when Mario sat on the chair for the first time?
How was Mario able to find his real friends?

Do you think the magic chair test was good? Why do you say so?

What does friends for life mean to you?

oan Fr WN

The grandfather s idea helped Mario find his real friends . Mention
any other way that would help you find out who are your real
friends .

Complete the following table by dividing the words into two parts. One
has been done for you.

0 A Column B

1. friend ly The words in Column A
2. are called the root words.
The sequences of letters
that are in Column B which
come after the root words
are called suffixes.

>

or

ea

Reprint 2025-26

Yi

18-Mar-25 2:14:55 PM |

Poorvi GRabDE 6

II Match the following root words with suitable suffixes. You can use a
suffix more than once as shown. Use them to make sentences of your
own. One has been done for you.

II

Unit 2.indd 66

-_

Root Word Word
1. magic ne magical The a an
amazing magical act.
2. care -al
3. celebrate -ful
4. laugh -ly
5. wonder -ed
6. help -tion
7. friend -ous
8. courage -ship

[Note: Observe the changes in spelling in a few word combinations.]

Read the following lines from the story.
Mario, brave and determined, took the strange invisible chair ...

You have already described the chair. Now, describe what kind of a
person Mario is in the image given below.

[Use words from the story. You may also use words of your own.]

Reprint 2025-26

The words that describe
the quality of a person
or a thing are called
adjectives.

09-Dec-24 3:50:20 PM

FRIENDSHIP

IV Match each word (adjectives) in Column A with a suitable word
(noun) in Column B. You can make more than one combination.
One has been done as an example.

: ; Column B : Column D
Adjective Nouns Phrase Sentences
1. brave friends brave soldier (i) The brave soldier
marched ahead.
2. clever rain
3. tasty soldier
4. heavy plan
5. slight peanuts
6. true cold

V Complete the paragraph with suitable adjective-noun pairings. Use
the words in the box given below.

old book magicaladventures happyboy amazing stories

| fantastic adventures colourful creatures old castles

Once upon a time in a little village, a/an 1. named
Abhishek found a/an 2. in the attic. He read
3. about fairy lands, 4. and
5. . Abhishek s eyes got big as he imagined these
6. . He told his friends about the stories, and they
started to have their own 7. when they played
together.

Reprint 2025-26

Yi

Unit 2.indd 67 09-Dec-24 3:50:20 PM|

Poorvi GRabDE 6

Let us listen

You will listen to Manu talk about her friend, Monika. As you listen, fill
in the blanks with words that you hear. (refer to page 73 for transcript)

1. Manu found it when she took admission in the school.

2. Manu met and helped by her in many ways.

3. So, it was not so for the new girl to adjust in the school.

4. Both friends experienced difficult and _moments together.

5. Manu is ___ to Monika for making her life easy and finding
a friend.

You will listen to the girl once again.

Let us speak

Work in pairs. Read the following qualities of a friend.

loving honest kind caring loyal polite

respectful team-worker understanding

Discuss in pairs. Choose any four positive qualities that you would like
your friend to have. Give a reason for your choice. Use the hints given
below when you speak.

I feel my friend should be ... because ...
I think the quality I want in my friend is being .... The reason for this is ...
I believe my friend should be ... This is in order to ...

If my friend is ... then ...

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 2.indd 68 18-Mar-25 2:20:09 PM

FRIENDSHIP

Let us write

Read the messages that Mario has written to his friends Deepa, Guneet
and Asma.

Dear Deepa,

I feel so special that you are my friend. I know you will always be there
for me. Before going to bed, I said a little prayer for Guneet, Asma and
you. You made me realise the value of having good friends.

Best wishes,
Mario
Dear Asma,

I feel blessed to know that you are my true friend. I would have fallen
again today, if it wasn t for Guneet, Deepa and you. I know I can always
depend on the three of you, no matter what.

Best wishes,
Mario

1. Now, choose the correct word given in brackets to complete Mario s
message to Guneet.

Dear Guneet,

Iam (thankful to/requesting) God to have you as
a (lucky/real) friend for life. When everyone was

____ (laughing at/talking to) me, Deepa, Asma and you
showed me that you _ (will save/care for) me. You
are indeed a __ (blessing/loving) in my life.

Best wishes,
Mario

2. Now, write your own message to your best friend. You may take
ideas from the story, The Unlikely Best Friends and the poem,
 A Friend s Prayer .

Reprint 2025-26

Yi

Unit 2.indd 69 09-Dec-24 3:50:21 PM|

Poorvi GRabDE 6

1. Find out more stories about Friendship . It could be from your state,
other states or other countries too. You can share them with your class.

2. Describe your friends by filling in the blanks with suitable words. This is
known as an acrostic poem.

F

yams hw

S

3. Complete the following task by talking to different people of different
age groups as mentioned in the table. You may divide the class into
groups to do the following:

Question Response

50+

31 to 49
20 to 30
12 to 19

After gathering responses:

v Discuss: similarities and differences across age groups.

Y Reflect: how viewpoints on friendship may change with age and life
experiences.

v Present: a summary of the group s responses, emphasising key themes
or unique insights.

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 2.indd 70 09-Dec-24 3:50:21 PM

Transcript
& Let us listen (refer to page 49) .
THe UNLIKELY BEST FRIENDS

Let me tell youa story of a cow and a leopard from Vadodara
in Gujarat who became friends. As you know, a leopard is a
wild animal and a cow is a domestic animal. Some people
say that the cow took care of the leopard cub like a mother.
When the cub became older, it went away from the village.
It returned to meet the cow at night. The villagers were
worried but they never stopped the leopard. They saw that
the leopard just sat beside the cow quietly. The cow and
leopard spent time by relaxing and playing with each other.
The leopard did not like the villagers and stopped coming
regularly. The villagers were surprised that the leopard
never attacked the cow but became its friend.

You will listen to the audio or narration once again. As you
listen, check your answers.

Reprint 2025-26 i o

Unit 2.indd 71 09-Dec-24 3:50:21 PM

Transcript

Let us listen (refer to page 56)

A FRIEND S PRAYER
Hello!

Let me tell you what outdoor activities Ajay and Dhiraj
enjoy doing. Some days they like playing at the swings in
the park. Ajay enjoys slides the most. Dhiraj likes nature,
so both take walks in the nearby park, listen to birds and
look at the trees. On Saturdays, both go cycling around the
neighbourhood. What both truly enjoy is eating ice-cream
together. Sometimes they also purchase a comic book, sit on
a park bench and read together. They are truly best friends.

You will listen to the audio or narration once again. As you
listen, check your answers.

Reprint 2025-26

Unit 2.indd 72 09-Dec-24 3:50:21 PM

Transcript

Let us listen (refer to page 68)

THE CHAIR

When I first joined this new school, things were very difficult.
There was Monika. She was a supportive friend who guided
me, introduced me to others and even shared her notes.
That made me comfortable in the school. Since then, Monika
and I have been together through difficult times and happy
times. She is the kind of friend who is always there for you.
I m really thankful to her, and how her help and support
turned into a really good friendship.

You will listen to the audio or narration once again. As you
listen, check your answers.

Reprint 2025-26 i a

Unit 2.indd 73 18-Mar-25 2:21:16 PM |

Let, us ponder

SAVE WATER

Look at the pictures.
Now, discuss the following
points.
 Sources of water
*Without water there
cannot be any life
 Value of water and the
need to save it

Unit 2.indd 74