strengthen parties so that they perform their functions well? What is a political party? What are the characteristics of a political party? A group of people who come together to contest elections and hold power in the government is called a 7. Match List I (organisations and struggles) with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below the lists: List I Congress Party List II A. National Democratic Alliance Bharatiya Janata Party B. State party Communist Party of India (Marxist) C. United Progressive Alliance BIWIN Te Telugu Desam Party D. Left Front (a) (b) (c) OVO; oa; oy; O| S| UO] SIN >| OC] S| WD] w (d) BD) wD) Ww) oO; 8. Who among the following is the founder of the Bahujan Samaj Party? A. Kanshi Ram B. Sahu Maharaj C. B.R. Ambedkar D. Jotiba Phule 9. What is the guiding philosophy of the Bharatiya Janata Party? A. Bahujan Samaj B. Revolutionary democracy C. Integral humanism D. Modernity Reprint 2025-26 ISCS Exerc ews 08-04-2022 a) 5) w [o) ae s) w w z) [o) ) (an) 10. Consider the following statements on parties. A. Political parties do not enjoy much trust among the people. B. Parties are often rocked by scandals involving top party leaders. C. Parties are not necessary to run governments. Which of the statements given above are correct? ] (a) A,B, and C (b)AandB (c)BandC (d)AandC l] 11. Read the following passage and answer the questions given below: Muhammad Yunus is a famous economist of Bangladesh. He received several international honours for his efforts to promote economic and social development for the benefit of the poor. He and the Grameen Bank that he started jointly, received the Nobel Peace Prize for the year 2006. In February 2007, he decided to launch a political party and contest in the parliamentary elections. His objective was to foster proper leadership, good governance and build a new Bangladesh. He felt that only a political party different from the traditional ones would bring about new political culture. His party would be democratic from the grassroots level. The launching of the new party, called Nagarik Shakti (Citizens Power), has caused a stir among the Bangladeshis. While many welcomed his decision, some did not like it. Now I think Bangladesh will have a chance to choose between good and bad and eventually have a good government, said Shahedul Islam, a government Official. That government, we hope, would not only keep itself away from corruption but also make fighting corruption and black money a top priority. ISes But leaders of traditional political parties who dominated the country s politics for decades were apprehensive. There was no debate (over him) winning the Nobel, but politics is different very challenging and often controversial, said a senior leader of the Bangladesh Nationalist Party. Some others were highly critical. They asked why he was rushing into politics. Is he being planted in politics by mentors from outside the country, asked one political observer. Do