parties willing to reform? If they are willing, what has prevented them from reforming so far? If they are not willing, is it possible to force them to reform? Citizens all over the world face this question. This is not a simple question to answer. In a democracy, the final decision is made by leaders who represent political parties. People can replace them, but only by another set of party leaders. If all of them do not wish to reform, how can anyone force them to change? Let us look at some of the recent efforts and suggestions in our country to reform political parties and its leaders: @ The Constitution was amended to prevent elected MLAs and MPs from changing parties. This was done because many elected representatives were indulging in DEFECTION in order to become ministers or for cash rewards. Now the law says that if Reprint 2025-26 Does this suggest that in democracies people contest elections only to make money? But isn t it true that there are politicians committed to the well-being of the people? Glossary Defection: Changing party allegiance from the party on which a person got elected (to a legislative body) to a different party. 08-04-2022 a) 5) w [o) ae s) w w z) [o) ) (an) Keshav - The Hindu "ELECTORAL DISCIPLINE 1S NOT OUR CUP OF TEA... Do you agree that this form of reforming political parties will be acceptable to them? Glossary Affidavit: A signed document submitted to an officer, where a person makes a sworn statement regarding her personal information. r4.indd 60 any MLA or MP changes parties, he or she will lose the seat in the legislature. This new law has helped bring defection down. At the same time, this has made any dissent even more difficult. MPs and MLAs have to accept whatever the party leaders decide. @ The Supreme Court passed an order to reduce the influence of money and criminals. Now, it is mandatory for every candidate who contests elections to file an AFFIDAVIT giving details of his property and criminal cases pending against him. The new system has made a lot of information available to the public. But there is no system to check if the information given by the candidates is true. As yet we do not know if it has led to decline in the influence of the rich and the criminals. The Election Commission passed an order making it necessary for political parties to hold their organisational elections and file their income tax returns. The parties have started doing so but sometimes it Reprint 2025-26 is mere formality. It is not clear if this step has led to greater internal democracy in political parties. Besides these, many suggestions are often made to reform political parties: @ A lawshould be made to regulate the internal affairs of political parties. It should be made compulsory for political parties to maintain a register of its members, to follow its own constitution, to have an