income tax returns. The parties have started doing so but sometimes it Reprint 2025-26 is mere formality. It is not clear if this step has led to greater internal democracy in political parties. Besides these, many suggestions are often made to reform political parties: @ A lawshould be made to regulate the internal affairs of political parties. It should be made compulsory for political parties to maintain a register of its members, to follow its own constitution, to have an independent authority, to act as a judge in case of party disputes, to hold open elections to the highest posts. Itshould be made mandatory for political parties to give a minimum number of tickets, about one-third, to women candidates. Similarly, there should be a quota for women in the decision making bodies of the party. @ There should be state funding of elections. The government should give parties money to support their election expenses. This support could be given in kind: petrol, paper, telephone, etc. Or it could be given in cash on the basis of the votes secured by the party in the last election. These suggestions have not yet been accepted by political parties. If and when these are accepted these could lead to some improvement. But we must be very careful about legal solutions to political problems. Over-regulation of political parties can be counter-productive. This would force all parties to find ways to cheat the law. Besides, political parties will not agree to pass a law that they do not like. There are two other ways in which political parties can be reformed. One, people can put 08-04-2022 12:33:48 Chapter 4.indd 61 pressure on political parties. This can be done through petitions, publicity and agitations. Ordinary citizens, pressure groups and movements and the media can play an important role in this. If political parties feel that they would lose public support by not taking up reforms, they would become more serious about reforms. Two, political parties can improve if those who want this, join political parties. The quality of democracy depends on the degree of public participation. It is difficult to reform politics if ordinary citizens do not take part in it and simply criticise it from the outside. The problem of bad politics can be solved by more and better politics. We shall return to this theme in the final chapter. 1. State the various functions political parties perform in a democracy. 2. What are the various challenges faced by political parties? Suggest some reforms to strengthen parties so that they perform their functions well? What is a political party? What are the characteristics of a political party? A group of people who come together to contest elections and hold power in the government is called a 7. Match List I (organisations and struggles) with List II and select the correct answer using the codes given below the lists: List I Congress Party List II A. National Democratic Alliance Bharatiya Janata Party B. State party Communist