India? Why is the difference between the durations of day and night hardly felt at Kanniyakumari but not so in Kashmir? INDIA AND THE WORLD The Indian landmass has a central location between the East and the West Asia. Indiaisa southward extension of the Asian continent. The trans Indian Ocean routes, which connect the countries of Europe in the West and the countries of East Asia, provide a strategic central location to India. Note that the Deccan Peninsula protrudes into the Indian Ocean, thus helping India to establish close contact with West Asia, Africa and Europe from the western coast and with Southeast and East Asia from the eastern coast. No other country has a long coastline on the Indian Ocean as India has and indeed, it is India s eminent position in the Indian Ocean, which justifies the naming of an Ocean after it. Do You Know? + cincentne opening of the Suez Canal in 1869, India s distance from Europe has been reduced by 7,000 km. 8.51 7.69 | . ft & my ; | 7 of oh hOm 3.28 \ tf me ; | 7 EE me mm Russia Canada USA China Brazil Australia India Country Source : United Nations Demographic Year Book 2015 Figure 1.2 : Seven Largest Countries of the World CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I Reprint 2025-26 AFGHANISTAN oo Np _ > ras fe) S oO + o LAKSHADWEEP (INDIA) Figure 1.3 : India : Extent and Standard Meridian INDIA - SIZE AND LOCATION Reprint 2025-26 : x \ ETHIOPIA | je nee Air Routes - - Sea Routes Figure 1.4 : India on International Highway of Trade and Commerce India s contacts with the World have continued through ages but her relationships through the land routes are much older than her maritime contacts. The various passes across the mountains in the north have provided passages to the ancient travellers, while the oceans restricted such interaction for a long time. These routes have contributed in the exchange of ideas and commodities since ancient times. The ideas of the Upanishads and the Ramayana, the stories of Panchtantra, the Indian numerals and the decimal system thus could reach many parts of the world. The spices, muslin and other merchandise were taken from India to different countries. On the other hand, the influence of Greek sculpture, and the architectural styles of dome and minarets from West Asia can be seen in different parts of our country. Inp1A s NEIGHBOURS India occupies an important strategic position in South Asia. India has 28 states and Eight Union Territories (Figure 1.5). Find out e The number of Union Territories along the western and eastern coasts. e Area-wise which is the smallest and which is the largest state? e The states which do not have an international border or lie on the coast. e Classify the states into four groups each having common frontiers with (i) Pakistan, (ii) China, (iii) Myanmar, and (iv) Bangladesh. India shares its land boundaries with Pakistan and Afghanistan in