28 states and Eight Union Territories (Figure 1.5). Find out e The number of Union Territories along the western and eastern coasts. e Area-wise which is the smallest and which is the largest state? e The states which do not have an international border or lie on the coast. e Classify the states into four groups each having common frontiers with (i) Pakistan, (ii) China, (iii) Myanmar, and (iv) Bangladesh. India shares its land boundaries with Pakistan and Afghanistan in the northwest, China (Tibet), Nepal and Bhutan in the north and Myanmar and Bangladesh in the east. Our southern neighbours across the sea consist of the two island countries, namely Do You Kno ? Before 1947, there were two types of states in India the provinces and the Princely states. Provinces were ruled directly by British officials, who were appointed by the Viceroy. Princely states were ruled by local, hereditary rulers, who acknowledged sovereignity in return for local autonomy. CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I Reprint 2025-26 he. a eee mS SAM, ae ese Fa wet GBA ESF a INGLADESH, Re Mt aweaecRne , Dom nnn wanna on doe mnatt MADHYA PRODEBH: a BENGAL -- Intemational Boundary State Boundary ANDAMAN & hare ISLANDS Figure 1.5 : India and Adjacent Countries Sri Lanka and Maldives. Sri Lanka is separated from India by a narrow channel of sea formed by the Palk Strait and the Gulf of Mannar, while Maldives Islands are situated to the south of the Lakshadweep Islands. Do You Know? India has had strong geographical and historical links with her neighbours. Look at the physical map of Asia in your atlas, and note how India stands apart from the rest of Asia. School Bhuvan, NCERT is a portal providing map-based learning to bring awareness among the students about the country s natural resources, environment and their role in sustainable development. It is an initiative of Bhuvan NRSC/ISRO based on NCERT syllabus. You can explore various maps of India related to the secondary stage on https://bhuvan-app1.nrsc.gov.in/mhrd_ncert/ INDIA - SIZE AND LOCATION Reprint 2025-26 EXERCISE 1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below. (i) The Tropic of Cancer does not pass through (a) Rajasthan (c) Chhattisgarh (b) Odisha (d) Tripura (ii) The easternmost longitude of India is (a) 97 25'E (c) 77 6'E (b) 68 7'E (d) 82 32'E (iii) Uttarakhand, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal and Sikkim have common frontiers with (a) China (c) Nepal (b) Bhutan (dq) Myanmar (iv) If you intend to visit Kavarati during your summer vacations, which one of the following Union Territories of India you will be going to (a) Puducherry (c) Andaman and Nicobar (b) Lakshadweep (d) Daman and Diu (v) My friend hails from a country which does not share land boundary with India. Identify the country. (a) Bhutan (c) Bangladesh (b) Tajikistan (d) Nepal 2 Answer the following questions briefly. (i) Name the group of islands lying in the Arabian Sea. (ii) Name the countries which are larger than India. (iii) Which island