of chromosomes than that of the mother cells. Can you think as to why the chromosome number has reduced to half in daughter cells? you have learnt The fundamental organisational unit of life is the cell. Cells are enclosed by a plasma membrane composed of lipids and proteins. The cell membrane is an active part of the cell. It regulates the movement of materials between the ordered interior of the cell and the outer environment. In plant cells, a cell wall composed mainly of cellulose is located outside the cell membrane. The presence of the cell wall enables the cells of plants, fungi and bacteria to exist in hypotonic media without bursting. The nucleus in eukaryotes is separated from the cytoplasm by double-layered membrane and it directs the life processes of the cell. The ER functions both as a passageway for intracellular transport and as a manufacturing surface. The Golgi apparatus consists of stacks of membrane-bound vesicles that function in the storage, modification and packaging of substances manufactured in the cell. Most plant cells have large membranous organelles called plastids, which are of two types chromoplasts and leucoplasts. 58 SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 e Chromoplasts that contain chlorophyll are called chloroplasts and they perform photosynthesis. The primary function of leucoplasts is storage. Most mature plant cells have a large central vacuole that helps to maintain the turgidity of the cell and stores important substances including wastes. Prokaryotic cells have no membrane-bound organelles, their chromosomes are composed of only nucleic acid, and they have only very small ribosomes as organelles. Cells in organisms divide for growth of body, for repalcing dead cells, and for forming gametes for reproduction. Exercises 1. Make a comparison and write down ways in which plant cells are different from animal cells. 2. How is a prokaryotic cell different from a eukaryotic cell? 3. What would happen if the plasma membrane ruptures or breaks down? 4. What would happen to the life of a cell if there was no Golgi apparatus? 5. Which organelle is known as the powerhouse of the cell? Why? 6. Where do the lipids and proteins constituting the cell membrane get synthesised? 7. How does an Amoeba obtain its food? 8. What is osmosis? 9. Carry out the following osmosis experiment: e Take four peeled potato halves and scoos each one out to make potato cups. One of these potato cups should be made from a boiled potato. Put each potato cup in a trough containing water. Now, (a) Keep cup A empty (b) Put one teaspoon sugar in cup B (c) Put one teaspoon salt in cup C (d) Put one teaspoon sugar in the boiled potato cup D. Keep these for two hours. Then observe the four potato cups and answer the following: (i) Explain why water gathers in the hollowed portion of B and C. (ii) Why is potato A necessary for this experiment? (iii) Explain why water does not gather in the hollowed out portions of A and D. 10.