sized in animal cells while plant cells have very large vacuoles. The central vacuole of some plant cells may occupy 50-90% of the cell volume. THE FUNDAMENTAL UNIT OF LIFE In plant cells vacuoles are full of cell sap and provide turgidity and rigidity to the cell. Many substances of importance in the life of the plant cell are stored in vacuoles. These include amino acids, sugars, various organic acids and some proteins. In single-celled organisms like Amoeba, the food vacuole contains the food items that the Amoeba has consumed. In some unicellular organisms, specialised vacuoles also play important roles in expelling excess water and some wastes from the cell. uestions 1. Canyou name the two organelles we have studied that contain their own genetic material? 2. If the organisation-of a cell is destroyed due to some physical or chemical influence, what will happen? 3. Why are lysosomes known as suicide bags? 4. Where are proteins synthesised inside the cell? Each cell thus acquires its structure and ability to function because of the organisation of its membrane and organelles in specific ways. The cell thus has a basic structural organisation. This helps the cells to perform functions like respiration, obtaining nutrition, and clearing of waste material, or forming new proteins. Thus, the cell is the fundamental structural unit of living organisms. It is also the basic functional unit of life. Cell Division New cells are formed in organisms in order to grow, to replace old, dead and injured cells, and to form gametes required for reproduction. The process by which new cells are made is called cell division. There are two main types of cell division: mitosis and meiosis. The process of cell division by which most of the cells divide for growth is called mitosis. In this process, each cell called mother cell Reprint 2025-26 Chromosomes A _ _, Mother cell Fig. 5.7: Mitosis divides to form two identical daughter cells (Fig. 5.7). The daughter cells have the same number of chromosomes as mother cell. It helps in growth and repair of tissues in organisms. Specific cells of reproductive organs or tissues in animals and plants divide to form gametes, which after fertilisation give rise to offspring. Daughter cells Meiosis-II Meiosis-I (4) a . Fig. 5.8: Meiosis Daughter cells Mother cell They divide by a different process called meiosis which involves two consecutive divisions. When a cell divides by meiosis it produces four new cells instead of just two (Fig. 5.8). The new cells only have half the number of chromosomes than that of the mother cells. Can you think as to why the chromosome number has reduced to half in daughter cells? you have learnt The fundamental organisational unit of life is the cell. Cells are enclosed by a plasma membrane composed of lipids and proteins. The cell membrane is an active part of the cell. It regulates the movement of materials between the ordered interior of the cell and the outer environment. In plant cells, a cell