(a) Do all cells look alike in terms of shape and size? (b) Do all cells look alike in structure? (c) Could we find differences among cells from different parts of a plant body? (d) What similarities could we find? Some organisms can also have cells of different kinds. Look at the following picture. It depicts some cells from the human body. \ Blood cells Smooth Nerve Cell muscle cell wr or yy one Hy , cell \ r Fat cell XY VN Ovum Sperm Fig. 5.3: Various cells from the human body SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 The shape and size of cells are related to the specific function they perform. Some cells like Amoeba have changing shapes. In some cases the cell shape could be more or less fixed and peculiar for a particular type of cell; for example, nerve cells have a typical shape. Each living cell has the capacity to perform certain basic functions that are characteristic of all living forms. How does a living cell perform these basic functions? We know that there is a division of labour in multicellular organisms such as human beings. This means that different parts of the human body perform different functions. The human body has a heart to pump blood, a stomach to digest food and so on. Similarly, division of labour is also seen within a single cell. In fact, each such cell has got certain specific components within it known as cell organelles. Each kind of cell organelle performs a special function, such as making new material in the cell, clearing up the waste material from the cell and so on. A cell is able to live and perform all its functions because of these organelles. These organelles together constitute the basic unit called the cell. It is interesting that all cells are found to have the same organelles, no matter what their function is or what organism they are found in. uestions 1. Who discovered cells, and how? 2. Why is the cell called the structural and functionalL.unit of life? 5.2 What is a Cell Made Up of? What is the Structural Organisation of a Cell? We saw above that the cell has special components called organelles. How is a cell organised? If we study a cell under a microscope, we would come across three features in almost THE FUNDAMENTAL UNnir OF LIFE every cell; plasma membrane, nucleus and cytoplasm. All activities inside the cell and interactions of the cell with its environment are possible due to these features. Let us see how. 5.2.1 PLASMA MEMBRANE OR CELL MEMBRANE This is the outermost covering of the cell that separates the contents of the cell from its external environment. The plasma membrane allows or permits the entry and exit of some materials in and out of the cell. It also prevents movement of some other materials. The cell membrane, therefore, is called a selectively permeable membrane. How does the movement of substances take place into the cell? How do