it gets dark. Then I will sleep forever. Sue sat on Johnsy s bed, kissed her and said, You are not going to die. I can t draw the curtain for I need the light. I want to finish the painting and get some money for us. Please, my dear The Last Leaf/ 45 Reprint 2025-26 friend, she begged Johnsy, promise not to look out of the window while I paint. All right, said Johnsy. Finish your painting soon for I want to see the last leaf fall. I m tired of waiting. I have to die, so let me go away peacefully like one of those poor, tired leaves. Try to sleep, said Sue. I have to paint an old miner. I will call Behrman up to be my model. Sue rushed down. Behrman lived on the ground floor. He was a sixty-year-old painter. His lifelong dream was to paint a masterpiece but that had remained a dream. Sue poured out her worries to Behrman. She told him how Johnsy was convinced that she would die when the last leaf fell. Is she stupid? asked Behrman. How can she be so foolish? She is running a high temperature, complained Sue. She refuses to eat or drink and that worries me a lot. I will come with you and see Johnsy, Behrman said. They tiptoed into the room. Johnsy was sleeping. Sue drew the curtains together and they went to the next room. She peeped out through the window. There was only one leaf on the creeper. It was raining heavily and an icy-cold wind was blowing. It seemed . , as though the leaf --.. would fall any minute ' now. Behrman did not say a word. He went .\, back to his room. * Johnsy woke up next morning. In a feeble voice she asked Sue to draw the curtains. Sue was nervous. She drew back the curtains very reluctantly. Oh! Sue exclaimed as she looked at the vine creeper. Look, there is still one leaf 46 / Moments Reprint 2025-26 aseet eh es 3" Te pag: She 3) + ae oe en on the creeper. It looks quite green and healthy. In spite of the storm and the fierce winds, it didn t fall. I heard the wind last night, said Johnsy. I thought it would have fallen. It will surely fall today. Then I'll die. You won't die, said Sue energetically. You have to live for your friends. What would happen to me if you die? Johnsy smiled weakly and closed her eyes. After every hour or so she would look out of the window and find the leaf still there. It seemed to be clinging to the creeper. In the evening, there was another storm but the leaf did not fall. Johnsy lay for a long time looking at the leaf. Then she called out to Sue. I have been a bad girl. You have looked after me so lovingly and I have not cooperated