7. The Last Leaf 0960CHO7 It is autumn. The wind is blowing hard and it is raining heavily. All the leaves on an ivy creeper have fallen, except one. Why doesw t the last leaf fall? Sue and Johnsy, two young artists, shared a small flat. The flat was on the third storey of an old house. Johnsy fell very seriously ill in November. She had pneumonia. She would lie in her bed without moving, just gazing out of the window. Sue, her friend, became very worried. She sent for the doctor. Although he came every day there was no change in Johnsy s condition. One day the doctor took Sue aside and asked her, Is anything worrying Johnsy? No, replied Sue. But why do you ask? The doctor said Johnsy, it seems, has made up her mind that she is not going to get well. If she doesn t want to live, medicines will not help her. Sue tried her best to make Johnsy take an interest in things around her. She talked about clothes and fashions, but Johnsy did not respond. Johnsy continued to lie still on her bed. Sue brought her drawing-board into Johnsy s room and started painting. To take Johnsy s mind off her illness, she whistled while working. Suddenly Sue heard Johnsy whisper something. She quickly rushed to the bed and heard Johnsy counting backwards. She was looking out of the window and was saying, Twelve! After sometime she whispered eleven , then ten , then nine , eight , seven . Sue anxiously looked out of the window. She saw an old ivy creeper climbing half-way up the brick wall opposite their window. In the strong wind outside, the creeper was shedding its leaves. Reprint 2025-26 What is it, dear? Sue asked. Six, whispered Johnsy. They are falling faster now. Three days ago there were almost a hundred leaves. There are only five left now. It is autumn, said Sue, and the leaves will fall. When the last leaf falls, I will die, said Johnsy with finality. I have known this for the last three days. Oh, that s nonsense, replied Sue. What have old ivy leaves to do with your getting well? The doctor is confident that you will get better. Johnsy did not say anything. Sue went and brought her a bowl of soup. I don t want any soup, said Johnsy. Iam not hungry... Now there are only four leaves left. I want to see the last one fall before it gets dark. Then I will sleep forever. Sue sat on Johnsy s bed, kissed her and said, You are not going to die. I can t draw the curtain for I need the light. I want to finish the painting and get some money for us. Please, my dear The Last Leaf/ 45 Reprint 2025-26 friend, she begged Johnsy, promise not to look out of the window while I paint. All right, said Johnsy. Finish your painting soon for