Johnsy smiled weakly and closed her eyes. After every hour or so she would look out of the window and find the leaf still there. It seemed to be clinging to the creeper. In the evening, there was another storm but the leaf did not fall. Johnsy lay for a long time looking at the leaf. Then she called out to Sue. I have been a bad girl. You have looked after me so lovingly and I have not cooperated with you. I have been depressed and gloomy. The last leaf has shown me how wicked I have been. I have realised that it is a sin to want to die. Sue hugged Johnsy. Then she gave her lots of hot soup and a mirror. Johnsy combed her hair and smiled brightly. In the afternoon the doctor came. After examining his patient he told Sue, Johnsy now has the will to live. Iam confident she'll recover soon. Now! must go downstairs and see Behrman. He is also suffering from pneumonia. But I am afraid, there is no hope for him. The next morning . Sue came and sat on Johnsy s bed. Taking Johnsy s hand in hers she said, I have something to tell you. Mr Behrman _ died of pneumonia this morning. He was ill for only two days. The first day the janitor found him on his bed. His clothes and shoes were wet and he was shivering. He had been out in that stormy night. The Last Leaf/ 47 2a/ ga rs Seite yes, Woy ego Reprint 2025-26 Then they found a ladder and a lantern still lighted lying near his bed. There were also some brushes and green and yellow paints on the floor near the ladder. Johnsy dear, said Sue, look out of the window. Look at that ivy leaf. Haven t you wondered why it doesn t flutter when the wind blows? That s Behrman s masterpiece. He painted it the night the last leaf fell. O. HENRY Glossary janitor: a person whose job is to look after a building BL Tune Asour Ir 1. What is Johnsy s illness? What can cure her, the medicine or the willingness to live? 2. Do you think the feeling of depression Johnsy has is common among teenagers? 3. Behrman has a dream. What is it? Does it come true? 4. What is Behrman s masterpiece? What makes Sue say so? wae Tau Avour Ir Have you ever felt depressed and rejected? How did you overcome such feelings? Share your experience with your classmates. WME Suecesren Reanine e The Gift of the Magi by O.Henry e Dusk by Saki (H.H. Munro) Chicken Soup for the Teenage Soul on Tough Stuff: Compiled and edited by Jack Canfield, Mark Victor Hansen, Kimberly Kirberger 48 / Moments Reprint 2025-26 et ee do* +