the house. I knew what she was after. My father had died when I was young, and I was certain that she was not going to let his pictures and letters go up in flames. They were the only things that she had to remember him by. Still I screamed at her, Mom! No! I was about to run after her when I felt a large hand hold me back. It was a fireman. I hadn t even noticed that the street had already filled with fire trucks. I was trying to free myself from his grasp, yelling, You don t understand, my mother s in there! He held on to me while other firefighters ran into the house. He knew that I wasn t acting very logically and that if he were to let go, I'd run. He was right. It s all right, they'll get her, he said. He wrapped a blanket around me and sat me down in our car. Soon after that, a fireman emerged from our house with 50 / Moments Reprint 2025-26 my mom in tow. He quickly took her over to the truck and put an oxygen mask on her. I ran over and hugged her. All those times I ever argued with her and hated her vanished at the thought of losing her. She s going to be okay, said the fireman. She just inhaled a little smoke. And then he ran back to fight the fire while my mother and I sat there dazed. I remember watching my house burn down and thinking that there was nothing I could do about it. Five hours later, the fire was finally out. Our house was almost completely burned down. But then it struck me...I hadn t seen my cat. Where was my cat? Much to my horror, I realised that she was nowhere to be found. Then all at once it hit me the new school, the fire, my cat I broke down in tears and cried and cried. I was suffering loss, big time. The firemen wouldn t let us go back into the house that night. It was still too dangerous. Dead or alive, I couldn t imagine leaving without knowing about my cat. Regardless, I had to go. We piled into the car with just the clothes on our backs and a few of the firemen s blankets, and made our way to my grandparents house to spend the night. The next day, Monday, I went to school. When the fire broke out, I was still wearing the dress I had worn to church that morning but I had no shoes! I had kicked them off when I was doing my homework. They became yet another casualty of the fire. So I had to borrow some tennis shoes from my aunt. Why couldn t I just stay home from school? My mother wouldn t hear of it, but I was totally embarrassed by everything. The clothes I was wearing looked