her A House Is Not a Home/ 53 Reprint 2025-26 close to me and cried into that beautiful orange fur. She purred happily. My friends were hugging me, hugging the cat and jumping around. Apparently, my cat had been so freaked by the fire that she ran over a mile away. Her collar had our phone number on it, but our phones had been destroyed and disconnected. This wonderful woman took her in and worked hard to find out whose cat it was. Somehow, she knew this cat was loved and sorely missed. As I sat there with my friends and my cat curled up in my lap, all the overwhelming feelings of loss and tragedy seemed to diminish. I felt gratitude for my life, my new friends, the kindness of a stranger and the loud purr of my beloved cat. My cat was back and so was I. ZAN GAUDIOSO Glossary stoking the fire: feeding and tending the fire zombie: a dull and apathetic person surreal: strange; bizarre milling around: moving in an aimless manner shove: push hard 2 Tune Avour Ir 1. What does the author notice one Sunday afternoon? What is his mother s reaction? What does she do? 2. Why does he break down in tears after the fire? 3. Why is the author deeply embarrassed the next day in school? Which words show his fear and insecurity? 4. The cat and the author are very fond of each other. How has this been shown in the story? Where was the cat after the fire? Who brings it back and how? 5. What actions of the schoolmates change the author s understanding of life and people, and comfort him 54 / Moments * gs ? Dvn Ba: Reprint 2025-26 Bow hsb emotionally? How does his loneliness vanish and how does he start participating in life? 6. What is the meaning of My cat was back and so was I ? Had the author gone anywhere? Why does he say that he is also back? BGe Taix Avour Ir Have any of your classmates/schoolmates had an experience like the one described in the story where they needed help? Describe how they were helped. BRE Suovcsre Reavine Her Story So Far: Tales of the Girl Child in India edited by Monica Das Modern Hindi Stories edited by Indu Jain Malgudi Days by R.K. Narayan h A House Is Not a Home/ 55 ; | 4 a aa 4 aiitee 4 S299) agos Reprint 2025-26