of the cross-section you obtain is a plane curve. Do you notice it? A kitchen play Have you noticed cross-sections of some vegetables when they are cut for the purposes of cooking in the kitchen? Observe the various slices and get aware of the shapes that result as cross-sections. 2024-25 VISUALISING SOLID SHAPES ii iii Play this Make clay (or plasticine) models of the following solids and make vertical or horizontal cuts. Draw rough sketches of the cross-sections you obtain. Name them wherever you can. Fig 13.21 EXERCISE 13.3 1. What cross-sections do you get when you give a (i) vertical cut (i) horizontal cut to the following solids? \ (a) Abrick (b) Around apple (c) Adie (d) Acircular pipe (e) Anice cream cone 13.5.2 Another Way is by Shadow Play A shadow play \ Shadows are a good way to illustrate how three-dimensional objects can be viewed in two dimensions. Have you seen a shadow play? It is aform of entertainment using solid Fig 13.22 articulated figures in front of an illuminated back-drop to create the illusion of moving images. It makes some indirect use of ideas in Mathematics. You will need a source of light and a few solid shapes for this activity. (If : | you have an overhead projector, place the solid under the lamp and do A f= a these investigations.) Keep a torchlight, right in front of a Cone. What type of shadow does Fig 13.23 it cast on the screen? (Fig 13.23) WG The solid is three-dimensional; what is the dimension of the shadow? = a If, instead of a cone, you place a cube in the above game, what type of shadow will {' you get? Experiment with different positions of the source of light and with different positions of the solid object. Study their effects on the shapes and sizes of the shadows you get. Here is another funny experiment that you might have tried already: Place a circular plate in the open when the Sun at the noon time is just right above it as shown in Fig 13.24 (i). What is the shadow that you obtain? 2024-25 ES a i emarics Will it be same during 8: (a) forenoons? (b) evenings? . a 7 j id i Fig 13.24 (i) - (iii) Study the shadows in relation to the position of the Sun and the time of observation. EXERCISE 13.4 1. A bulbis kept burning just right above the following solids. Name the shape of the shadows obtained in each case. Attempt to give a rough sketch of the shadow. (You may try to experiment first and then answer these questions). i} I} > Ww . Ty ys Acylindrical pipe A book (ii) (iit) 2. Here are the shadows of some 3-D objects, when seen under the lamp of an overhead projector. Identify the solid(s) that match each shadow. (There may be multiple answers for these!) Acircle A square A triangle A rectangle (1) (ii) (iit) (iv) 2024-25 VISUALISING