faces. How many are there in the net here? (Give two separate diagrams. If you like, you may use a squared sheet for easy manipulation.) . Match the nets with appropriate solids: Zi (a) eo (i) > (b) a 1) (d) (iv) Play this game You and your friend sit back-to-back. One of you reads out a net to make a 3-D shape, while the other attempts to copy it and sketch or build the described 3-D object. 13.4 DrawinGc SO.Lips on A Fiat SURFACE Your drawing surface is paper, which is flat. When you draw a solid shape, the images are somewhat distorted to make them appear three-dimensional. Itis a visual illusion. Youwill = _,.-------- F find here two techniques to help you. bowennennnne 13.4.1 Oblique Sketches Here is a picture of a cube (Fig 13.11). It gives a clear idea of how the cube looks like, ----------Ree eee eee when seen from the front. You do not see certain faces. In the drawn picture, the lengths _ _ Fig 13.11 2024-25 EE a i emarics are not equal, as they should be in a cube. Still, you are able to recognise it as a cube. Such a sketch of a solid is called an oblique sketch. How can you draw such sketches? Let us attempt to learn the technique. You need a squared (lines or dots) paper. Initially practising to draw on these sheets will later make it easy to sketch them on a plain sheet (without the aid of squared lines or dots!) Let us attempt to draw an oblique sketch of a3 x 3 x 3 (each edge is 3 units) cube (Fig 13.12). a ee Step 1 Step 2 Draw the front face. Draw the opposite face. Sizes of the faces have to be same, but the sketch is somewhat off-set from step 1. Step 4 Join the corresponding corners Redraw using dotted lines for hidden edges. (It is a convention) The sketch is ready now. Fig 13.12 In the oblique sketch above, did you note the following? (i) The sizes of the front faces and its opposite are same; and (ii) The edges, which are all equal in a cube, appear so in the sketch, though the actual measures of edges are not taken so. You could now try to make an oblique sketch of a cuboid (remember the faces in this case are rectangles) Note: You can draw sketches in which measurements also agree with those of a given solid. To do this we need what is known as an isometric sheet. Let us try to 2024-25 VISUALISING SOLID SHAPES iii, Ti iii make a cuboid with dimensions 4 cm length, 3 cm breadth and 3 cm height on given isometric sheet. 13.4.2 Isometric Sketches Have you seen an isometric dot sheet? (A sample is given at the end of the book). Sucha sheet divides the paper into small equilateral triangles made up of dots or lines. To draw sketches in which measurements