each case. Attempt to give a rough sketch of the shadow. (You may try to experiment first and then answer these questions). i} I} > Ww . Ty ys Acylindrical pipe A book (ii) (iit) 2. Here are the shadows of some 3-D objects, when seen under the lamp of an overhead projector. Identify the solid(s) that match each shadow. (There may be multiple answers for these!) Acircle A square A triangle A rectangle (1) (ii) (iit) (iv) 2024-25 VISUALISING SOLID SHAPES ii ii i iii 3. Examine if the following are true statements: (i) The cube can cast a shadow in the shape of a rectangle. (ii) The cube can cast a shadow in the shape of a hexagon. 13.5.3 A Third Way is by Looking at it from Certain Angles to Get Different Views One can look at an object standing in front of it or by the side of it or from above. Each time one will get a different view (Fig 13.25). Front view Side view Top view Fig 13.25 Here is an example of how one gets different views of a given building. (Fig 13.26) 2D aS) | Building Front view Side view Top view Fig 13.26 You could do this for figures made by joining cubes. | on Et Fig 13.27 Try putting cubes together and then making such sketches from different sides. 2024-25 EE Te i emarics Try THESE 1. For each solid, the three views (1), (2), (3) are given. Identify for each solid the corresponding top, front and side views. Solid Its views (2) 29-0 O CO Front Top Front Top Front 5 Cubes Top Front 2. Draw a view of each solid as seen from the direction indicated by the arrow. hy He eb st (11) (iii) 2024-25 VISUALISING SOLID SHAPES ii iii WuaT HAVE WE DISCUSSED? 1. The circle, the square, the rectangle, the quadrilateral and the triangle are examples of plane figures; the cube, the cuboid, the sphere, the cylinder, the cone and the pyramid are examples of solid shapes. 2. Plane figures are of two-dimensions (2-D) and the solid shapes are of three-dimensions (3-D). 3. The corners of a solid shape are called its vertices; the line segments of its skeleton are its edges; and its flat surfaces are its faces. 4. Anetisaskeleton-outline of a solid that can be folded to make it. The same solid can have several types of nets. 5. Solid shapes can be drawn on a flat surface (like paper) realistically. We call this 2-D representation of a 3-D solid. 6. Two types of sketches of a solid are possible: (a) Anoblique sketch does not have proportional lengths. Still it conveys all important aspects of the appearance of the solid. (b) Anisometric sketch is drawn on an isometric dot paper, a sample of which is given at the end of this book. In an isometric sketch of the solid the measurements kept proportional. 7. Visualising solid shapes is a very useful skill. You