end of the book. You could try to make on it some cubes or cuboids of dimensions specified by your friend. 13.4.3 Visualising Solid Objects Sometimes when you look at combined shapes, some of them may be hidden from your view. Here are some activities you could try in your free time to help you visualise some solid objects and how they look. Take some cubes and arrange them as shown in Fig 13.16. 7 Ff A 7 (i 7 iii (ii) Fig 13.16 Now ask your friend to guess how many cubes there are when observed from the view shown by the arrow mark. Try THESE Try to guess the number of cubes in the following arrangements (Fig 13.17). 4p ue (i) (ii) (iii) Fig 13.17 2024-25 EE emarics Such visualisation is very helpful. Suppose you form a cuboid by joining such cubes. You will be able to guess what the length, breadth and height of the cuboid would be. EXAMPLE 2 If two cubes of dimensions 2 cm by 2cm by 2cm are 2om=H placed side by side, what would the dimensions of the resulting cuboid be? Scem=B SOLUTION As youcansee (Fig 13.18) when kept side by side, the mo 2em length is the only measurement which increases, it be The breadth =2 cm and the height = 2 cm. . Twodice are placed side by side as shown: Can you say what the total would be on the face opposite to (a) 5+6 (b) 44+3 (Remember that in a die sum of numbers on opposite faces is 7) . Three cubes each with 2 cm edge are placed side by side to form a cuboid. Try to make an oblique sketch and say what could be its length, breadth and height. 13.5 ViEwING DIFFERENT SECTIONS OF A SOLID Now let us see how an object which is in 3-D can be viewed in different ways. 13.5.1 One Way to View an Object is by Cutting or Slicing Slicing game Here is a loaf of bread (Fig 13.20). It is like a cuboid with a square face. You slice it with a knife. When you give a vertical cut, you get several pieces, as shown in the Figure 13.20. Each face of the piece is a square! We call this face a cross-section of the whole bread. The cross section is nearly a square in this case. Beware! If your cut is not vertical you may get a different cross section! Fig 13.20 Think about it. The boundary of the cross-section you obtain is a plane curve. Do you notice it? A kitchen play Have you noticed cross-sections of some vegetables when they are cut for the purposes of cooking in the kitchen? Observe the various slices and get aware of the shapes that result as cross-sections. 2024-25 VISUALISING SOLID SHAPES ii iii Play this Make clay (or plasticine) models of the following solids and make vertical or horizontal cuts. Draw rough sketches of the cross-sections you obtain.