0756CH15 Chapter 13 In this chapter, you will classify figures you have seen in terms of what is known as dimension. Tn our day to day life, we see several objects like books, balls, ice-cream cones etc., around us which have different shapes. One thing common about most of these objects is that they all have some length, breadth and height or depth. That is, they all occupy space and have three dimensions. Hence, they are called three dimensional shapes. Do you remember some of the three dimensional shapes (1.e., solid shapes) we have seen in earlier classes? Match the shape with the name: (a) Cuboid (iv) : | (ii) @ (b) Cylinder (v) (c) Cube (vi) (f) Cone Fig 13.1 2024-25 VISUALISING SOLID SHAPES i REI EE Try to identify some objects shaped like each of these. By asimilar argument, we can say figures drawn on paper which have only length and breadth are called two dimensional (1.e., plane) figures. We have also seen some two dimensional figures in the earlier classes. Match the 2 dimensional figures with the names (Fig 13.2): (i) (a) Circle (it) || O) (b) Rectangle (iv) (d) Quadrilateral (v) (e) Tnrangle Fig 13.2 Note: We can write 2-D in short for 2-dimension and 3-D in short for 3-dimension. 13.2 Faces, EDGES AND VERTICES Do you remember the Faces, Vertices and Edges of solid shapes, which you studied earlier? Here you see them for a cube: Vertex py AT AQUI iS i 4 Edge Face (i) (ii) (iii) Fig 13.3 The 8 corners of the cube are its vertices. The 12 line segments that form the skeleton of the cube are its edges. The 6 flat square surfaces that are the skin of the cube are its faces. 2024-25 a es emarics Complete the following table: Table 13.1 ff Vertex Face </ Face Vertex Edge Edge Faces (F) 6 4 Edges (E) 12 Vertices (V) 8 4 Can you see that, the two dimensional figures can be identified as the faces of the @ three dimensional shapes? For example a cylinder ) 0 has two faces which are circles, W ' [Pn and a pyramid, shaped like this LN has triangles as its faces. = We will now try to see how some of these 3-D shapes can be visualised on a 2-D Ct. surface, that is, on paper. In order to do this, we would like to get familiar with three dimensional objects closely. Let us try forming these objects by making what are called nets. 13.3 NeEtTs For. Burtpinc 3-D SHAPES Take a cardboard box. Cut the edges to lay the box flat. You have now a net for that box. A net is a sort of skeleton-outline in 2-D [Fig13.4 (i)], which, when folded [Fig13.4 (11)], results in a 3-D shape [Fig 13.4 (iii)]. \ Fig 13.4 2024-25 VISUALISING SOLID SHAPES iD iii i il Here you got a net by suitably separating the edges. Is the reverse process possible? Here is