popular game in their class? Try to find out the most popular game among your classmates. 4. Pari wants to respond to the questions given below. Put a tick (V) for the questions where she needs to carry out data collection and Reprint 2025-26 (75) Chapter 4_ Data Handling and Presentation.indd 75 13/08/2024 15:33:11 Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 put a cross (X) for the questions where she doesn t need to collect data. Discuss your answers in the classroom. a. What isthe most popular TV show among her classmates? a b. When did India get independence? a c. How much water is getting wasted in her locality? a d. What is the capital of India? a Shri Nilesh is a teacher. He decided to bring sweets to the class to celebrate the new year. The sweets shop nearby has jalebi, gulab jamun, gujiya, barfi, and rasgulla. He wanted to know the choices of the children. He wrote the names of the sweets on the board and asked each child to tell him their preference. He put a tally mark |? for each student and when the count reached 5, he put a line through the previous four and marked it as PN. Tally Marks No. of Students Jalebi MH SC 6 Gulab jamun MH LAT | 9 Gujiva HA HE II Barf MI Rasgulla MH Sd % Figure it Out 1. Complete the table to help Shri Nilesh to purchase the correct numbers of sweets: a. How many students chose jalebi? ( b. Barfi was chosen by [ students? c. How many students chose gujiya? ( d. Rasgulla was chosen by ( students? e. How many students chose gulab jamun? ( Data Handling and Presentation Shri Nilesh requested one of the staff members to bring the sweets as given in the table. The above table helped him to purchase the correct numbers of sweets. 2. Is the above table sufficient to distribute each type of sweet to the correct student? Explain. If it is not sufficient, what is the alternative? To organise the data, we can write the name of each sweet in one column and using tally signs, note the number of students who prefer that sweet. The numbers 6, 9, ... are the frequencies of the sweet preferences for jalebi, gulab jamun ... respectively. Sushri Sandhya asked her students about the sizes of the shoes they wear. She noted the data on the board. 4 5 4 5 4 6 4 6 4 R) R) She then arranged the shoe sizes of the students in ascending order 3, 3,3,4,4,4, 4, 4 4, 4 4, 4 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 6, 6, 6, 6, 7 % Figure it Out 1. Help her to figure out the following: a. The largest shoe size in the class is b. The smallest shoe size in the class is c. There are students who wear shoe size 5. d. There are students who wear shoe sizes