DATA HANDLING AND 2332 PRESENTATION 0674CHO4 If you ask your classmates about their favourite colours, you will get a list of colours. This list is an example of data. Similarly, if you measure the weight of each student in your class, you would get a collection of measures of weight again data. Any collection of facts, numbers, measures, observations or other descriptions of things that convey information about those things is called data. We live in an age of information. We constantly see large amounts of data presented to us in new and interesting ways. In this chapter, we will explore some of the ways that data is presented, and how we can use some of those ways to correctly display, interpret and make inferences from such data! 4.1 Collecting and Organising Data Navya and Naresh are discussing their favourite games. L (AO 4. Cricket is my I play cricket sometimes IN ; favourite game! but hockey is the game I L like the most. S D I think cricket is the Iam not sure. How can we find IN 1 most popular game in the most popular game in our our class. q class? J : 5 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 4_Data Handling and Presentation.indd 74 13/08/2024 15:33:11 Data Handling and Presentation / WF) To figure out the most popular game in ig *~ | their class, what should Navya and Naresh do? Can you help them? rt Via) aa. Cu 4 Naresh and Navya decided to go to each student in the class and ask what their favourite game is. Then they prepared a list. Navya is showing the list: Mehnoor - Kabaddi Pushkal - Satoliya (Pittu) | Anaya Kabaddi Jubimon Hockey Densy Badminton Jivisha Satoliya (Pittu) Simran Kabaddi Jivika Satoliya (Pittu) Rajesh Football Nand - Satoliya (Pittu) Leela - Hockey Thara Football Ankita Kabaddi Afshan Hockey Soumya Cricket Imon Hockey Keerat Cricket Navjot Hockey Yuvraj Cricket Gurpreet Hockey Hemal - Satoliya (Pittu) Rehana Hockey Arsh Kabaddi Debabrata Football Aarna - Badminton Bhavya Cricket Ananya Hockey Kompal - Football Sarah Kabaddi Hardik Cricket Tahira Cricket She says (happily), I have collected the data. I can figure out the most popular game now! . A few other children are looking at the list and wondering, We can t yet see the most popular game. How can we get it from this list? . % Figure it Out 1. What would you do to find the most popular game among Naresh s and Navya s classmates? 2. What is the most popular game in their class? Try to find out the most popular game among your classmates. 4. Pari wants to respond to the questions given below. Put a tick (V) for the questions where she needs to carry out data collection and Reprint 2025-26 (75) Chapter 4_ Data Handling and Presentation.indd 75 13/08/2024 15:33:11 Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 put a cross (X) for the questions where she doesn t need to collect data. Discuss your answers in the classroom.