or observations. Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Oe a i A i a a 4 a A A A a a a a a a a a a a a a a a ee a a a a a a ae = Pictographs represent data in the form of pictures, or objects or parts of objects. Each picture represents a frequency which can be 1 or more than 1 this is called the scale and it must be specified. = Bar graphs have bars of uniform width; the length or height that indicates the total frequency of occurrence. The scale that is used to convert length or height to frequency again, must be specified. = Choosing the appropriate scale for a pictograph or bar graph is important to accurately and effectively convey the desired information or data and to also make it visually appealing. = Other aspects of a graph also contribute to its effectiveness and visual appeal such as how colours are used, what accompanying pictures are drawn, and whether the bars are horizontal or vertical. These aspects correspond to the artistic and aesthetic side of data handling and presentation. = However, making visual representations of data fancy can also sometimes be misleading. =m By reading pictographs and bar graphs accurately, we can quickly understand and make inferences about the data presented. CHAPTER 4 SOLUTIONS Data Handling and Presentation Section 4.1 Page No. 75 Figure it Out Q.1. What would you do to find the most popular game among Naresh s and Navya s classmates? Ans. One of the ways could be to arrange and organize the given data in a table. Think of some other ways. Q.2. What is the most popular game in their class? Ans. Hockey (frequency 8). Q.4. Pari wants to respond to the questions given below. Put a tick ( v ) for the questions where she needs to carry out data collection and put a cross (X) for the questions where she doesn t need to collect data. Discuss your answers in the classroom. a. What is the most popular TV show among her classmates? b. When did India get independence? c. How much water is getting wasted in her locality? d. What is the capital of India? Ans. a. o = Page No. 76 Figure it Out Q.1. Complete the table to help Shri Nilesh to purchase the correct numbers of sweets: How many students chose jalebi? [| Barfi was chosen by [| students? How many students chose gujiya? [| Rasgulla was chosen by || students? How many students chose gulab jamun? [| Shri Nilesh requested one of the staff members to bring the sweets as given in the table. The above table helped him to purchase the correct numbers of sweets. Ans. e 6 e 3 e 13 e 7 e 9 Q.2. Is the above table sufficient to distribute each type of sweet to the correct student? Explain. If it is not sufficient, what is the alternative? Ans. No. It