arranged the shoe sizes of the students in ascending order 3, 3,3,4,4,4, 4, 4 4, 4 4, 4 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 6, 6, 6, 6, 7 % Figure it Out 1. Help her to figure out the following: a. The largest shoe size in the class is b. The smallest shoe size in the class is c. There are students who wear shoe size 5. d. There are students who wear shoe sizes larger than 4. 2. How did arranging the data in ascending order help to $9 answer these questions? Math 3. Are there other ways to arrange the data? Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 4. Write the names of a few trees you see around you. When you observe a tree on the way from your home to school (or while walking from one place to another place), record the data and fill in the following table: Peepal Neem a. Which tree was found in the greatest number? b. Which tree was found in the smallest number? c. Were there any two trees found in the same numbers? 5. Take a blank piece of paper and paste any small news item from a newspaper. Each student may use a different article. Now, prepare a table on the piece of paper as given below. Count the number of each of the letters c , e , i , r , and x in the words of the news article, and fill in the table. Any other letter Letter Cc r|x : of your choice Number of times found in the news item The letter found the most number of times is b. The letter found the least number of times is c. List the five letters c , e , i , r , x in ascending order of frequency. Now, compare the order of your list with that of your classmates. Is your order the same or nearly the same as theirs? (Almost everyone is likely to get the order x, c, 7, i, e .) Why do you think this is the case? Data Handling and Presentation d. Write the process you followed to complete this task. e. Discuss with your friends the processes they followed. f. If you do this task with another news item, what process would you follow? Provide more opportunities to collect and organise data. Ask students to guess what is the most popular colour, game, toy, school subject, etc., | ] ; ! amongst the students in their classroom and then collect the data for it, | It can be a fun activity in which they also learn about their classmates, ' Discuss how they can organise the data in different ways, each way ' having its own advantages and limitations. For all these tasks and the tasks under Figure it Out , discuss the tasks with the children and let them understand the tasks, and then let them plan and present their research processes