be a useful scale or key to draw this pictograph? b. How many symbols will you use to represent the dogs in Village B? c. Kamini said that the number of dogs in Village B and Village D together will be more than the number of dogs in the other 4 villages. Is she right? Give reasons for your response. Ans. Village Number of Mudhol Hounds (i = 6 dogs) Village A a) ae ) aa 1 Village B a) ae 1 ae ) ae] oe 1 a 1 Village C a Village D AE VE TE AR AE FR UF FF Village E Ae AE VF Village F Ae AR WR VR a. Scale is AR =6 dogs, as numbers of dogs are multiples of 6. b. 6 "symbols. c. Yes, Kamini is right as the number of dogs in village B and village D together is 84 which is more than the number of dogs in the other 4 villages (72). Q.9 A survey of 120 school students was conducted to find out which activity they Ans. preferred to do in their free time. Draw a bar graph to illustrate the above data taking the scale of 1 unit length =5 students. Which activity is preferred by most students other than playing? 20 10 0 Playing Reading Watching Listeningto Painting Story Books TV music Number of Students N wm Preferred Activity Other than playing, reading story books is preferred by most students. Q.10 Students and teachers of a primary school decided to plant tree saplings in the school Ans. campus and in the surrounding village during the first week of July. Details of the saplings they planted are as follows a. The total number of saplings planted on Wednesday and Thursday is b. The total number of saplings planted during the whole week is c. The greatest number of saplings were planted on , and the least number of saplings were planted on . Why do you think that is the case? Why were more saplings planted on certain days of the week and less on others? Can you think of possible explanations or reasons? How could you try and figure out whether your explanations are correct? a. 70 b. 310 c. Saturday, Wednesday The variation in the number of saplings planted on different days may be because of rainy season or different number of students present on different days. (Discuss for other reasons.) Q.11. The number of tigers in India went down drastically between 1900 and 1970. Project Tiger was launched in 1973 to track and protect tigers in India. Starting in 2006, the exact number of tigers in India was tracked. Shagufta and Divya looked up information about the number of tigers in India between 2006 and 2022 in 4-year intervals. They prepared a frequency table for this data and a bar graph to present this data, but there are a few mistakes in the graph. Can you find those mistakes and fix them? Ans. There