number of wickets taken by Jaspreet Bumrah in different number of matches. b. The title of this table may be: Wickets Taken by Jaspreet Bumrah in Last 30 Matches.(think of more!) c. In this table, attention seeking point is that in 1 match 7 wickets were taken by Jaspreet Bumrah only.(think of more!) d. In 3 matches Bumrah has taken 4 wickets. e. No, Mayank can t get the total number of wickets taken in this way. For example, 3 wickets per match were taken in 8 matches, which means total 24 wickets were taken. f. To know the total number of wickets, prepare a next column of total wickets .It will have products of corresponding numbers of the two given columns. Then the sum of the numbers in the 3 column, will be the total number of wickets. Total number of wickets =90 Q.6. The following pictograph shows the number of tractors in five different villages. Ans. Observe the pictograph and answer the following questions a. Which village has the smallest number of tractors? b. Which village has the most tractors? c. How many more tractors does Village C have than Village B? d. Komal says, Village D has half the number of tractors as Village E. Is she right? a. Village D. b. Village C. c. 3. d. Yes Q.7. The number of girl students in each class of a school is depicted by a pictograph: Ans. Observe this pictograph and answer the following questions: a. Which class has the least number of girl students? b. What is the difference between the number of girls in Classs 5 and 6? c. If 2 more girls were admitted in Class 2, how would the graph change? d. How many girls are there in Class 7? a. Class 8. b. 6. c. If 2 more girls were admitted in class 2, the last half symbol will be converted into full symbol. d. 12. Q.8. Mudhol Hounds (a type of breed of Indian dogs) are largely found in North Karnataka s Bagalkote and Vijaypura districts. The government took an initiative to protect this breed by providing support to those who adopted these dogs. Due to this initiative, the number of these dogs increased. The number of Mudhol dogs in six villages of Karnataka are as follows Village A : 18, Village B : 36, Village C : 12, Village D : 48, Village E : 18, Village F : 24 Prepare a pictograph and answer the following questions: a. What will be a useful scale or key to draw this pictograph? b. How many symbols will you use to represent the dogs in Village B? c. Kamini said that the number of dogs in Village B and Village D together will be more than the number of dogs in the other 4 villages. Is she right? Give reasons for your response. Ans. Village Number of Mudhol Hounds (i = 6 dogs) Village A a) ae ) aa 1 Village B a)