What is the scale for this graph? d. Draw the correct bar for Sagar. Add the scale of the bar graph by placing the correct numbers on the vertical axis. f. Are the bars for Seoni and Indore correct in this graph? If not, draw the correct bar(s). 3. Chinu listed the various means of transport that passed across the road in front of his house from 9 a.m. to 10 a.m.: bike cars ike bus bike bike bike auto rickshaw bicycle bullock bicycle auto ; oN cart rickshaw car "scooter car auto bicycle bike v4 rickshaw car auto rickshaw bike scooter bike car bicycle scooter bicycle scooter bike bus auto rickshaw autorickshaw bike bicycle bus bike bicycle scooter bus scooter auto bike rickshaw scooter bicycle bike bullock auto scooter cart rickshaw car scooter Data Handling and Presentation a. Prepare a frequency distribution table for the data. Which means of transport was used the most? c. If you were there to collect this data, how could you do it? Write the steps or process. Roll a die 30 times and record the number you obtain each time. Prepare a frequency distribution table using tally marks. Find the number that appeared: a. The minimum number of times. b. The maximum number of times. c. Find numbers that appeared an equal number of times. Faiz prepared a frequency distribution table of data on the number of wickets taken by Jaspreet Bumrah in his last 30 matches: CY YS 2 ~ (os nee 4 CY 3 What information is this table giving? What may be the title of this table? What caught your attention in this table? Bo op In how many matches has Bumrah taken 4 wickets? Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 e. Mayank says, If we want to know the total number of wickets he has taken in his last 30 matches, we have to add the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3 ..., up to 7. Can Mayank get the total number of wickets taken in this way? Why? f. How would you correctly figure out the total number of wickets taken by Bumrah in his last 30 matches, using this table? 6. The following pictograph shows the number of tractors in five different villages. Villages Number of Tractors (;*-. =1 Tractor ) Village A Ql Qi. dil. it. dit. di Village Bill. G8. Gib. did, di Village C diy #8 GH. Gib. Gi bib. did. dd Village D ily eit diy VillageE Qi. i Gi. di dio. dio. Observe the pictograph and answer the following questions a. Which village has the smallest number of tractors? b. Which village has the most tractors? c. How many more tractors does Village C have than Village B? d. Komal says, Village D has half the number of tractors as Village E. Is she right? Data Handling and Presentation 7. The number of girl students in each class of a school is depicted by the pictograph: Number of Girl Students & = 4 Girls