pictograph and answer the following questions a. Which village has the smallest number of tractors? b. Which village has the most tractors? c. How many more tractors does Village C have than Village B? d. Komal says, Village D has half the number of tractors as Village E. Is she right? Data Handling and Presentation 7. The number of girl students in each class of a school is depicted by the pictograph: Number of Girl Students & = 4 Girls ) Classes 1 RKHRKAHANK 2 RRNA 5 RKRHRKAK 1 RARE 5 AMSG 6 RKAHRNK 7 RAK s KE Observe this pictograph and answer the following questions: a. Which class has the least number of girl students? b. What is the difference between the number of girls in Classs 5 and 6? c. If two more girls were admitted in Class 2, how would the graph change? d. How many girls are there in Class 7? Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 8. Mudhol Hounds (a type of breed of Indian dogs) are largely found in North Karnataka s Bagalkote and Vijaypura districts. The government took an initiative to protect this breed by providing support to those who adopted these dogs. Due to this initiative, the number of these dogs increased. The number of Mudhol dogs in six villages of Karnataka are as follows Village A: 18, Village B: 36, Village C: 12, Village D: 48, Village E: 18, Village F : 24 Prepare a pictograph and answer the following questions: a. What will be a useful scale or key to draw this pictograph? b. How many symbols will you use to represent the dogs in Village B? c. Kamini said that the number of these dogs in Village B and Village D together will be more than the number of these dogs in the other 4 villages. Is she right? Give reasons for your response. 9. Asurvey of 120 school students was conducted to find out which activity they preferred to do in their free time: Preferred Activity Number of Students Playing 45 Reading story books 30 Watching TV 20 Listening to music 10 Painting 15 Draw a bar graph to illustrate the above data taking the scale of 1 unit length = 5 students. Which activity is preferred by most students other than playing? Se a a i i a a ee ~~ a ee a a a a a A a ee a a a a a a a aa Data Handling and Presentation 10. Students and teachers of a primary school decided to plant tree saplings in the school campus and in the surrounding village during the first week of July. Details of the saplings they planted are as follows 11. Number of saplings planted 60 40 20 0 Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Sunday Day The total number of saplings planted on Wednesday and Thursday is The total number of saplings planted during the whole week The greatest number of saplings were planted on and the