lengths. What is the scale for this graph? d. Draw the correct bar for Sagar. e. Add the scale of the bar graph placing the correct numbers on the vertical axis. f. Are the bars for Seoni and Indore correct in this graph? If not, draw the correct bar(s). a. 24 b. 20 c. lunit length = 4 tickets d. wn ti = a ] ) re NY a aii a a fe) 7 sa" ory e. One unit length =4 Tickets WJ =< 2 28 uw 24 20 . rr 16 \ = 12 \ Zz 8 N N Vidisha Jabalpur Seoni Indore Sagar Z CITY f. The bar for Seoni is correct but for Indore is incorrect. One unit length =4 Tickets Ww =< 2 28 S 50 [a < 16 \ = 12 \ 2 8 N a 0 S CITY Q.3. Chinu listed the various means of transport that passed across the road in front of Ans. his house from 9 am to 10 am: a. Prepare a frequency distribution table for the data. b. Which means of transport was used the most? c. If you were there to collect this data, how could you do it? Write the steps or process. Means of Transport Number Bike 13 Car Bicycle Auto Rickshaw Scooter Bus Bullock Cart Ny] Bl Ol, eC] wo] DN b. Bike c. To collect the data of various means of transport, one of the ways could be (i) Prepare a table with 2 columns. First for means of transport and second for its frequency. (ii) List the various means of transport as they pass across the road. (iii) | Frequency should be presented using tally marks. Q.5. Faiz prepared a frequency distribution table of data on the number of wickets taken Ans. by Jaspreet Bumrah in his last 30 matches: a. What information is this table giving? b. What may be the title of this table? c. What caught your attention in this table? d. In how many matches has Bumrah taken 4 wickets? e. Mayank says If we want to know the total number of wickets he has taken in his last 30 matches, we have to add the numbers 0, 1, 2,3 ..., up to 7. Can Mayank get the total number of wickets taken in this way? Why? f. How would you correctly figure out the total number of wickets taken by Bumrah in his last 30 matches, using this table? a. This table is giving the information about different number of wickets taken by Jaspreet Bumrah in different number of matches. b. The title of this table may be: Wickets Taken by Jaspreet Bumrah in Last 30 Matches.(think of more!) c. In this table, attention seeking point is that in 1 match 7 wickets were taken by Jaspreet Bumrah only.(think of more!) d. In 3 matches Bumrah has taken 4 wickets. e. No, Mayank can t get the total number of wickets taken in this way. For example, 3