form of water vapour) also takes_ place through stomata. Reprint 2025-26 Recall which gas is required for photosynthesis. Find out the role of transpiration in plants. Epidermal cells of the roots, whose function is water absorption, commonly bear long hairlike parts that greatly increase the total absorptive surface area. In some plants like desert plants, epidermis has a thick waxy coating of cutin (chemical substance with waterproof quality) on its outer surface. Can we think of a reason for this? Is the outer layer of a branch of a tree different from the outer layer of a young stem? As plants grow older, the outer protective tissue undergoes certain changes. A strip of secondary meristem located in the cortex forms layers of cells which constitute the cork. Cells of cork are dead and compactly arranged without intercellular spaces (Fig. 6.6). They also have a substance called suberin in their walls that makes them impervious to gases and water. Cork cells Ruptured epidermis Fig. 6.6: Protective tissue 6.2.2 (ii) COMPLEX PERMANENT TISSUE The different types of tissues we have discussed until now are all made of one type of cells, which look like each other. Such tissues are called simple permanent tissue. Yet another type of permanent tissue is complex tissue. Complex tissues are made of more than one type of cells. All these cells coordinate to perform a common function. Xylem and phloem are examples of such complex tissues. They are both conducting tissues and constitute a vascular bundle. Vascular tissue is a distinctive feature of the complex plants, one that has made possible their survival in the terrestrial environment. In Fig. 6.3 showing a section of stem, can you see different types of cells in the vascular bundle? Xylem consists of tracheids, vessels, xylem parenchyma (Fig. 6.7 a,b,c) and xylem fibres. Tracheids and vessels have thick walls, and many are dead cells when mature. Tracheids and vessels are tubular structures. This allows them to transport water and minerals vertically. The parenchyma stores food. Xylem fibres are mainly supportive in function. Phloem is made up of five types of cells: sieve cells, sieve tubes, companion cells, phloem fibres and the phloem parenchyma [Fig. 6.7 (d)]. Sieve tubes are tubular cells with perforated walls. Phloem transports food from leaves to other parts of the plant. Except phloem fibres, other phloem cells are living cells. Pit (a) Tracheid (b) Vessel es K : if (c) Xylem parenchyma Sieve plate Sieve tube Phloem parenchyma Companion cell (d) Section of phloem Fig. 6.7: Types of complex tissue SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 uestions 1. Name types of simple tissues. 2. Where is apical meristem found? 3. Which tissue makes up the husk of coconut? 4. What are the constituents of phloem? 6.3 Animal Tissues When we breathe we can actually feel the movement of our chest. How do these body parts move? For this we have specialised cells called muscle cells (Fig. 6.8). The contraction and relaxation of these cells result in movement. an Stomach dh