meristem seen in some plants is located near the node. Reprint 2025-26 Cells of meristematic tissue are very active, they have dense cytoplasm, thin cellulose walls and prominent nuclei. They lack vacuoles. Can we think why they would lack vacuoles? (You might want to refer to the functions of vacuoles in the chapter on cells.) 6.2.2 PERMANENT TISSUE What happens to the cells formed by meristematic tissue? They take up a specific role and lose the ability to divide. As a result, they form a permanent tissue. This process of taking up a permanent shape, size, and a function is called differentiation. Differentiation leads to the development of various types of permanent tissues. Fig. 6.3: Section ofa stem Activity Take a plant stem and with the help of your teacher cut into very thin slices or sections. Now, stain the slices with safranin. Place one neatly cut section on a slide, and put a drop of glycerine. Cover with a cover-slip and observe under a microscope. Observe the various types of cells and their arrangement. Compare it with Fig. 6.3. Now, answer the following on the basis of your observation: 1. Are all cells similar in structure? 2. How many types of cells can be seen? 3. Can we think of reasons why there would be so many types of cells? e We can also try to cut sections of plant roots. We can even try cutting sections of root and stem of different plants. 6.2.2 (i) SIMPLE PERMANENT TISSUE A few layers of cells beneath the epidermis are generally simple permanent tissue. Parenchyma is the most common simple permanent tissue. It consists of relatively unspecialised cells with thin cell walls. They are living cells. They are usually loosely arranged, thus large spaces between cells (intercellular spaces) are found in this tissue (Fig. 6.4a). This tissue generally stores food. Cuticle Epidermis Collenchyma Parenchyma Xylem Vascular bundle In some situations, it contains chlorophyll and performs photosynthesis, and then it is called chlorenchyma. In aquatic plants, large air cavities are present in parenchyma to help them float. Such a parenchyma type is called aerenchyma. The flexibility in plants is due to another permanent tissue, collenchyma. It allows bending of various parts of a plant like tendrils and stems of climbers without breaking. It also provides mechanical support. We can find this tissue in leaf stalks below the epidermis. The cells of this tissue are living, elongated and irregularly thickened at _ the corners. There is very little intercellular space (Fig. 6.4 b). SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 Intercellular spaces Wall thickenings Nucleus Vacuole Cell wall Thick lignified walls Narrow lumen Lignified thick wall c (ii) Fig. 6.4: Various types of simple tissues: (a) Parenchyma (b) Collenchyma (c) Sclerenchyma (i) transverse section, (ii) longitudinal section. Yet another type of permanent tissue is sclerenchyma. It is the tissue which makes the plant hard and stiff. We have seen the husk of a coconut. It is made of sclerenchymatous tissue. The cells of this tissue are dead.