SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 Intercellular spaces Wall thickenings Nucleus Vacuole Cell wall Thick lignified walls Narrow lumen Lignified thick wall c (ii) Fig. 6.4: Various types of simple tissues: (a) Parenchyma (b) Collenchyma (c) Sclerenchyma (i) transverse section, (ii) longitudinal section. Yet another type of permanent tissue is sclerenchyma. It is the tissue which makes the plant hard and stiff. We have seen the husk of a coconut. It is made of sclerenchymatous tissue. The cells of this tissue are dead. They are long and narrow as the walls are thickened due to lignin. Often these walls are so thick that there is no internal space inside the cell (Fig. 6.4 c). This tissue is present in stems, around vascular bundles, in the veins of leaves and in the hard covering of seeds and nuts. It provides strength to the plant parts. Activity Take a freshly plucked leaf of Rhoeo. e Stretch and break it by applying pressure. e While breaking it, keep it stretched gently so that some peel or skin projects out from the cut. e Remove this peel and put it in a petri dish filled with water. e Add a few drops of safranin. e Wait for a couple of minutes and then transfer it onto a slide. Gently place a cover slip over it. e Observe under microscope. What you observe is the outermost layer of cells, called epidermis. The epidermis is usually made of a single layer of cells. In some plants living in very dry habitats, the epidermis may be thicker since protection against water loss is critical. The entire surface of a plant has an outer covering epidermis. It protects all the parts of the plant. Epidermal cells on the aerial TISSUES Guard cells Epidermal cell (a) (b) Fig. 6.5: Guard cells and epidermal cells: (a) lateral view, (b) surface view parts of the plant often secrete a waxy, waterresistant layer on their outer surface. This aids in protection against loss of water, mechanical injury and invasion by parasitic fungi. Since it has a protective role to play, cells of epidermal tissue form a continuous layer without intercellular spaces. Most epidermal cells are relatively flat. Often their outer and side walls are thicker than the inner wall. We can observe small pores here and there in the epidermis of the leaf. These pores are called stomata (Fig. 6.5). Stomata are enclosed by two kidney-shaped cells called guard cells. They are necessary for exchanging gases with the atmosphere. Transpiration (loss of water in the form of water vapour) also takes_ place through stomata. Reprint 2025-26 Recall which gas is required for photosynthesis. Find out the role of transpiration in plants. Epidermal cells of the roots, whose function is water absorption, commonly bear long hairlike parts that greatly increase the total absorptive surface area. In some plants like desert plants, epidermis has a thick waxy coating of cutin (chemical substance with waterproof quality) on its outer surface. Can we think of a reason for this?