body movement. Under the microscope, these muscles show alternate light and dark bands or striations when stained appropriately. As a result, they are also called striated muscles. The cells of this tissue are long, cylindrical, unbranched and multinucleate (having many nuclei). The movement of food in the alimentary canal or the contraction and relaxation of blood vessels are involuntary movements. We cannot really start them or stop them simply by wanting to do so! Smooth muscles [Fig. 6.11(b)] or involuntary muscles control such movements. They are also found in the iris of the eye, in ureters and in the bronchi of the lungs. The cells are long with pointed ends (spindle-shaped) and uninucleate (having a single nucleus). They are also called unstriated muscles why would they be called that? The muscles of the heart show rhythmic contraction and relaxation throughout life. These involuntary muscles are called cardiac muscles [Fig. 6.11(c)]. Heart muscle cells are cylindrical, branched and uninucleate. Activity 6.5 Compare the structures of different types of muscular tissues. Note down their shape, number of nuclei and position of nuclei within the cell in the Table 6.1. Table 6.1: Features Striated | Smooth | Cardiac 6.3.4 NERVOUS TISSUE All cells possess the ability to respond to stimuli. However, cells of the nervous tissue are highly specialised for being stimulated and SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 then transmitting the stimulus very rapidly from one place to another within the body. The brain, spinal cord and nerves are all composed of the nervous tissue. The cells of this tissue are called nerve cells or neurons. A neuron consists of a cell body with a nucleus and cytoplasm, from which long thin hairlike parts arise (Fig. 6.12). Usually each neuron has a single long part (process) in the form of a fibre, called the axon, and many short, Nucleus Nerve ending \ branched parts (processes) called dendrites. An individual nerve cell may be up to a metre long. Many nerve fibres bound together by connective tissue make up a nerve. The signal that passes along the nerve fibre is called a nerve impulse. The nerve impulse from the nerve endings in transmitted to the dendrites of the next nerve cell. Nerve impulses allow us to move our muscles when we want to. The functional combination of nerve and muscle tissue is fundamental to most animals. This combination enables animals to move rapidly in response to stimuli. uestions 1. Name the tissue responsible for movement in our body. 2. What does.a neuron look like? Cell body 3. Give three features of cardiac Fig. 6.12: Neuron a unit of nervous tissue muscles. 4. What are the functions of areolar tissue? you have learnt Tissue is a group of cells similar in structure and function. Plant tissues are of two main types - meristematic and permanent. Meristematic tissue is the dividing tissue present in the growing regions of the plant. Permanent tissues are derived from meristematic tissue once they lose the ability to divide. They are classified as