is far more specialised and localised in complex animals than even in very complex plants. This fundamental difference reflects the different modes of life pursued by these two major groups of organisms, particularly in their different feeding methods. Also, they are differently adapted for a sedentary existence on one hand (plants) and active locomotion on the other (animals), contributing to this difference in organ system design. It is with reference to these complex animal and plant bodies that we will now talk about the concept of tissues in some detail. Reprint 2025-26 uestions 1. What is a tissue? 2. What is the utility of tissues in multi-cellular organisms? 6.2 Plant Tissues 6.2.1 MERISTEMATIC TISSUE Jar 1 Jar 2 Fig. 6.1: Growth ofroots in onion bulbs Activity 6.1 e Take two glass jars and fill them with water. e Now, take two onion bulbs and place one on each jar, as shown in Fig. 6.1. Observe the growth of roots in both the bulbs for a few days. e Measure the length of roots on day 1, 2 and 3. e On day 4, cut the root tips of the onion bulb in jar 2 by about 1 cm. After this, observe the growth of roots in both the jars and measure their lengths each day for five more days and record the observations in tables, like the table below: Length Day1l Day2 Day3 Day4 Dayd Jar 1 Jar 2 TISSUES From the above observations, answer the following questions: 1. Which of the two onions has longer roots? Why? 2. Do the roots continue growing even after we have removed their tips? 3. Why would the tips stop growing in jar 2 after we cut them? The growth of plants occurs only in certain specific regions. This is because the dividing tissue, also known as meristematic tissue, is located only at these points. Depending on the region where they are present, meristematic tissues are classified as apical, lateral and intercalary (Fig. 6.2). New cells produced by meristem are initially like those of meristem itself, but as they grow and mature, their characteristics slowly change and they become differentiated as components of other tissues. Apical meristem f Intercalary meristem {jf Y | | Lateral meristem | \ Fig. 6.2: Location of meristematic tissue in plant body Apical meristem is present at the growing tips of stems and roots and increases the length of the stem and the root. The girth of the stem or root increases due to lateral meristem (cambium). Intercalary meristem seen in some plants is located near the node. Reprint 2025-26 Cells of meristematic tissue are very active, they have dense cytoplasm, thin cellulose walls and prominent nuclei. They lack vacuoles. Can we think why they would lack vacuoles? (You might want to refer to the functions of vacuoles in the chapter on cells.) 6.2.2 PERMANENT TISSUE What happens to the cells formed by meristematic tissue? They take up a specific role and lose the ability to divide. As