a selectively permeable surface, there is a simple flat kind Reprint 2025-26 of epithelium. This is called the simple squamous epithelium (Squama means scale tn all oA =< (d) Columnar (Ciliated) Fig. 6.9: Different types of epithelial tissues of skin). Simple squamous epithelial cells are extremely thin and flat and form a delicate lining. The oesophagus and the lining of the mouth are also covered with squamous epithelium. The skin, which protects the body, is also made of squamous epithelium. Skin epithelial cells are arranged in many layers to prevent wear and tear. Since they are arranged in a pattern of layers, the epithelium is called stratified squamous epithelium. Where absorption and secretion occur, as in the inner lining of the intestine, tall epithelial cells are present. This columnar (meaning pillar-like ) epithelium facilitates movement across the epithelial barrier. In the respiratory tract, the columnar epithelial tissue also has cilia, which are hair-like projections on the outer surfaces of epithelial cells. These cilia can move, and their movement pushes the mucus forward to clear it. This type of epithelium is thus ciliated columnar epithelium. Cuboidal epithelium (with cube-shaped cells) forms the lining of kidney tubules and ducts of salivary glands, where it provides mechanical support. Epithelial cells often acquire additional specialisation as gland cells, which can secrete substances at the epithelial surface. Sometimes a portion of the epithelial tissue folds inward, and a multicellular gland is formed. This is glandular epithelium. 6.3.2 CONNECTIVE TISSUE Blood is a type of connective tissue. Why would it be called connective tissue? A clue is provided in the introduction of this chapter! Now, let us look at this type of tissue in some more detail. The cells of connective tissue are loosely spaced and embedded in an intercellular matrix (Fig. 6.10). The matrix may be jelly like, fluid, dense or rigid. The nature of matrix differs in concordance with the function of the particular connective tissue. Activity 6.4 e Take a drop of blood on a slide and observe different cells present in it under a microscope. SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 Cytoplasm Neutrophil Eosinophil Basophil (polynuclear leucocyte) Different white blood corpuscles Lymphocyte Monocyte Platelets (a) Haversian canal (contains blood vessels and nerve fibres) analiculus (contains (co) slender process of bone cell or osteocyte) (b) Red blood corpuscle 2 / Reticular fibre Fibroblast Macrophage Collagen fibre = Mast cell Plasma cell C)) Fat droplet Nucleus Adipocyte (e) Fig. 6.10: Types of connective tissues: (a) types of blood cells, (b) compact bone, (c) hyaline cartilage, (d) areolar tissue, (e) adipose tissue TISSUES Blood has a fluid (liquid) matrix called plasma, in which red blood corpuscles (RBCs), white blood corpuscles (WBCs) and platelets are suspended. The plasma contains proteins, salts and hormones. Blood flows and transports gases, digested food, hormones and waste materials to different parts of the body. Bone is another example of a connective tissue. It forms the framework that supports the body. It also anchors the muscles and supports the main organs of the body.