3. Give three features of cardiac Fig. 6.12: Neuron a unit of nervous tissue muscles. 4. What are the functions of areolar tissue? you have learnt Tissue is a group of cells similar in structure and function. Plant tissues are of two main types - meristematic and permanent. Meristematic tissue is the dividing tissue present in the growing regions of the plant. Permanent tissues are derived from meristematic tissue once they lose the ability to divide. They are classified as simple and complex tissues. Parenchyma, collenchyma and sclerenchyma are three types of simple tissues. Xylem and phloem are types of complex tissues. Animal tissues can be epithelial, connective, muscular and nervous tissue. Depending on shape and function, epithelial tissue is classified as squamous, cuboidal, columnar, ciliated and glandular. TISSUES 69 Reprint 2025-26 The different types of connective tissues in our body include areolar tissue, adipose tissue, bone, tendon, ligament, cartilage and blood. Striated, unstriated and cardiac are three types of muscle tissues. Nervous tissue is made of neurons that receive and conduct impulses. Ms Exercises 10. 11. Define the term tissue . How many types of elements together make up the xylem tissue? Name them. How are simple tissues different from complex tissues in plants? Differentiate between parenchyma, collenchyma and sclerenchyma on the basis of their cell wall. What are the functions of the stomata? Diagrammatically show the difference between the three types of muscle fibres. What is the specific function of the cardiac muscle? Differentiate between striated, unstriated and cardiac muscles on the basis of their structure and site/location in the body. Draw a labelled diagram of a neuron. Name the following. (a) Tissue that forms the inner lining of our mouth. (b) Tissue that connects muscle to bone in humans. (c) Tissue that transports food in plants. (d) Tissue that stores fat in our body. (e) Connective tissue with a fluid matrix. (f) Tissue present in the brain. Identify the type of tissue in the following: skin, bark of tree, bone, lining of kidney tubule, vascular bundle. SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 12. Name the regions in which parenchyma tissue is present. 13. What is the role of epidermis in plants? 14. How does the cork act as a protective tissue? 15. Complete the following chart: Permanent tissue TISSUES 71 Reprint 2025-26