the pancreas and helps in regulating blood sugar levels. If it is not secreted in proper amounts, the sugar level in the blood rises causing many harmful effects. Science Reprint 2025-26 If it is so important that hormones should be secreted in precise quantities, we need a mechanism through which this is done. The timing and amount of hormone released are regulated by feedback mechanisms. For example, if the sugar levels in blood rise, they are detected by the cells of the pancreas which respond by producing more insulin. As the blood sugar level falls, insulin secretion is reduced. = Hormones are secreted by endocrine glands and have specific functions. Complete Table 6.1 based on the hormone, the endocrine gland or the functions provided. Table 6.1 : Some important hormones and their functions Endocrine Gland 2. Thyroid gland Regulates metabolism for 4. Testosterone Testes 6. Adrenaline Adrenal gl Q U ES TION S$ How does chemical coordination take place in animals? Why is the use of iodised salt advisable? How does our body respond when adrenaline is secreted into the blood? Why are some patients of diabetes treated by giving injections of insulin? What you have learnt Control and coordination are the functions of the nervous system and hormones in our bodies. The responses of the nervous system can be classified as reflex action, voluntary action or involuntary action. The nervous system uses electrical impulses to transmit messages. The nervous system gets information from our sense organs and acts through our muscles. Chemical coordination is seen in both plants and animals. Hormones produced in one part of an organism move to another part to achieve the desired effect. A feedback mechanism regulates the action of the hormones. Control and Coordination 111 Reprint 2025-26 . Which of the following is a plant hormone? (a) Insulin (b) Thyroxin (c) Oestrogen (d) Cytokinin. . The gap between two neurons is called a (a) dendrite. (b) synapse. (c) axon. (d) impulse. . The brain is responsible for (a) thinking. (b) regulating the heart beat. (c) balancing the body. (d) all ofthe above. . What is the function of receptors in our body? Think of situations where receptors do not work properly. What problems are likely to arise? . Draw the structure of a neuron and explain its function. . How does phototropism occur in plants? . Which signals will get disrupted in case of a spinal cord injury? . How does chemical coordination occur in plants? . What is the need for a system of control and coordination in an organism? . How are involuntary actions and reflex actions different from each other? . Compare and contrast nervous and hormonal mechanisms for control and coordination in animals. . What is the difference between the manner in which movement takes place in a sensitive plant and the movement in our legs? 112 Science Reprint 2025-26