be carefully protected. For this, the body is designed so that the brain sits inside a bony box. Inside the box, the brain is contained in a fluid-filled balloon which provides further shock absorption. If you run your hand down the middle of your back, you will feel a hard, bumpy structure. This is the vertebral column or backbone which protects the spinal cord. 6.1.4 How does the Nervous Tissue cause Action? So far, we have been talking about nervous tissue, and how it collects information, sends it around the body, processes information, makes decisions based on information, and conveys decisions to muscles for action. In other words, when the action or movement is to be performed, muscle tissue will do the final job. How do animal muscles move? When a nerve impulse reaches the muscle, the muscle fibre must move. How does a muscle cell move? The simplest notion of movement at the cellular level is that muscle cells will move by changing their shape so that they shorten. So the next question is, how do muscle cells change their shape? The answer must lie in the chemistry of cellular components. Muscle cells have special proteins that change both their shape and their arrangement in the cell in response to nervous electrical impulses. When this happens, new arrangements of these proteins give the muscle cells a shorter form. Remember when we talked about muscle tissue in Class IX, there were different kinds of muscles, such as voluntary muscles and involuntary muscles. Based on what we have discussed so far, what do you think the differences between these would be? Q U ES TION S What is the difference between a/reflex action and walking? What happens at the synapse between two neurons? Which part of the brain maintains posture and equilibrium of the body? How do we detect the smell of an agarbatti (incense stick)? What is the role of.the brain in reflex action? 6.2 COORDINATION IN PLANTS Animals have a nervous system for controlling and coordinating the activities of the body. But plants have neither a nervous system nor muscles. So, how do they respond to stimuli? When we touch the leaves of a chhui-mui (the sensitive or touch-me-not plant of the Mimosa family), they begin to fold up and droop. When a seed germinates, the root goes down, the stem comes up into the air. What happens? Firstly, the leaves of the sensitive plant move very quickly in response to touch. Control and Coordination 105 Reprint 2025-26 There is no growth involved in this movement. On the other hand, the directional movement of a seedling is caused by growth. Ifit is prevented from growing, it will not show any movement. So plants show two different types of movement one dependent on growth and the other independent of growth. 6.2.1 Immediate Response to Stimulus Let us think about the first kind of movement, such as that of the sensitive plant. Since no growth is involved, the plant must actually