glorify continuous mechanisation of all work? What has industrialisation meant to people s lives? To answer such questions we need to turn to the history of industrialisation. In this chapter we will look at this history by focusing first on Britain, the first industrial nation, and then India, where the pattern of industrial change was conditioned by colonial rule. Give two examples where ik, Sf that is associated with progress has led to problems. ay like to think of areas related to environmental issues, nuclear weapons or disease. FT Reprint 2025-26 Fig. 2 Two Magjicians, published in \nland Printers, 26 January 1907. Before the Industrial Revolution All too often we associate industrialisation with the growth of factory industry. When we talk of industrial production we refer to factory production. When we talk of industrial workers we mean factory workers. Histories of industrialisation very often begin with the setting up of the first factories. There is a problem with such ideas. Even before factories began to dot the landscape in England and Europe, there was large-scale industrial production for an international market. This was not based on factories. Many historians now refer to this phase of industrialisation as proto-industrialisation. In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, merchants from the towns in Europe began moving to the countryside, supplying money to peasants and artisans, persuading them to produce for an international market. With the expansion of world trade and the acquisition of colonies in different parts of the world, the demand for goods began growing, But merchants could not expand production within towns. This was because here urban crafts and trade guilds were powerful. These were associations of producers that trained craftspeople, maintained control over production, regulated competition and prices, and restricted the entry of new people into the trade. Rulers granted different guilds the monopoly right to produce and trade in specific products. It was therefore difficult for new merchants to set up \ business in towns. So they turned to the countryside. In the countryside poor peasants and artisans began 78, ae working for merchants. As you have seen in the << = textbook last year, this was a time when open fields were disappearing and commons were being | enclosed. Cottagers and poor peasants who had earlier depended on common lands for their survival, gathering their firewood, berries, vegetables, hay and sttaw, had to now look for alternative sources of income. Many had tiny plots of land which could not = oO ean) oO a S n =) Ze) e eS uU lo?) EG Vu gs = provide work for all members of the household. So \ Fig. 3 Spinning in the eighteenth century. You can see each member of the family involved in the to produce goods for them, peasant households | production of yarn. Notice that one wheel is moving only one spindle. when merchants came around and offered advances eagerly agreed. By working for the merchants, they Reprint 2025-26 To S = oO _ [o) = iS