in India, they put labels on the cloth bundles. The label was needed to make the place of manufacture and the name of the company familiar to the buyer. The label was also to be a mark of quality. When buyers saw MADE IN MANCHESTER written in bold on the label, they were expected to feel confident about buying the cloth. Fig. 26(a) Fig. 26(b) Reprint 2025-26 Fig. 25 Gripe Water calendar of 1928 by M_V. Dhurandhar. The image of baby Krishna was most commonly used to popularise baby products. Fig. 26(a) Manchester labels, early twentieth century. Images of numerous Indian gods and goddesses - Kartika, Lakshmi, Saraswati are shown in imported cloth labels approving the quality of the product being marketed. Fig. 26(b) Maharaja Ranjit Singh on a Manchester label. Historic figures are used to create respect for the product. But labels did not only carry words and texts. They also carried images and were very often beautifully illustrated. If we look at these old labels, we can have some idea of the mind of the manufacturers, their calculations, and the way they appealed to the people. Images of Indian gods and goddesses regularly appeared on these labels. It was as if the association with gods gave divine approval to the goods being sold. The imprinted image of Krishna or Saraswati was also intended to make the manufacture from a foreign land appear somewhat familiar to Indian people. By the late nineteenth century, manufacturers were printing calendars to popularise their products. Unlike newspapers and magazines, calendars were used even by people who could not read. They were hung in tea shops and in poor people s homes just as much as in offices and middle-class apartments. And those who hung the calendars had to see the advertisements, day after day, through the year. In these calendars, once again, we see the figures of gods being used to sell new products. Like the images of gods, figures of important personages, of emperors and nawabs, adorned advertisement and calendars. The message very often seemed to say: if you respect the royal figure, then respect this product; when the product was being used by kings, or produced under royal command, its quality could not be questioned. When Indian manufacturers advertised the nationalist message was clear and loud. If you care for the nation then buy products that Indians produce. Advertisements became a vehicle of the nationalist message of swadeshi. Conclusion Clearly, the age of industries has meant major technological changes, growth of factories, and the making of a new industrial labour force. However, as you have seen, hand technology and small-scale production remained an important part of the industrial landscape. Look again at Figs. 1 and 2. What would you now say of the images they project? Reprint 2025-26 Fig. 27 Sunlight soap calendar of 1934. Here God Vishnu is shown bringing sunlight from across the skies. The Age of Industrialisation Fig. 28 An Indian mill cloth label. The goddess is shown