slept out once under a haystack, and once in an old farm shed ... On arrival in London we tried to find ... my friend ... but ... were unsuccessful. Our money was gone, so there was nothing for us to do but to walk around until late at night, and then try to find some place to sleep. We found an old building and slept in it that night. The next day, Sunday, late in the afternoon, we got to the Old Kent Gas Works, and applied for work. To my great surprise, the man we had been looking for was working at the time. He spoke to the foreman and I was given a job. Quoted in Raphael Samuel, Comers and Goers , in H.J. Dyos and Michael Wolff, eds, The Victorian City: Images and Realities, 1973. Source Imagine that you are a merchant writing back to a salesman who has been trying to persuade you to buy a new machine. Explain in your letter what you have heard and why you do not wish to invest in the new technology. = ean] oO n n =) Ze) < Ss eS uU lo?) <x Vu gs = ac) = = oO _ ) a = vu g = S) (a) u iS ~ ne) SI oO oe so = hammers were produced and 45 kinds of axes. These required human skill, not mechanical technology. In Victorian Britain, the upper classes the aristocrats and the bourgeoisie preferred things produced by hand. Handmade products came to symbolise refinement and class. They were better finished, individually produced, and carefully designed. Machine made goods were for export to the colonies. In countries with labour shortage, industrialists were keen on using mechanical power so that the need for human labour can be minimised. This was the case in nineteenth-century America. Britain, however, had no problem hiring human hands. . Fig. 9 Workers in an iron works, north-east 2.1 Life of the Workers England, painting by William Bell Scott, 1867. Many artists from the late nineteenth century began idealising workers: they were shown As news of possible jobs travelled to the countryside, hundreds suffering hardship and pain for the cause of the nation. The abundance of labour in the market affected the lives of workers. tramped to the cities. The actual possibility of getting a job depended on existing networks of friendship and kin relations. If you had a relative or a friend in a factory, you were more likely to get a job quickly. But not everyone had social connections. Many job seekers had to wait weeks, spending nights under bridges or in night 2s a ve tee Fig. 10 Houseless and Hungry, painting by Samuel Luke Fildes, 1874. This painting shows the homeless in London applying for tickets to stay overnight in a workhouse. These shelters were maintained under the supervision of the Poor Law Commissioners for the destitute, wayfarers, wanderers and foundling . Staying in these workhouses was a humiliating experience: