time: their export market collapsed, and the local market shrank, being glutted with Manchester imports. Produced by machines at lower costs, the imported cotton goods were so cheap that weavers could not easily compete with them. By the 1850s, reports from most weaving regions of India narrated stories of decline and desolation. By the 1860s, weavers faced a new problem. They could not get sufficient supply of raw cotton of good quality. When the American Reprint 2025-26 Source C The Commissioner of Patna wrote: It appears that twenty yeas ago, a brisk trade was carried on in the manufacture of cloth at Jahanabad, and Behar, which has in the former place entirely ceased, while in the latter the amount of manufacture is very limited, in consequence of the cheap and durable goods from Manchester with which the Native manufactures are unable to compete. Quoted in J. Krishnamurty, Deindustrialisation in Gangetic Bihar during the nineteenth century , The Indian Economic and Social History Review, 1985. Source D Reporting on the Koshtis, a community of weavers, the Census Report of Central Provinces stated: The Koshtis, like the weavers of the finer kinds of cloth in other parts of India, have fallen upon evil times. They are unable to compete with the showy goods which Manchester sends in such profusion, and they have of late years emigrated in great numbers, chiefly to Berar, where as day labourers they are able to obtain wages ... Census Report of Central Provinces, 1872, quoted in Sumit Guha, The handloom industry in Central India, 1825-1950 , The Indian Economic and Social History Review. ZL K/ 4 Oe Fig. 75 - Bombay harbour, a late-eighteenth-century drawing. Bombay and Calcutta grew as trading ports from the 1780s. This marked the decline of the old trading order and the growth of the colonial economy. Civil War broke out and cotton supplies from the US were cut off, Britain turned to India. As raw cotton exports from India increased, the price of raw cotton shot up. Weavers in India were starved of supplies and forced to buy raw cotton at exorbitant prices. In this, situation weaving could not pay. Then, by the end of the nineteenth century, weavers and other craftspeople faced yet another problem. Factories in India began production, flooding the market with machine-goods. How could weaving industries possibly survive? Reprint 2025-26 ao Ss le) oo] oO nw i tS n > Te) = = qe uU D <x Vu gs Ee S = = oO a s) = Vu g = fe) 1S) Vu = _ S = oO oe S = Factories Come Up The first cotton mill in Bombay came up in 1854 and it went into production two years later. By 1862 four mills were at work with 94,000 spindles and 2,150 looms. Around the same time jute mills came up in Bengal, the first being set up in 1855 and another one seven years later, in 1862. In north India, the Elgin Mill was started