exporting iron and steel worth about 77 million, double the value of its cotton export. Reprint 2025-26 Look at Figs. 4 and 5. Can you see any difference in the way the two images show industrialisation? Explain your view briefly. om S [e) ean] oO vn n > Te) om S (= qe [o) uU lo?) x Vu 2s = Second: the new industries could not easily displace traditional industries. Even at the end of the nineteenth century, less than 20 per cent of the total workforce was employed in technologically advanced industrial sectors. Textiles was a dynamic sector, but a large portion of the output was produced not within factories, but outside, within domestic units. Third: the pace of change in the traditional industries was not set by steam-powered cotton or metal industries, but they did not remain Poe St entirely stagnant either. Seemingly ordinary and small innovations | Fig. 6 A fitting shop at a railway works in England, The Illustrated London News, 7849. ; ; : In the fitting shop new locomotive engines were food processing, building, pottery, glass work, tanning, furniture | completed and old ones repaired. were the basis of growth in many non-mechanised sectors such as making, and production of implements. Fourth: technological changes occurred slowly. They did not spread dramatically across the industrial landscape. New technology was expensive and merchants and industrialists were cautious about using it. The machines often broke down and repair was costly. They were not as effective as their inventors and manufacturers claimed. Consider the case of the steam engine. James Watt improved the steam engine produced by Newcomen and patented the new engine in 1781. His industrialist friend Mathew Boulton manufactured the new model. But for years he could find no buyers. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, there were no more than 321 steam engines all over England. Of these, 80 were in cotton industries, nine in wool industries, and the rest in mining, canal works and iron works. Steam engines were not used in any of the other industries till much later in the century. So even the most powerful new technology that enhanced the productivity of labour manifold was slow to be accepted by industrialists. Historians now have come to increasingly recognise that the typical worker in the mid-nineteenth century S = = oO a s) a = Vu g = fe) 1S) Vu = = S = oO oe S Fig. 7 A spinning factory in 1830. was not a machine Operator but the You can see how giant wheels moved by steam power could set in motion hundreds of spindles to manufacture thread. traditional craftsperson and labourer. Reprint 2025-26 a Hand Labour and Steam Power In Victorian Britain there was no shortage of human labour. Poor peasants and vagrants moved to the cities in large numbers in search of jobs, waiting for work. As you will know, when there is plenty of labour, wages are low. So industrialists had no problem of