factories, and the making of a new industrial labour force. However, as you have seen, hand technology and small-scale production remained an important part of the industrial landscape. Look again at Figs. 1 and 2. What would you now say of the images they project? Reprint 2025-26 Fig. 27 Sunlight soap calendar of 1934. Here God Vishnu is shown bringing sunlight from across the skies. The Age of Industrialisation Fig. 28 An Indian mill cloth label. The goddess is shown offering cloth produced in an Ahmedabad mill, and asking people to use things made in India. Write in brief 1. Explain the following: a) Women workers in Britain attacked the Spinning Jenny. b) Inthe seventeenth century merchants from towns in Europe began employing peasants and artisans within the villages. c) The port of Surat declined by the end of the eighteenth century. d) The East India Company appointed gomasthas to supervise weavers in India. 2. Write True or False against each statement: a) Atthe end of the nineteenth century, 80 per cent of the total workforce in Europe was employed in the technologically advanced industrial sector. b) The international market for fine textiles was dominated by India till the eighteenth century. c) The American Civil War resulted in the reduction of cotton exports from India. d) The introduction of the fly shuttle enabled handloom workers to improve their productivity. 3. Explain what is meant by proto-industrialisation. Why did some industrialists in nineteenth-century Europe prefer hand labour over machines? 2. How did the East India Company procure regular supplies of cotton and silk textiles from Indian weavers? 3. Imagine that you have been asked to write an article for an encyclopaedia on Britain and the history of cotton. Write your piece using information from the entire chapter. 4. Why did industrial production in India increase during the First World War? Select any one industry in your region and find out its history. How has the technology changed? Where do the workers come from? How are the products advertised and marketed? Try and talk to the employers and some workers to get their views about the industry s history. Ke) = oO a [oe = Vu wy = 1S) Vu = ~ ge) = oO oe ae) = Reprint 2025-26