steel works in India at Jamshedpur. Iron and steel industries in India started much later than textiles. In colonial India industrial machinery, railways and locomotives were mostly imported. So capital goods industries could not really develop in any significant way till Independence. Fig. 79 - Young workers of a Bombay mill, early twentieth century. When workers went back to their village homes, they liked dressing up. = ean] oO n = i n =) Ze) e Ss eS uU lo?) <x Vu = = oO TS = oO a le) Qa = Vu Ww = fo} YU Vu = ~ eo) = o oe we) = Getting jobs was always difficult, even when mills multiplied and the demand for workers increased. The numbers seeking work were always more than the jobs available. Entry into the mills was also restricted. Industrialists usually employed a jobber to get new recruits. Very often the jobber was an old and trusted worker. He got people from his village, ensured them jobs, helped them settle in the city and provided them money in times of crisis. The jobber therefore became a person with some authority and power. He began demanding money and gifts for his favour and controlling the lives of workers. The number of factory workers increased over time. However, as you will see, they were a small proportion of the total industrial workforce. Source E Vasant Parkar, who was once a millworker in Bombay, said: The workers would pay the jobbers money to get their sons work in the mill ... The mill worker was closely associated with his village, physically and emotionally. He would go home to cut the harvest and for sowing. The Konkani would go home to cut the paddy and the Ghati, the sugarcane. It was an accepted practice for which the mills granted leave. Meena Menon and Neera Adarkar, One Hundred Years: One Hundred Voices, 2004. Source Fig. 27 Spinners at work in an Ahmedabad mill. Women worked mostly in the spinning departments. Reprint 2025-26 Fig. 20 A head jobber. Notice how the posture and clothes emphasise the jobber s position of authority. SourceF SSS Bhai Bhosle, a trade unionist of Bombay, recollected his childhood in the 1930s and 1940s: In those days, the shift was 10 hours from 5 pm to 3 am terrible working hours. My father worked for 35 years; he got the asthma like disease and could not work any more...Then my father went back to village. Meena Menon and Neera Adarkar, One Hundred Years: One Hundred Voices. Source cy The Peculiarities of Industrial Growth European Managing Agencies, which dominated industrial production in India, were interested in certain kinds of products. They established tea and coffee plantations, acquiring land at cheap rates from the colonial government; and they invested in mining, indigo and jute. Most of these were products required primarily for export trade and not for sale in India. When Indian businessmen began setting up industries in the late nineteenth century, they avoided