(a) Hibiscus leaf with (b) Banana leaf with (c) Grass leaf with reticulate venation parallel venation parallel venation Fig. 2.4: Leaves showing different types of venation In some leaves, you can observe a net-like pattern of veins on both sides of a thick middle vein. This pattern is called reticulate venation. For example, leaves of hibiscus exhibit reticulate venation (Fig. 2.4a). In some leaves, you may observe that the veins run parallel. This pattern is called parallel venation. For example, the leaves of banana plants and grasses exhibit parallel venation (Fig. 2.4b and Fig. 2.4c). Diversity in the Living World Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 2.indd 17 10/4/2024 3:19:52 PM Do you think that plants can be grouped on the basis of venation present in their leaves? Now, let us try to explore roots of the plants. Do all plants have roots? Are these roots similar? Activity 2.6: Let us find OUt = @ Visit an open area where wild herbs and grasses are growing. You may use small herbs for this exercise. @ Using a khurpi (trowel), carefully dig out a few different herbs without damaging the roots. To do this, you may wet the soil and loosen it. @ Wash the roots with water and observe them. @ After you are done observing, make sure to replant the herbs so that they may continue to thrive and grow. What are the similarities and differences in the roots of the plants collected by you? What differences do you see in the roots of plants shown in Fig. 2.5a and Fig. 2.5b? (a) Taproot system in (b) Fibrous root system a mustard plant in common grass Fig. 2.5: Types of roots Carefully observe the roots of a mustard plant in Fig. 2.5a. The roots of this plant consist of one main root and small side roots arising from it. The main root is called taproot. Another example of a plant having taproots is hibiscus observed by you in Activity 2.1. The plant in Fig. 2.5b is a common grass plant. The roots of this plant appear as a bunch of similar-sized thin roots arising from the base of the stem. Such roots are called fibrous roots (Fig. 2.5b). Does your collection include any other grasses? What kind of roots do they have? Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 2.indd 18 10/4/2024 3:19:55 PM Is there any relation between the type of leaf venation and the type of root of the same plant? How do we find this out? Activity 2.7: Let us relate and analyse SE Collect saplings of five common plants from your school nursery or any other nurseries to plant in your school garden. Examples of such plants can include lemongrass, marigold, sadabahar (periwinkle), and others. Before planting them, observe their roots and the venation in their leaves. Record your observations in Table 2.4. Table 2.4: Types of leaf venation and roots S. no. Name of the Type of leaf Type of root plant venation