out? Activity 2.7: Let us relate and analyse SE Collect saplings of five common plants from your school nursery or any other nurseries to plant in your school garden. Examples of such plants can include lemongrass, marigold, sadabahar (periwinkle), and others. Before planting them, observe their roots and the venation in their leaves. Record your observations in Table 2.4. Table 2.4: Types of leaf venation and roots S. no. Name of the Type of leaf Type of root plant venation (fibrous/tap) (reticulate/ parallel) 1. Lemongrass Parallel Fibrous 2. 3. 4. 5. Do you observe any relation between the leaf venation and types of root in these plants? A sadabahar plant has a taproot and its leaves have reticulate venation. Do other plants with reticulate venation have taproots too? Lemongrass, on the other hand, has fibrous roots and its leaves have parallel venation. Do other plants with parallel venation have fibrous roots too? Generally, plants with reticulate venation have taproots while those with parallel venation have fibrous roots. Chickpea (chana) is another example of a plant with taproots and reticulate venation in leaves. Wheat is an example of a plant with fibrous roots and parallel venation in its leaves. Diversity in the Living World Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 2.indd 19 10/4/2024 3:19:55 PM Is there any relation among the seed of a plant, types of root and leaf venation? Are all seeds similar? Activity 2.8: Let us compare eee @ Soak some chickpea and maize seeds in water for two or three days. @ Remove the seed coat of a chickpea. Now, observe the structure of the chickpea and maize seeds. Are they similar or different? Cotyledons (a) Dicot seed (chickpea) (b) Monocot seed (maize) Fig. 2.6: Dicot and monocot seeds You would notice that chickpea seeds are split into two parts (Fig. 2.6a). Each part is called a cotyledon. Plants that have seeds with two cotyledons are called dicotyledons (dicots). Maize has a single thin cotyledon (Fig. 2.6b). Plants with such seeds are called monocotyledons (monocots). What relation do you observe among leaf venation, root types and the number of cotyledons in seeds of a plant? Dicot plants have reticulate venation and a taproot system while monocot plants have parallel venation and a fibrous root system. You have learnt about some features used for grouping plants. Now, let us explore the grouping of animals in more detail. 2.2.2 How to group animals? Just like plants, animals too are significantly different from one another. How can we group such a wide variety of animals? What features can you think of to group them? In Activity 2.3, you have already set some bases for grouping animals. Let us explore a few of these in more detail. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 2.indd 20 10/4/2024 3:19:55 PM Activity 2.9: Let us find out ee You have recorded the movement of a few animals in Table 2.2. You may have also observed how other animals move from place to