What type of venation would you observe in the leaves of radish plant? Look at the image of a mountain goat and a goat found in the plains. Point out the similarities and differences between them. What are the reasons for these differences? Reprint 2025-26 Diversity in the Living World 10/4/2024 3:22:42 PM (a) Mountain Goat (b) Goat found in the plains 5. Group the following animals into two groups based on any feature other than those discussed in the chapter cow, cockroach, pigeon, bat, tortoise, whale, fish, grasshopper, lizard. 6. As the population grows and people want more comfortable lives, forests are being cut down to meet various needs. How can this affect our surroundings? How do you think we can address this challenge? 7. Analyse the flowchart. What can be examples of A and B ? [_ Plant Yes Yes venation? Yes 8. Raj argues with his friend Sanjay that Gudhal (hibiscus) plant is a shrub. What questions can Sanjay ask for clarification? Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 2.indd 32 10/4/2024 3:22:46 PM Chapter 2.indd 33 9. Based on the information in the table, find out examples of these plants for each group. Group Type of seed Type of root Examples A Dicot Taproot B Monocot Fibrous roots (a) What other similarities do plants of group A have? (b) What other similarities do plants of group B have? 10. Observe the labelled part of a duck in the picture given below. What differences do you observe in the feet of the duck compared to the other birds? Which activity would the duck be able to perform using this part? Webbed <+ __ - feet (a) Duck (b) Pigeon Learning further _/)_ @ Read about one Indian scientist or a wildlife biologist who is working towards protection of India s biodiversity. Prepare a brief report. @ Explore the contributions of Divya Mudappa, Usha Lachungpa, Ghazala Shahabuddin, Nandini Velho, Vidya Athreya, Uma Ramakrishnan and Divya Karnad towards biodiversity in India. Prepare a report of the work done by any three of them. Reprint 2025-26 Diversity in the Living World 23-Jan-25 1:48:07 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 2.indd 34 Label the plants in your school with their local names with the help of your teacher or the gardener. List them in your notebook. With the help of your teacher, plan a field visit or a nature walk. Record your observations. Prepare a class biodiversity register by consolidating the observations and notes of all the students taken during the field visit or nature walk. Find out about Project Tiger and other similar projects initiated in India to protect our biodiversity. Prepare a presentation for your class. Divide your class into groups of six students each. Initiate a discussion in the class on how you can protect biodiversity around you. Prepare a group-wise report that includes suggestions given by members of each group. Interact with elders in your family or neighbourhood to