Trees stand in the Sun and give shade to others. Their fruits are also for others. Likewise, good people bear all * hardships and bring welfare to others. They give to others whatever they have earned. : . a (Wise saying) NY] ~ j 1 Ae oye 0 It is a pleasant morning after yesterday s refreshing rain. Dr Raghu and Maniram chacha (uncle) have been invited to the school by the science teacher, Madam Sulekha, to Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 2.indd 9 10/4/2024 3:17:29 PM facilitate an exciting nature walk. Dr Raghu is a scientist at the nearby Research Laboratory and Maniram chacha is an elderly person from a nearby community. Maniram chacha is an expert in mimicking bird calls. He is also brilliant at identifying a variety of plants and animals. To prepare them for the nature walk, Dr Raghu informs the students that the objective of this walk is to experience the beauty and variety of plants and animals in the nature. The students are excited to join them. They are curious to interact and learn from them. The teacher advises the students to carry a notebook, a pen and a water bottle. As they walk, they begin exploring the plants and animals around them. Dr Raghu advises the students to notice the variety of smells in the park and emphasises respecting all living creatures and observing them without disturbing. Maniram chacha tells the students to not only observe different plants and animals but also to carefully listen to different sounds. The students come across a variety of plants, including grasses, bushes, and large trees. They also observe a variety | i . . . . . aneuaraean of birds sitting on the branches of trees, butterflies moving each bird has from flower to flower and monkeys jumping from one tree itsown unique, to another. They record their observations in their notebooks and discuss them with Dr Raghu and Maniram chacha. The students can hear the chirping of birds. Dr Raghu informs them that each bird has a unique chirp. This is an example of diversity in nature. Dr Raghu requests Maniram ,, chacha to mimic calls of some birds. Maniram chacha mimics different bird calls. The students enthusiastically start copying him. Have you ever observed different plants and animals around you? Share and discuss your observations with your friends and teacher. chirp. mum 2.1 Diversity in Plants and Animals Around Us Activity 2.1: Let us explore and record SE @ Plan a nature walk with your teacher to a park or a nearby forest. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 @ While on the nature walk, observe different plants, insects, birds, and other animals. Also, note the weather conditions, whether it is hot, cold, windy and so on. Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 2.indd 10 10/4/2024 3:17:55 PM Chapter 2.indd 11 You can collect different types of fallen leaves or flowers and create a scrapbook. @ Take care of the plants and animals in nature. Ensure that