to a park or a nearby forest. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 @ While on the nature walk, observe different plants, insects, birds, and other animals. Also, note the weather conditions, whether it is hot, cold, windy and so on. Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 2.indd 10 10/4/2024 3:17:55 PM Chapter 2.indd 11 You can collect different types of fallen leaves or flowers and create a scrapbook. @ Take care of the plants and animals in nature. Ensure that you do not disturb the plants and animals in the park. Do not pluck leaves and flowers. @ Record your observations in Table 2.1 about the features of stems, leaves, flowers and anything interesting in various plants. Some examples have been given for you in Fig. 2.1 and Table 2.1. a | / (a) Grass (b) Tulsi (Holy Basil) (c) Hibiscus (Gudhal) Fig. 2.1: Examples of different features of some plants Table 2.1: Observations of different plants around us Local Leaves (shape/ Any other S.no. name of Stem arrangementof Flowers observations plant leaves) and features A single leaf grows Common Softand alternatively from 1. : . : Green leaves grass thin different points on the stem Arrangement of 9 Tulsi Hard a pair of leaves Pinkish , and thin inthe opposite purple directions 3. Hibiscus Hard Hard Leaves with 4, Neem and smooth thick surface 5. Any other Reprint 2025-26 Diversity in the Living World 10/4/2024 3:18:06 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 2.indd 12 What similarities and differences did you find among the plants that you observed? You must have observed that plants have a variety of features such as tall/short, hard/soft stem different shapes of leaves and their arrangement on the stem or branches flowers varying in colour, shape, and scent Now, create a list of animals you observed during this walk or from your previous experiences. Record the places where they live, the food they eat and the way they move around in Table 2.2. Some examples have been provided for you. Table 2.2: Observations of different animals around us Name of Place where Food they The way Any other the animal they live eat they move _ observations (local name) around and features Carrying a Crow Tree Insects Fly and walk _ twig inits beak Ant Cow Any other Nest in soil Leaves, seeds . Have six legs and burrow and insects 8 Grasses, leaves What are the similarities and differences among the animals that you have observed and recorded in Table 2.2? You would have observed that some animals live on land while some others live on trees. Birds live on trees. Fish live in water and some animals like frogs live on land as well as in water. Animals consume a diverse range of foods and exhibit a variety of movements. Sketch the plants and animals observed by you in your notebook or prepare a scrapbook with leaves, flowers from different plants and feathers from animals. Write all the details