The plants and animals that live on land are said to live in terrestrial habitats. Some examples of terrestrial habitats are forests, deserts, grasslands, and mountains. Reprint 2025-26 Diversity in the Living World 10/21/2024 9:59:50 AM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 2.indd 28 The plants and animals that live in water are said to live in aquatic habitats. Some examples of aquatic habitats are ponds, lakes, rivers, and oceans. Some animals, such as frogs, can live in water as well as on land. These are called amphibians. What would happen if the habitat of a plant or an animal is damaged? What would happen if a goat does not get grass to eat? Can a fish survive without water? Check with your parents, grandparents, and neighbours to know about the plants, birds, insects or any other animal they used to see frequently in their childhood but do not see as often now. These changes often happen when habitats are damaged. The damage to habitats of plants and animals results in loss of their homes, food, and other resources. This leads to the loss of biodiversity. The population of the Bengal Tiger, Cheetah, and Great Indian Bustard has declined in India due to loss of natural habitats caused by human activities. The Government of India has initiated several projects to conserve our biodiversity. Project Tiger was initiated in 1973 to protect the declining population of the Bengal Tiger. The Cheetah Reintroduction Project was initiated in 2022 to restore the population of the Cheetah. Similarly, habitats of the Great Indian Bustards have been declared as Protected areas in the states of Gujarat, Rajasthan and Maharashtra. Reprint 2025-26 Cheetah Great Indian Bustard 10/21/2024 10:00:13 AM Traditionally Protected Forests: Sacred Groves Sacred groves are undisturbed patches of forests. Their sizes may vary from quite small to very large. Sacred groves are found all over India. They are home to different kinds of plants and animals, including numerous medicinal plants. These are protected by the local community and no one is allowed to harm any animals and cut trees in these groves, or disturb the area. This way, sacred groves are a community protected treasure of biodiversity. Find out about the sacred More to groves in your region. know! Sacred grove from the Western Ghats We must protect biodiversity to ensure our planet is full of life, helping plants and animals to survive and thrive. Adaptation - Monocot plants | Analyse Amphibians | Parallelvenation | Compare Aquatic Reticulate venation Create ( Biodiversity . Sacred groves Cotyledon Shrubs ) Group S Dicot plants Taproot | Observe : Fibrous root Terrestrial Record Habitat | Tree Relate : Herbs - Venation Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 2.indd 29 10/21/2024 10:00:37 AM @ Weare surrounded by a large variety of plants and animals. Such variety of plants and animals is a part of biodiversity. Plants and animals can be grouped on the basis of similarities and differences among them. @ Plants have similarities and differences based on