stem easily, or is it stiff? Take care that the stems do not break. @ Also, observe from where the branches of the plants arise whether they arise close to the ground or higher up on the stem. Fill in your observations in Table 2.3. A few examples are already given. Diversity in the Living World Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 2.indd 15 10/4/2024 3:18:07 PM S. no. 1. 3. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 2.indd 16 Table 2.3: Grouping of plants based on height and nature of stem Nameof Height Nature of stem Appearance of Name the plant branches of plant Short/. Green/ Tender/ Thick/ Close Higher group Medium/ Brown Hard Thin tothe upon Tall ground the stem Mango Tall Brown Hard Thick Yes Tree Rose Medium Brown Hard Thin Yes Shrub Tomato Short Green Tender Thin Yes Herb What differences do you observe among herbs, shrubs, and trees? How can you group plants as herbs, shrubs, and trees based on the data entered in Table 2.3? Some plants grow really tall and have hard, thick, brown, and woody stems. Their branches typically start higher up on the stem and away from the ground. These plants are called trees. For example, a mango tree (Fig. 2.3a). tf (c) Herb Fig. 2.3: Types of plants Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:19:51 PM Some plants are not as tall as trees. These plants often have many brown woody stems that start branching very close to the ground. These stems are hard but not as thick as the stem of a tree. These plants are called shrubs. For example, a rose plant is a shrub (Fig. 2.3b). Some plants are typically small with soft and green stems. These are known as herbs. For example, a tomato plant is a herb (Fig. 2.3c). Some plants with weak stems need support to climb and grow, and are called climbers. Some plants creep along the ground and are called creepers. What can be other features on the basis of which you can group plants? Let us perform another activity. Activity 2.5: Let us compare OO Look at the leaves of different plants collected by you, during the nature walk. Do you notice any variation in the shape and structure of these leaves? You may observe thin lines on the leaves of the plants (Fig. 2.4a). These are veins. The pattern of veins on the leaf is called venation. What differences do you see in the veins of leaves shown in Fig. 2.4a and Fig. 2.4b? (a) Hibiscus leaf with (b) Banana leaf with (c) Grass leaf with reticulate venation parallel venation parallel venation Fig. 2.4: Leaves showing different types of venation In some leaves, you can observe a net-like pattern of veins on both sides of a thick middle vein. This pattern is called reticulate venation. For example, leaves of hibiscus exhibit reticulate venation (Fig. 2.4a). In some leaves, you may observe that the veins run parallel. This pattern is called parallel venation. For example,