2.2? You would have observed that some animals live on land while some others live on trees. Birds live on trees. Fish live in water and some animals like frogs live on land as well as in water. Animals consume a diverse range of foods and exhibit a variety of movements. Sketch the plants and animals observed by you in your notebook or prepare a scrapbook with leaves, flowers from different plants and feathers from animals. Write all the details you have gathered about them. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:18:06 PM While travelling to and from school, observe your surroundings and look out for a variety of plants and animals. Add the name of any plant or animal that you have not listed before in Tables 2.1 and 2.2. Activity 2.2: Let us appreciate a Close your eyes for 30 seconds and think of one plant and one animal that you have closely observed and appreciated very much. @ Now each one of you can draw the plant and animal that you thought of on the blackboard. @ What are your observations about the various plants and animals that have been drawn? How many different plants and animals did the entire class draw on the blackboard? Do you think that there may be many more varieties of plants and animals other than those drawn on the board? The variety of plants and animals found in a particular region contributes to the biodiversity of that region. Diversity in the Living World Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 2.indd 13 10/4/2024 3:18:07 PM Each member in the biodiversity of a region has a different role to play. For example, trees provide food and shelter to some birds and other animals, animals help in spreading seeds after eating fruits, and so on. Can you think of more such examples? This shows that plants and animals are dependent on each other. I 2.2 How to Group Plants and Animals? How would you arrange your books and notebooks in groups? Would arranging them in groups help you better organise your school bag? Now, let us look at the world around us. We are surrounded by a variety of plants and animals with different features about which you have learnt in section 2.1. We can group them based on similarities and differences among them. Activity 2.3: Let US QrOUD: EE Collect pictures of various other plants and animals. Cut their pictures from old magazines, newspapers, charts and other sources. Paste each of these pictures on a different card. Divide your class in groups of 5-6 students each. Pool the cards prepared by the students in your group. @ Observe various features of plants and animals shown on the cards. @ Recall the features of plants and animals that you have listed in Tables 2.1 and 2.2. Group them on the basis of common features. Share and discuss the basis of grouping you have made with other groups in your class. You will be surprised to see that the basis used