class in groups of 5-6 students each. Pool the cards prepared by the students in your group. @ Observe various features of plants and animals shown on the cards. @ Recall the features of plants and animals that you have listed in Tables 2.1 and 2.2. Group them on the basis of common features. Share and discuss the basis of grouping you have made with other groups in your class. You will be surprised to see that the basis used by different groups may vary. What do you think are the reasons behind it? Different students might have chosen different common features for the grouping. For example, some students may have chosen the height of plants as the basis for grouping while others might have chosen presence or absence of flowers as the basis for grouping of plants (See Fig. 2.2). Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 2.indd 14 10/4/2024 3:18:07 PM Presence . nes / Hard/soft Eating Place they stem habits live absence of flowers Fig. 2.2: Some possible criteria of groupings of plants and animals You may have grouped animals based on varied features, such as what they eat, where they live, what colour they are and how they move. What is the importance of grouping? Grouping makes it easier to understand and study plants and animals on the basis of their similarities and differences. You will learn more about the importance of grouping in our daily lives in the chapter, Materials Around Us . me 22.1 How to group plants? You must have noticed that plants show variation in the features related to stems, leaves, flowers, and more. The stems of different plants vary in thickness, height, and hardness, while the leaves vary in shape, colour, size and arrangement. You might have tried grouping the plants in Activity 2.3 using one of these features. You might have also learnt in earlier classes that plants can be grouped into herbs, shrubs, and trees based on their height and types of stem. Let us study the features of plants in more detail and group them on that basis. Activity 2.4: Let Us grOUD )9 - - Let us go on a nature walk again for some more interesting observations. @ Look closely at the height of different plants. Are these plants shorter than you, as tall as you, or taller than you? @ Is the stem brown or green? Touch and feel the stems and try to bend them gently. Can you bend the stem easily, or is it stiff? Take care that the stems do not break. @ Also, observe from where the branches of the plants arise whether they arise close to the ground or higher up on the stem. Fill in your observations in Table 2.3. A few examples are already given. Diversity in the Living World Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 2.indd 15 10/4/2024 3:18:07 PM S. no. 1. 3. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 2.indd 16 Table