Biodiversity . Sacred groves Cotyledon Shrubs ) Group S Dicot plants Taproot | Observe : Fibrous root Terrestrial Record Habitat | Tree Relate : Herbs - Venation Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 2.indd 29 10/21/2024 10:00:37 AM @ Weare surrounded by a large variety of plants and animals. Such variety of plants and animals is a part of biodiversity. Plants and animals can be grouped on the basis of similarities and differences among them. @ Plants have similarities and differences based on features associated with roots, stems, leaves, flowers, and so on. @ The method of arranging things into groups based on their common features is called grouping. Plants can be grouped into herbs, shrubs, and trees based on their heights, types of stem, and branching patterns. @ Plants can also be grouped as dicotyledons (dicots) and monocotyledons (monocots) based on the number of cotyledons in their seeds. @ Monocots generally exhibit parallel venation in their leaves and possess fibrous roots while dicots typically exhibit reticulate venation in their leaves and possess taproots. @ Animals have different types of movement that can be a basis for their grouping. Biodiversity of different regions varies because of distinct environmental conditions. @ The special features that enable plants and animals to survive in a particular region are called adaptations. @ The place where plants and animals live is their habitat. Based on their habitats, animals and plants can be grouped as terrestrial and aquatic. @ Due to damage of their habitats, plants and animals lose their homes, food and other resources resulting in the loss of biodiversity. Wemust protect biodiversity to ensure that our planet is full of life, helping plants and animals to survive and thrive. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 2.indd 30 10/21/2024 10:00:39 AM Chapter 2.indd 31 Here are two types of seeds. What differences do you find among the roots and leaf venation of their plants? (a) Wheat (b) Kidney beans Names of some animals are given below. Group them based on their habitats. Write the names of aquatic animals in the area marked A and terrestrial animals in the area marked B . Enter the names of animals living in both habitats in part C . Horse, Dolphin, Frog, Sheep, Crocodile, Squirrel, Whale, Earthworm, Pigeon, Tortoise Manu s mother maintains a kitchen garden. One day, she was digging out radish from the soil. She told Manu that radish is a kind of root. Examine a radish and write what type of root it is. What type of venation would you observe in the leaves of radish plant? Look at the image of a mountain goat and a goat found in the plains. Point out the similarities and differences between them. What are the reasons for these differences? Reprint 2025-26 Diversity in the Living World 10/4/2024 3:22:42 PM (a) Mountain Goat (b) Goat found in the plains 5. Group the following animals into two groups based on any feature other than those discussed in the