bodies, they can survive for many days without drinking water. Maya talks about seeing plants with beautiful bright flowers, rhododendrons, in the Shola forests of Nilgiris. Here, rhododendrons are of shorter height and have smaller leaves to survive through the heavy winds on mountain tops. However, Pema, who is from Sikkim, mentions that she has observed rhododendrons in the nearby mountains to be taller (Fig. 2.13). So, even plants such as rhododendrons may exhibit different features in different regions to survive the conditions of those regions. Fig. 2.13: Different features of rhododendrons Sagar tells his classmates that he went to the Andaman and Nicobar Islands with his parents for a special event. He saw huge whales and colourful fish in the ocean. His father explained that the streamlined body of fish helps them to swim in water. Reprint 2025-26 19-Dec-24 12:42:18 PM Chapter 2.indd 27 We have learnt that the plants and animals living in a particular region have special features that make them fit to survive there. The special features that enable plants and animals to survive in a particular region are called adaptations. The shape of the deodar tree and the height of the rhododendron are adaptations that enable them to survive in the mountainous regions. The place where plants and animals live is called their habitat. For example, the habitat of sea turtles is the sea or the ocean. The habitat of a camel is the hot or the cold desert, and the habitat of a rhododendron is the mountains. The habitat of plants and animals provides them food, water, air, shelter and other needs for their survival. Many types of plants and animals may share the same habitat. Habitat plays an important role in shaping the biodiversity of a region. Salim Ali (1896-1987) travelled across India to observe diversity in birds. He prepared a list of birds and documented their travel routes and habitats. He recorded the regions with high diversity of birds and took measures to conserve these regions. Keoladeo National Park in Bharatpur, Rajasthan and Ranganathittu Bird Sanctuary in Mandya, Karnataka are examples of regions he preserved. He wrote a landmark series of 10 books on birds of the Indian Subcontinent. He is referred to as the Birdman of India . He was awarded Padma Vibhushan in 1976. What are the different ways in which you can group plants and animals based on their habitats? One way is to group them into those that live on land and those that live in water . The plants and animals that live on land are said to live in terrestrial habitats. Some examples of terrestrial habitats are forests, deserts, grasslands, and mountains. Reprint 2025-26 Diversity in the Living World 10/21/2024 9:59:50 AM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 2.indd 28 The plants and animals that live in water are said to live in aquatic habitats. Some examples of aquatic habitats are ponds, lakes, rivers, and oceans. Some animals, such as frogs, can live