during the day and very cold at night. Therefore, you will find plants and animals in these areas that can tolerate and survive both the hot conditions during the day and cold conditions at night. The fleshy stems of plants found in the desert can store water and help them tolerate the hot conditions in these places. The mountains in extremely cold regions experience frequent snowfall. In order to survive in such conditions, some of the trees have the ability to let the snow slide off easily. Conical shape and sloping branches of deodar trees enable them to do so easily. You must have understood by now that the biodiversity varies from region to region because of diverse conditions. Look at the images of a camel from the hot desert of Rajasthan (Fig. 2.11) and a camel from the cold desert of Ladakh (Fig. 2.12). What are the differences you observe between them? What advantages do these differences provide to these camels? Hooves Hooves Fig. 2.11: A camel living in the hot Fig. 2.12: A camel living in the desert of Rajasthan cold desert of Ladakh The camel ofthe hot desert has long legs with wide hooves. Alex shares that his grandmother told him that the long legs and wide hooves help these camels to walk on the sandy desert without sinking into the sand. On the other hand, the height and legs of camels of a cold desert are comparatively shorter than those found in a hot desert. These short legs allow them to walk easily in mountainous regions. Reprint 2025-26 Diversity in the Living World 10/21/2024 9:59:45 AM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 2.indd 26 In deserts, food is not available easily. Camels store food in their humps. Camels found in the hot desert have one hump each that helps them to survive during the scarcity of food. Camels found in the cold desert have two humps each. These two humps shrink in late winters because there is not much food available in the cold desert and they have to use food stored in their humps during that time. Moreover, they grow long hair from head to neck, which help them survive the cold winters of Ladakh. What other features can help camels to survive in the desert? Other students also start sharing their observations. Kashi from Rajasthan says that camels excrete small amounts of urine, their dung is dry, and they do not sweat. As camels do not lose much water from their bodies, they can survive for many days without drinking water. Maya talks about seeing plants with beautiful bright flowers, rhododendrons, in the Shola forests of Nilgiris. Here, rhododendrons are of shorter height and have smaller leaves to survive through the heavy winds on mountain tops. However, Pema, who is from Sikkim, mentions that she has observed rhododendrons in the nearby mountains to be taller (Fig. 2.13). So, even plants such as rhododendrons may exhibit different features in different regions to