This process makes it easier for people and businesses to get things done and improve how they work. For example, instead of sending letters by post, we now use email to communicate with people quickly and at a lower cost. However, remember that technological progress does not always mean replacing old technologies some, like pulleys and wheelbarrows, are still in use. 08-07-2025 10:30:21 Chapter 7.indd 177 Fig. 7.21. Pulley used in boats construction site Now, let s look at examples of how technology is helping students learn, build new skills, and find jobs. | Technology paving the way for accessing knowledge, skills, and job opportunities A variety of online courses are available to students through Government platforms like SWAYAM (Study Webs of Active Learning for Young Aspiring Minds), which offers courses for Grade 9 onwards and operates on Massive Open Online Courses 2 (MOOCs) through which learners can Fig. 7.22. Online learning explore subjects like robotics, aquaculture, textile printing, and so on that are free of cost. Students benefit from learning at their own pace, from anywhere, while pursuing other jobs or courses. Online portals, like the Government s National Career Service, help people find job opportunities across various sectors, from plumbing to accounting. This is how technology has eliminated geographical barriers, allowing people access to knowledge, skill development and jobs in India and abroad. The services to these online portals can be accessed through the following links: = https://swayam.gov.in/ = https:/www.ncs.gov.tn/ Economic Life Around Us 7 - Factors of Production 05-07-2025 12:52:16 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 LET'S EXPLORE > Can you think of some technological advancements that have impacted the lives of people and communities around you? Talk to elders at home and in the neighbourhood about it. > Think of an invention that you would like to make to solve a problem. Write its related information on a piece of paper, such as its name, what it does, and how it works, sketches or drawings of what it would look like, and so on. Discuss with your classmates. HOW ARE THE FACTORS CONNECTED? The factors land, labour, capital, entrepreneurship and technology are combined to produce goods and services, and the proportion of each factor used depends on the product. For example, output from the agriculture, construction, and handicraft sectors relies more on labour and thus is labourintensive, while semiconductor chips or satellites require more capital, specialised machinery, and are capital-intensive. These factors complement each other and are interconnected; in case of some missing or misused factors, production can become inefficient or can be halted. However, in some cases, new techniques can change the proportion used and output. For instance, increased machine use in agriculture can lower dependence on labour. Similarly, 3-D printing can help revive the dying art forms in textiles by producing handloom products at a large scale to serve the market. The production inputs are available at different geographic locations. Businesses can procure them from these varied locations and combine