Factors of Production For a country like India, the largest contribution to growth and productivity will probably come about from more efficiently using land, labour and capital, thus they must be used more efficiently. Bibek Debroy, Chairman, Economic Advisory Council to the Prime Minister (2017-24) = = > = - a + rs moenoes e a ee) mp 1 oe 0881CHO7 Chapter 7.indd 163 80752025) 047-09; Chapter 7.indd 164 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Business: | A firm, a shop, a factory, etc., which produces or sells goods or provides a service. Fig. 7.2. A glimpse at the production of some goods INTRODUCTION Have you ever wondered how your clothes, shoes, school bag, furniture, phone, computer, etc., are made? Every product around you goes through a production process before it finally reaches you. This production process involves using resources or inputs required to produce the final product. The resources or inputs used in producing goods and services are hence called factors of production. Meet Ratna, who runs a small restaurant named Pause Point, on the city outskirts. Popular among highway travellers for its tasty, high-quality food, Pause Point is growing with a team of seven people who assist Ratna in managing the business. When she started five years ago, she had to choose a location, organise money for rent and equipment, hire staff, buy ingredients, and plan how to make her dream a success. Businesses combine various inputs or factors of production to create goods and services, which also generate opportunities for people to engage in economic activities. 05-07-2025 12:51:58 LET'S EXPLORE > Insmall groups, study the economic activities around your locality. What are the different types of goods and services being made or provided? > Here s a small report that Latha, Asha, Mohan, and Kiran made. You can make your own report for shops of your choice. Number | Goods produced in the or services locality provided Types of Types of inputs shops required Packaged goods, perishables, storage space Grocery shops Food grains, milk, bread Raw ingredients Cooked meals, | like vegetables and snacks, beverages | fruits, gas, utensils; cook/helper Restaurants/ food stalls vendors and fruits scale, cart or stall Tools, spare parts, Mobile repair, knowledge and Fresh produce, Vegetable Fresh vegetables baskets, weighing repair chops mobile skills of mobile accessories components and functions Salons/ Haircut, Scissors, creams, parlours 3 grooming, beauty| beauty products, services water, electricity Looking at your group s report, think about the following: > Where do people get the money that they need for their business? > Where did the hairdresser get trained? Who taught the food vendors to cook? > What motivated the business owners to start their business? Vv Economic Life Around Us 7 - Factors of Production Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Skill: The ability to doan activity or job well with practice and training. In economics, the inputs used in a production process or the factors of production are classified