resources help in the production of goods and services that serve society and need to be preserved and utilised judiciously. Questions and activities 1. How are the factors of production different from each other? What are the difficulties you faced in classifying the factors of production in the exercise given in-text? How does human capital differ from physical capital? How do you think technology is changing how people develop their skills and knowledge? A skill is something you learn and practice to get better. It helps you do things well, like playing a sport, creative writing, solving math problems, cooking, or even communicating well with people. If you could learn one skill today, what would it be and why? Do you think entrepreneurship is the driving force of production? Why or why not? Can technology replace other factors like labour? Is this good or bad? Support your answer with the help of an example. How do education and skill training affect human capital? Can they substitute for each other, or do they complement each other? Imagine you want to start a business that produces steel water bottles. What kind of inputs are needed? How would you obtain them? Suppose one of the factors is missing; what happens to your business operations? Interview an entrepreneur or founder to understand their motivation to start a business and the opportunities and 05-07-2025 12:52:24 Chapter 7.indd 183 10. challenges they saw. You can work in pairs to create a questionnaire to collect the information and share what you have learned in a report. Think like an economist. Let s explore what happens when things change. If you were Ratna, what would you do in the following situations? Discuss with your classmates. I. Suppose the rent for your space suddenly doubles. = Will you raise the price of the food served to cover the costs? = Will you look for a cheaper location? = How does this affect your business? II. Imagine one of your helpers quits suddenly. = Can the remaining workers manage the same amount of work? = Will you need to offer a higher salary to attract a new worker? III. You receive a small loan to invest in better technology for your restaurant. = Will this increase the production or improve quality? = Willit help you reach more customers? IV. Suppose another restaurant opens in the neighbourhood. = How will you attract and keep your customers? = Will you improve your service, reduce prices, or offer something new? V. What government laws or rules should be changed to improve the ease of doing business? Economic Life Around Us 7 - Factors of Production 05-07-2025 12:52:24