for individuals when they start a business, just as Ratna did when she started her business. However, the funds were insufficient for Ratna to start the business, so she took a loan from the bank to meet the shortfall. She paid interest along with a part of her loan amount over a period of time. Similarly, large companies require a lot of money to expand their business; hence, they raise money from the general public through the stock market. The stock market is a special type of market where shares are bought and sold. Large companies raise money from the public by offering them a share of the profits, called a dividend. In other words, big businesses can raise money or financial capital through such a market and can sell shares of their business. You will learn the exact mechanism of how this works in the higher grades. LET'S EXPLORE Identify a factory in your region. Find out how much capital may have been invested in the construction of the factory (you may provide an estimate). What kinds of equipment does the factory use to create its finished products? Entrepreneurship Entrepreneurship means starting your own business or creating something new to solve a problem. An entrepreneur is a person Fig. 7.12. Bamboo and cane products, Arunachal Pradesh Interest: The amount of money paid by the borrower of a loan to the lender for using their money for a specific time. Dividend: An amount of money paid regularly by a company to its shareholders out of its profits. Economic Life Around Us 7 - Factors of Production Fig. 7.14. Pottery products, Delhi Fig. 7.15. Petrochemical plant who comes up with an idea, takes risks, gathers other factors Startup of production, and works hard to make their startup idea A startup is an successful entrepreneurial , venture An entrepreneur s vision for solving a problem helps bring with limited . . d d . h k hat b fi resources that innovative products and services to the market that benefit aims at rapid society and the nation. At the same time, they also create job oe panion opportunities and support livelihoods. In return, they derive a while deep sense of satisfaction from seeing their dreams become a leveraging reality and serving the people. technology. y 6 peop Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 e Thus, an entrepreneur is one who: An Entrepreneur Takes risks Combines by investing various money and factors time of production Aw w Vv Identifies a problem and is resolute to solve it with Vv Makes key decisions regarding the operation and Vv Contributes to the welfare of society with his/ her innovation an innovative functioning solution of his/her business Fig. 7.16. Tasks performed by an entrepreneur The man who dreamed big for India J.R.D. Tata entrepreneur, industrialist and philanthropist Jehangir Ratanji Dadabhoy (J.R.D.) Tata was one of India s greatest entrepreneurs and played a big role in building modern India. He was born in