with devotion. The tools (a type of technology) used were worshipped; this tradition continues as Vishwakarma puja or Ayudha puja. So, creating products involved a unique blend of kala (art) and vidya (knowledge). Knowledge was passed on from generation to generation, and also built on. The shilpa shastras are ancient texts that contain detailed design guidelines on sculptures, paintings, buildings, wooden items, and jewellery. For example, texts on sculpture prescribe exact specifications regarding postures, colours, measurements, and proportions of figures. cc, DON'T MISS OUT Generations of families of sculptors have worked on constructing India s temples over centuries. They used their skills without expecting to see the finished outcome. They pursued excellence, considering work as worship by practising regularly and learning new techniques. Stitched shipbuilding Indians used a unique stitching technique dating back over 2000 years to make ships and boats, which they used to conduct maritime trade and cultural exchanges across the Indian Ocean. The technique involved stitching wooden planks together using cords instead of nails, which made them flexible and helped the ships navigate the Indian Ocean with ease. Fig. 7.9. Re-creation of a 5 -century stitched ship Economic Life Around Us 7 - Factors of Production @ Capital: In economics, any asset, whether physical or financial, used to produce goods and services. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 LET'S EXPLORE > Many of the traditional techniques of production have either disappeared or are on a decline. For example, the stitching of ships saw a severe decline after the arrival of Europeans in the Indian Ocean in the 16" century. This technique is now used for small fishing boats. > Why do you think the use of indigenous techniques has declined? Discuss in the class. > Find outsome techniques and products from your region that showcase human effort and skill. Explain briefly using drawings and text in the class. Capital Businesses also require capital that comprises monetary resources and durable assets like machinery, tools, equipment, vehicles, vending carts, computers, shops, factories, office buildings, etc., for their day-to-day operations. Just as Ratna would have required money to take the land on lease, buy the furniture and kitchen equipment, etc. These are all called capital money plus human-made resources that are used to produce goods and services. Capital is essential to a manufacturing unit or a services sector enterprise. But where do businesses get the capital? Generally, Fig. 7.10. Machinery Fig. 7.11. Loans personal savings, family, and friends are the first source of funds and support for individuals when they start a business, just as Ratna did when she started her business. However, the funds were insufficient for Ratna to start the business, so she took a loan from the bank to meet the shortfall. She paid interest along with a part of her loan amount over a period of time. Similarly, large companies require a lot of money to expand their business; hence, they raise money from the general public through the stock market. The