a problem and is resolute to solve it with Vv Makes key decisions regarding the operation and Vv Contributes to the welfare of society with his/ her innovation an innovative functioning solution of his/her business Fig. 7.16. Tasks performed by an entrepreneur The man who dreamed big for India J.R.D. Tata entrepreneur, industrialist and philanthropist Jehangir Ratanji Dadabhoy (J.R.D.) Tata was one of India s greatest entrepreneurs and played a big role in building modern India. He was born in 1904 and became the head of the Tata Group, one of the largest business groups in the country. He believed that businesses should not only make money but also help society. He started Fig. 7.17. ].R.D. Tata India s first airline, Tata Airlines, in 1932, which later became Air India. Under his leadership, the Tata Group expanded into many areas like steel, cars, power, and chemicals. J.R.D. Tata was also known for caring about his workers and believed in providing them with good working conditions. He was a man of vision, hard work, and honesty. In 1992, he received the Bharat Ratna, India s highest civilian award, for his great service to the nation. Y THINK ABOUT IT > What could be the lessons for young entrepreneurs that you can gather from the above case? > Does the existing knowledge of the entrepreneur help in finding solutions to the problem at hand? Or do they need to seek other sources? > Is profit the only motivation for an entrepreneur? Why or why not? > What are the other personality traits required to be a successful entrepreneur? Economic Life Around Us 7 - Factors of Production Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Chapter 7.indd 176 TECHNOLOGY: AN ENABLER OF PRODUCTION Technology means the application of scientific knowledge. For example, a camera converts light into electrical signals to create a digital image. Any production-related activity uses some form of technology. Some early forms of technology that have existed since ancient times are still in use today. Today, newer and advanced technological developments are applied in various areas, making our lives easier. For example, payments can be made at the click of a button through UPI (Unified Payments Interface); farmers can get advance weather updates; Global Positioning Systems (GPS) can discover the shortest routes for transporting goods, and so on. Fig. 7.18. Drones spraying fertilisers to Fig. 7.19. Robots assisting in improve crop health surgical processes Have you noticed how old technology gets replaced by a new, better one? This process makes it easier for people and businesses to get things done and improve how they work. For example, instead of sending letters by post, we now use email to communicate with people quickly and at a lower cost. However, remember that technological progress does not always mean replacing old technologies some, like pulleys and wheelbarrows, are still in use. 08-07-2025 10:30:21 Chapter 7.indd 177 Fig. 7.21. Pulley used in boats construction site Now, let s look at examples