ground and water. This pollution can be dangerous for people, animals, and plants. That is why it is important for producers to use natural resources responsibly so that we can meet our needs today without making it harder for future generations to meet theirs. They should try to reduce waste, avoid pollution, and protect the environment while making products. vv THINK ABOUT IT How are local communities and biodiversity affected by such activities? Do you also know some places around you that have seen water and land degradation over time? Discuss in class. So, it is important for producers to adopt sustainable practices to replenish natural resources for future use. | Fig. 7.24. Recycling industrial wastewater Fig. 7.25. Use of recycled products as inputs before releasing it into water bodies Apart from land and natural resources, businesses have responsibilities towards their workers and employees, which are summarised below. = Fair compensation and working conditions: Employers need to ensure that workers are paid fairly for their labour and that they work in a safe environment. = Skill development and training: There is a responsibility to invest in training and education to ensure that workers develop the skills necessary to remain competitive in the labour market. = Workplace rights and protections: Laws and regulations for workers rights relating to fair treatment, preventing discrimination, and providing benefits like health care or paid leave should be adhered to. Businesses are motivated to address social and environmental concerns in their operations to benefit society and biodiversity through Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR). This includes reducing polluting activities, addressing the well-being of local communities, treating employees and customers with respect, and so on. cic, DON'T MISS OUT India was the first nation in the world to bring a Corporate Social Responsibility law in 2014 that mandated companies to spend 2 per cent of their average profits of the last three years on CSR activities. Before we move on... > Land, labour, capital and entrepreneurship are factors of production that are used in a particular proportion to produce goods and services. These factors complement each other and are interconnected. > Human capital is the knowledge, skills, experience, and ability of individuals that contribute to their ability to perform work and create economic value. It is influenced Economic Life Around Us 7 - Factors of Production Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Se Chapter 7.indd 182 by education, training, health, use of technology, and social context that make people more productive in the workforce. The resources help in the production of goods and services that serve society and need to be preserved and utilised judiciously. Questions and activities 1. How are the factors of production different from each other? What are the difficulties you faced in classifying the factors of production in the exercise given in-text? How does human capital differ from physical capital? How do you think technology is changing how people develop their skills and knowledge? A skill is something you learn and