long way in various aspects of human capital since independence. Literacy is an important characteristic of the population and helps enhance the skills and productivity of human capital. The Adult Literacy Rate in India is 85 per cent for males and 70 per cent for females as of 2023, as per the World Bank estimates. Despite progress in many areas, India faces challenges in developing human capital. Productivity: Ability to do more ina particular time period. Adult literacy rate: Percentage of people aged 15 and above who can read and write with understanding a short, simple statement about their everyday life. Economic Life Around Us 7 - Factors of Production Y THINK ABOUT IT > Shivay, a student at Saraswati Vidyalaya in Grade 8, had to drop out of school two years back as his father lost his job. How do you think the loss of schooling years will affect Shivay when he grows up? > What problems could businesses face when they do not find workers with the required skills? According to the Economic Survey of India 2024, 65 per cent of people in India are below the age of 35 years. This means that India has a young, productive population, which may help the country reap the benefits of a demographic dividend. The demographic dividend refers to the benefit a country gets when it has a large number of young and : - working people. When more people Fig. 7.8. Students writing an exam are working and earning, and fewer people depend on them, the country can grow businesses and improve living standards. To take advantage of this potential, individuals must have access to quality education, health, training, and skilling, which would contribute to the nation s progress. You will learn more about this in the year ahead in the chapter on Demographics. Y THINK ABOUT IT Are some jobs more important than others? What would happen if nobody cleaned the streets, collected the trash, | farmers stopped cultivating the crops, doctors were not | available to treat patients, and so on? Today, there is a vast variety of jobs requiring different kinds of skills. However, India has had a rich legacy of skill-based knowledge systems and workmanship. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 India s ancient skill heritage For ancient Indians, work was a form of expressing their nature and striving for perfection, an offering to the deity or the receiver, as the case may be. It had to be created or done with devotion. The tools (a type of technology) used were worshipped; this tradition continues as Vishwakarma puja or Ayudha puja. So, creating products involved a unique blend of kala (art) and vidya (knowledge). Knowledge was passed on from generation to generation, and also built on. The shilpa shastras are ancient texts that contain detailed design guidelines on sculptures, paintings, buildings, wooden items, and jewellery. For example, texts on sculpture prescribe exact specifications regarding postures, colours, measurements, and proportions of figures.