expertise in specific fields. What you e Chapter 7.indd 167 05-07-2025 12:52:00 Training: It is the process of learning the required skills to doa particular job or activity. Cognitive: It refers to the process of learning, knowing and understanding. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Fig. 7.7. Education and training learn in school enriches your knowledge and prepares you to solve real-world problems. For example, a civil engineering student learns principles of design and materials, which are applied to building infrastructure like roads and bridges. The challenge lies in creating durable, cost-efficient, and ecofriendly solutions. This is achieved through training, such as observing construction sites, testing materials, understanding safety procedures and hands-on application. With education and training, individuals are prepared to excel in their careers. Healthcare Good health supports cognitive development, allowing children to attend school regularly and learn better. Similarly, workers are able to give their best, physically and mentally, when they are of sound body. They are able to do more in shorter time periods, be creative, and do not have to be away from work due to ill health. VY THINK ABOUT IT How do infrastructure and healthcare systems like hospitals, primary healthcare centres, doctors, pharmacies, diagnostic labs, etc., contribute to developing human capital? Social and cultural influences A culture of hard work, continuous improvement, and endeavouring to do things well has helped countries to move forward. There is a Japanese concept called kaizen, which means continuous improvement . This concept has been applied in Japan since the mid-1940s and has helped Japan achieve higher standards of living for its people. Another example could be that of the German work ethic, which is deeply rooted in their history. Germany is renowned for its high-quality industrial output. They place a high value on punctuality, attention to detail and quality. These qualities of their human capital contributed to their rise as a global leader in technology and manufacturing. LET'S EXPLORE > Let sdoasmall experiment. Make a list of 10 working adults in your family and neighbourhood. Ask them to describe the culture at their workplace. Share notes with your classmates. What did you discover? What are some adjectives that occur more frequently? > In the Tapestry chapters, you have seen examples of the art and architecture in India across several centuries. What do you think are the factors that enabled their creators to achieve such high levels of excellence? Discuss in groups and share in class. Challenges to human capital Our nation has come a long way in various aspects of human capital since independence. Literacy is an important characteristic of the population and helps enhance the skills and productivity of human capital. The Adult Literacy Rate in India is 85 per cent for males and 70 per cent for females as of 2023, as per the World Bank estimates. Despite progress in many areas, India faces challenges in developing human capital. Productivity: Ability to do more ina particular time period. Adult literacy rate: Percentage