money that they need for their business? > Where did the hairdresser get trained? Who taught the food vendors to cook? > What motivated the business owners to start their business? Vv Economic Life Around Us 7 - Factors of Production Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Skill: The ability to doan activity or job well with practice and training. In economics, the inputs used in a production process or the factors of production are classified into four types land, labour, capital and entrepreneurship. Technology is a facilitator and a crucial factor that enables businesses to produce more goods with the same or fewer inputs. Let s learn more about these inputs in the sections ahead! FACTORS OF PRODUCTION Land (natural resources) The word land in economics encompasses not only geographical land but also natural resources like soil, forests, water, air, sunlight, minerals, oil, and natural gas. Recollect the chapter on Natural Resources and Their Use, where we discussed different types of resources that nature gifts to us and how we use them. Businesses either purchase the required land or pay rent to use it for a period of time. Revisit the table in your report. Which of the items on your list can be labelled as land ? Labour (human resources) Labour is essential in production, involving physical and mental effort. Carpenters, farmers, construction workers, teachers, and doctors use varying levels of physical strength, knowledge, and skill. Everyone contributes differently through their work, helping create goods and services for society s needs. People as a resource Human beings play a key role in economic activities and production processes as they apply their knowledge, skills, and decision-making abilities to create goods and services. For example, a police officer maintains law and order, a scientist invents new technologies, a chef develops new recipes, etc. They all require a special set of knowledge and skills to perform well. Of course, they all must be dedicated to their work to do Fig. 7.5. Carpenter Fig. 7.6. Software developer a good job. The word labour refers to the physical and mental effort used in production. However, human capital refers to the specialised skills, knowledge, abilities and expertise required to perform that labour. Thus, human capital is not just the basic efforts of labour but also the quality and efficiency of that labour. Facilitators of human capital Education and training Economic Life Around Us 7 - Factors of Production Education helps individuals gain knowledge, starting with basic literacy and extending to expertise in specific fields. What you e Chapter 7.indd 167 05-07-2025 12:52:00 Training: It is the process of learning the required skills to doa particular job or activity. Cognitive: It refers to the process of learning, knowing and understanding. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Fig. 7.7. Education and training learn in school enriches your knowledge and prepares you to solve real-world problems. For example, a civil engineering student learns principles of design and materials, which