missing or misused factors, production can become inefficient or can be halted. However, in some cases, new techniques can change the proportion used and output. For instance, increased machine use in agriculture can lower dependence on labour. Similarly, 3-D printing can help revive the dying art forms in textiles by producing handloom products at a large scale to serve the market. The production inputs are available at different geographic locations. Businesses can procure them from these varied locations and combine the inputs to produce goods and services. Thus, the geographic interconnectedness provides businesses with access to varied inputs. However, production activities sometimes face severe supply chain challenges. The supply chain is a network of individuals, organisations, resources, activities and technology that are involved in the production and sale of goods. When a disruption in the supply chain occurs due to relying on sources from far-off places, instead of local inputs, it results in a halt in the production process, as was the case during the COVID-19 pandemic. DON'T MISS OUT India is the world s second-largest mobile phone manufacturer after China in 2025! Let s understand these ideas through a flow chart depicting mobile phone manufacturing. The process of mobile phone assembly R&D team Acquire land Acquire raw conceptualises and set up materials new features factory Distribution Mass production Assemble components & install software Test phone to retail stores & packaging (functionality, quality & performance) Fig. 7.23 Human effort is involved at every stage of production to design, supervise, and improve products and processes. For example, teams of software, electrical, and mechanical engineers, along with project managers, use their expertise to develop a product. The entrepreneur provides guidance on how resources should be used. Then, procuring resources like land, factory space, machinery, and skilled workers requires financial resources. Together, all these inputs are essential, working like puzzle pieces to create the goods and services we rely on! Economic Life Around Us 7 - Factors of Production Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 | RESPONSIBILITIES TOWARDS FACTORS OF PRODUCTION When we produce goods, we use natural resources like land, water, and minerals. However, these resources are limited and can be harmed if we are not careful. For example, in Tamil Nadu, many people earn money by working in leather factories. This helps the local economy, but the waste from these factories can pollute rivers and soil. In the same way, when old smartphones are not recycled properly, harmful substances like lead and mercury can leak into the ground and water. This pollution can be dangerous for people, animals, and plants. That is why it is important for producers to use natural resources responsibly so that we can meet our needs today without making it harder for future generations to meet theirs. They should try to reduce waste, avoid pollution, and protect the environment while making products. vv THINK ABOUT IT How are local communities and biodiversity affected by such activities? Do you also know some places around