in discovery. The poem Paper Boats uses the imagery of paper boats to symbolise dreams and aspirations. Students will reflect on the joy of simple pleasures and the universal desire to connect with the unknown. North, South, East, West will help students appreciate the diversity that exists in our country. The narrative presents postcards from a girl exploring India s diverse landscapes with her parents. The vibrant observations will foster an appreciation for the country s rich cultural and natural heritage. J\/ | | } \\ Ml Ly 3 PM \ | Unit 4 Travel and Adventure ignites the spirit of exploration and aims to cultivate curiosity, resilience, and a sense of wonder. The story, The Tunnel will take students on an adventurous episode ina tunnel, highlighting the excitement of discovery and the courage to face the unknown. It also conveys the concept of maturing through self-exploration. The poem, Travel revolves around the theme of exploring the unknown and a strong desire to travel. Train is used as a symbol to embark on to new adventures with new people. The sun s journey is used as a metaphor for constant movement and the human urge for exploration. Conquering the Summit is a non-fiction piece on Arunima Sinha, the first female amputee to scale Mount Everest to accomplish her dream. This will inspire students with her extraordinary determination and perseverance. Unit 5 Bravehearts instills a sense of patriotism and gratitude in students, celebrating the courage and sacrifices of the valiant who have selflessly laid down their lives for the nation. A Homage to Our Brave Soldiers is a tribute to the real heroes of our nation our soldiers, the embodiment of patriotism. The poem My Dear Soldiers is a heartfelt acknowledgement of the courage, dedication, and sacrifice of the soldiers who tirelessly defend the nation, often in harsh and unforgiving conditions. The graphic story of Rani Abbakka is a tale of a fearless queen, who defied Portuguese colonial powers with resilience and military acumen. She exhibited indomitable courage, valour, and determination. These literary pieces serve not only as sources of entertainment but also as repositories of valuable life lessons, fostering personal growth and equipping children with skills to navigate social situations with confidence. By resonating with children s daily experiences, the selected pieces promote positive values such as resilience, empathy, and emotional intelligence, thereby exerting a profound impact on their overall development. The primary focus lies in cultivating competencies in listening, speaking, reading, and writing while concurrently developing vocabulary and grammar in context. Language learning truly comes to life when connected to the immediate environment of learners, allowing them to express their thoughts, feelings, and experiences through experiential learning. All the activities are conveniently colour coded under headings such as Let us discuss , Let us think and reflect , Let us speak , Let us listen , Let us learn , Let us write and Let us explore . Let us Explore extends learning beyond the text, staying within the