at all stages. Having nurtured the students inherent abilities touching upon all the five planes of human existence, the pafichakoshas in the Foundational and the Preparatory Stages have paved the way for the progression of their learning further at the Middle Stage. Thus, the Middle Stage acts as a bridge between the Preparatory and the Secondary Stages, spanning three years from Grade 6 to Grade 8. The NCF-SE 2023, at the Middle Stage, aims to equip students with the skills that are needed to grow, as they advance in their lives. It endeavours to enhance their analytical, descriptive, and narrative capabilities, and to prepare them for the challenges and opportunities that await them. A diverse curriculum, covering nine subjects in three languages including at least two languages native to India Science, Mathematics, Social Sciences, Art Education, Physical Education and Well-being, and Vocational Education promotes their holistic development. Such a transformative learning culture requires certain essential conditions. One of them is to have appropriate textbooks in different curricular areas as these textbooks will play a central role in mediating between content and pedagogy a role that will strike a judicious balance between direct instruction and opportunities for exploration and inquiry. Among the other conditions, classroom arrangement and teacher preparation are crucial to establish conceptual connections both within and across curricular areas. The National Council of Educational Research and Training, on its part, is committed to providing students with such high-quality textbooks. Various Curricular Area Groups, which have been constituted for this purpose, comprising notable subject-experts, pedagogues, and practising teachers as their members, have made all possible efforts to develop such textbooks. Poorvi, the English language textbook for Grade 7 is one of these. Its content comprises stories, poems, and narratives that ensure a reflection of their social, cultural, and geographical landscapes wherein students are sure to find traces of their lived experiences. Poorvi also weaves into its contents vin | f/f | | / J | b6-Mar.25\4:41:41 P i Mi snippets from the vast treasure-trove of Indian Knowledge Systems, India s artistic and cultural heritage, and embeds values alongside ecological sensitivity, gender equality, digital skills, etc. For all practical purposes, it has, to my mind, succeeded in its Curricular Goals: first, to foster natural curiosity among students through a proper selection of content, and second, develop among them the core competencies in listening, speaking, reading, and writing by intelligently designing various activities around them, thereby seamlessly integrating vocabulary and grammar within meaningful contexts. However, in addition to this textbook, students at this stage should also be encouraged to explore various other learning resources. School libraries play a crucial role in making such resources available. Besides, the role of parents and teachers will also be invaluable in guiding and encouraging students to do so. With this, I express my gratitude to all those who have been involved in the development of this textbook, and hope that it will meet the expectations of all stakeholders. At the same time, I also invite suggestions