this stage should also be encouraged to explore various other learning resources. School libraries play a crucial role in making such resources available. Besides, the role of parents and teachers will also be invaluable in guiding and encouraging students to do so. With this, I express my gratitude to all those who have been involved in the development of this textbook, and hope that it will meet the expectations of all stakeholders. At the same time, I also invite suggestions and feedback from all its users for further improvement in the coming years. DINESH PRASAD SAKLANI Director, New Delhi National Council of Educational February 2025 Research and Training | \ | \' \06-Mar-25) 4:41311 PM \ ABOUT THE BOOK Poorvi, a textbook of English for Grade 7, is developed in alignment with the vision of the National Education Policy (NEP) 2020 and the National Curriculum Framework for School Education (NCF-SE) 2023. Language education is essential for effective communication, aesthetic expression and appreciation. Reasoning and critical thinking are very closely linked with language use, and these are valuable capacities to be developed. Language development plays an important role in the development of perceptual and practical concepts, and also enables us to check our experiences with others to ensure that we have a shared meaning emerging from these experiences. The textual material developed for the Middle Stage will take children well beyond the Preparatory Stage. Curricular Goals, competencies, and learning outcomes have been the guiding principles while developing the textbook. The Curricular Goals (CG) cover a range of competencies. The NCF-SE 2023 has stated the following Curricular Goals: CG-1: Develops independent reading, comprehension, and summarising skills of a variety of texts (stories, poems, extracts of plays, essays, articles, and news reports). CG-2: Attains the ability to write about thoughts, feelings, and experiences of social events. CG-3: Develops the capacity for effective communication using language skills for questioning, describing, analysing, and responding. CG-4: Explores different literary devices and forms of literature. CG-5: Develops the ability to recognise basic linguistic aspects (word and sentence structure) and use them in oral and written expression. CG-6: Develops an appreciation of the distinctive features of the language, including its alphabet and script, sounds, rhymes, puns, and other wordplays and games unique to the language (pp. 245-246). The Curricular Goals have been covered through a variety of themes and an array of activities. There are five thematic units that comprise stories, poems, conversation, narrative and descriptive pieces. Themes such as learning together, wit and humour, dreams and discoveries, travel and adventure and homage to bravehearts have been included. Cross-cutting themes, such as Indian Knowledge Systems, values, heritage, gender sensitivity, and inclusion have been integrated in all the units. Each unit has three literary pieces story, poem, conversation or non-fiction. /| f/f | 06-Mar-25 \4:41:42 P Mi \ There are in-text questions, Let us discuss to assess comprehension of the text. The end-of-the-text questions given in Let us think and reflect are designed to encourage critical thinking, reasoning, responding,