travel and adventure and homage to bravehearts have been included. Cross-cutting themes, such as Indian Knowledge Systems, values, heritage, gender sensitivity, and inclusion have been integrated in all the units. Each unit has three literary pieces story, poem, conversation or non-fiction. /| f/f | 06-Mar-25 \4:41:42 P Mi \ There are in-text questions, Let us discuss to assess comprehension of the text. The end-of-the-text questions given in Let us think and reflect are designed to encourage critical thinking, reasoning, responding, analysing, etc. Unit 1 Learning Together encourages students to explore the interconnectedness of nature and human life. The story, The Day the River Spoke , emphasises the importance of respecting and listening to nature. The river encourages Jahnavi to overcome her fears and societal barriers by boldly pursuing her desire for education, assuring that her courage can make a difference. The poem, Try Again inspires resilience and the power of perseverance, encouraging students to view challenges as stepping stones to success. The poem leaves a powerful impact on the readers, inspiring them to achieve their best goal in life. Three Days to See presents a touching narrative of a girl who cannot see and that invites learners to appreciate their senses and value the beauty of the world around them. Unit 2 Wit and Humour engages students with a light-hearted story, poem, and play. These delightful works showcase the charm of intelligence, humour and laughter. The amusing tale of Animals, Birds, and Dr. Dolittle will help students explore the idea of a doctor who learns animal language. He not only communicates with animals but also treats their ailments with empathy. The story is a fable that entertains and also educates about animal care. The poem, A Funny Man celebrates humour which can be unfamiliar that can spark curiosity and amusement. Say the Right Thing highlights the comic consequences of miscommunication. The play focuses on the fact that itis important to say the right thing at the right time. We must listen carefully to what others are saying and we must think before we speak. Unit 3 Dreams and Discoveries captures the essence of wonder and imagination of children. It also sparks curiosity and creativity, encouraging students to explore how dreams and discoveries shape the world. My Brother s Great Invention is a humorous story about a boy who likes to discover new things around him. This leads to an unexpected encounter with a thief. The story highlights determination, creativity, and sibling bonds, teaching students the value of trial and error in discovery. The poem Paper Boats uses the imagery of paper boats to symbolise dreams and aspirations. Students will reflect on the joy of simple pleasures and the universal desire to connect with the unknown. North, South, East, West will help students appreciate the diversity that exists in our country. The narrative presents postcards from a girl exploring India s diverse landscapes with her parents. The vibrant observations will foster an appreciation for the country s rich cultural and natural