Tagore for Paper Boats ; A.P.J. Abdul Kalam for My Dear Soldiers from https://abdulkalam.nic.in/dr-apj-abdul-kalam/poetry/my-dearsoldiers. The Council acknowledges the support of Amarendra Behera, Professor and Joint Director, CIET; Pratyusha Kumar Mandal, Professor and Head, DESS; Sunita Farkya, Professor and Head, DESM; Indrani Bhaduri, Professor and Head, ESD; Vinay Singh, Professor and Head, DEGSN; Milli Roy, Professor and Head, DGS; and Jyotsna Tiwari, Professor and Head, DEAA, along with their teams, for their meticulous efforts in ensuring the seamless integration of cross-curricular aspects throughout the textbook and linkages with other curricular areas. We are also grateful to Md. Farug Ansari, Professor and Head, Department of Education in Languages, for providing academic and administrative support. The Council acknowledges Geetanjali Kumar, PGT English, PM Shri Kendriya Vidyalaya No.1, Kozhikode, Kerala for her valuable inputs. vin | {i} | \*\ / J | b6-Mar.25\4:41:44 [ Mi \ A) | | The Council acknowledges and appreciates the contributions made by Monika Dohare, Senior Research Assistant; Asma Rafiq, Junior Project Fellow; Deepa Dubey, Junior Project Fellow; Faizy Abdul Kalam, Junior Project Fellow; and Abhishek Kumar, Junior Project Fellow from the Department of Education in Languages, NCERT for providing support in the development of the textbook. Special thanks are also due to the Publication Division, NCERT for their support. NCERT gratefully acknowledges the contributions made by Pawan Kumar Barriar, Incharge, DTP Cell; Kanchan Mishra, Ambuj Mishra, and Keshav Saroyan, Proofreaders (Contractual); Mohammad Wasi, Vivek Rajpoot, DTP Operators (Contractual); Himani, Graphic Designer (Contractual); and Shadab Khan, Computer Typist (Contractual). Copyright has been applied for all the texts and the publisher extends apologies for any omissions and would be glad to hear from any such unacknowledged copyright holders. Poorvi The textbook of English for Grade 7 is titled Poorvi after the Indian raga Poorvi . This raga is said to promote harmony and serenity. It is associated with dusk, specifically sunset time (Sandhi Prakash). Each raga in Indian music carries its own emotional significance and is symbolically connected to certain seasons, times of day, and moods. Ragas are believed to evoke specific emotions in listeners. Poorvi is an ancient and traditional Hindustani classical raga that originated in eastern India. It is typically performed during the fourth prahar of the day, between 3:00 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. It evokes a sense of calmness and contemplation in the journey of learners, symbolising a harmonious blend of traditional and modern learning. CONTENTS Foreword About the Book Unit 1: Learning Together The Day the River Spoke Try Again Three Days to See Wit and Humour Animals, Birds, and Dr. Dolittle A Funny Man Say the Right Thing Dreams and Discoveries _ My Brother s Great Invention Paper Boats North, South, East, West Travel Adventure The Tunnel \ 4 @ Travel a the Summit { ~ 166 : a 5: Bravehearts nage to Our Brave Soldiers fe: liers eer) ae yl / 9 re ae ALD [tt age Se er eT ll aA \ F : ' THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA PREAMBLE WE, THE PEOPLE