11.8 would make trade easier and so, money came into existence. AS more and more people began to use it for transactions buying and selling goods and services it became the accepted method of payment. As we saw in the farmer s story above, he could not store the wheat for long as it would rot or get eaten 08-04-2025 12:58:36 If the farmer uses money instead of wheat as a medium of exchange, he can keep the money for a longer time and use it for making purchases later. So, money acts as a store of value that can be used later. Isn t it fascinating! Money also serves aS a common denomination that measures the value of goods and services, and enables the comparison of goods and services in terms of their prices. For example, your parents pay money to the shopkeepers in exchange for various products. This money is used by the shopkeepers to pay salaries to their workers. The workers use the same medium to buy everyday essentials and other goods, pay their children s school fees, etc. Fig. 11.9 Y THINK ABOUT IT Suppose you need to buy a book. You have %50 in your pocket. You visit the bookshop in your neighbourhood where the shopkeeper tells you that the book is worth 100. What options do you have to buy the book today? Will you request the shopkeeper to allow you to make the rest of the payment later? The fact that money is accepted as a way of making deferred payments makes money a standard of deferred payment. Economic Life Around Us 11 - From Barter to Money Chapter 11.indd 237 08-04-2025 12:58:38 m pr Minting: The process of producing coins. A mint refers toa anufacturing facility that oduces coins that are used Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 as a nation s currency. Alloy: A metal made by combining two or more metallic elements. This makes the coin strong. Chapter 11.indd 238 The Journey of Money LET'S EXPLORE Look at the timeline given below. What are the changes in money that you observe? Coinage As you can see from the timeline, coins were among the earliest forms of money. During those times, rulers would issue coins that were used by the citizens of their respective kingdoms for transactions. So different kingdoms would have their own coinage. The minting and issue of coins was controlled entirely by the rulers. Over time, the coins of powerful rulers were accepted across various kingdoms and not just their own. This facilitated trade across geographies. The coins were made from precious metals like gold, silver, and copper or their alloys. They were called karshdpanas or panas. They had symbols punched on them called rupas. digital money debit cards and credit cards cowrie barter metal coinage iron, silver, gold, iron, silver, gold, copper 1980 official paper money UPI Fig. 11.10. Evolution of money in India - a broad timeline 08-04-2025 12:58:40 Chapter 1l.indd 239