people or places? What difficulties are you likely to face? For one, you would have to find someone who needed an ox. Now, swapping your ox for Imagine that you are a farmer and that people use a barter system where you live. You need a whole variety of things a pair of new shoes, a sweater, and medicines for your grandmother. But you only have an ox that you can a pair of shoes would hardly be a fair exchange! You may have had to go through a series of exchanges for example, find someone to exchange your ox for several bags of wheat. You would then have to transport all that wheat to several places; first, find someone willing to exchange a part of the wheat for shoes, another person for the sweater, and yet another for the medicines. Economic Life Around Us 11 - From Barter to Money 08-04-2025 12:58:32 In each of these cases, a discussion would take place to arrive at the fair amount of wheat that you could exchange for shoes or for the sweater. You would have to take the leftover bags of wheat and find a place to store them safely. The next time you needed something, you would have to carry the bags of wheat with you again! Y THINK ABOUT IT | What are the different types of difficulties you encountered in the situation above? In the farmer s story, imagine he finds someone who is willing to trade a pair of new shoes, a sweater, and Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 11.indd 232 08-04-2025 12:58:33 medicines all in exchange for his ox. Do you think it would be easy to come across such a situation? Just like the farmer, people who depended on the barter system would face many problems in making an exchange in their everyday lives. They would have to find someone who wants the exact item that they want to give, and in return are also able to offer exactly what the other party wants. This scenario is called double coincidence of wants. Even if there are two people who want each other s goods and are also willing to make an exchange, other issues could arise in what proportion should the two goods be exchanged? In such cases, it becomes difficult to compare the value of one good against another. If one of the people feels that the exchange is disadvantageous, they would not be interested in the exchange. This is because there is no common standard measure of value. VY THINK ABOUT IT What are the instances of double coincidence of wants in the above example? Even ifthere are two people who want each other s goods and are also willing to make an exchange, other issues could arise in what proportion should the two goods be exchanged? In such cases, it becomes difficult to compare the value of one good against another. If one of the people