system led to the development of money as a medium of exchange. > Forms of money evolved through time, such as shells, coins, and paper currency. This evolution continues as we create new and easier ways to make and receive payments, including the QR code that you saw in the illustration above. Questions and activities 1. How does the barter system take place and what kinds of commodities were used for exchange under the system? 2. What were the limitations of the barter system? What were the salient features of ancient Indian coins? 4. Howhas money as a medium of exchange transformed over time? 5. What steps might have been taken in ancient times so that Indian coins could become the medium of exchange across countries? 6. Read the following lines from the Arthashastra. An annual salary of 60 panas could be substituted by an adhaka of grain per day, enough for four meals... (One adhaka is equal to about 3 kg) What does this indicate about the value of one pana? The fine for failing to help a neighbour was 100 panas. Compare this with the annual salary. What conclusion can you draw about the human values being encouraged through this? 7. Write and enact a skit to show how people may have persuaded each other to use cowrie shells (or other such items) as the medium of exchange. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 SE Chapter 1l.indd 244 10-Apr-25 10:58:44 AM Chapter 1l.indd 245 The RBI is the only legal source that prints and distributes paper currency in India. To prevent illegal printing of notes and their misuse, the RBI has introduced many security features. Find out what some of these measures are and discuss them in class. Interview a few of your family members and local shopkeepers, and ask them their preferences in making and receiving payments do they prefer cash or UPI? Why? Economic Life Around Us 11 - From Barter to Money 10-Apr-25 10:58:44 AM Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 *'Noodles is our abbreviation for Notes and Doodles ! S Chapter 11.indd 246 08-04-2025 12:58:44