This is because there is no common standard measure of value. VY THINK ABOUT IT What are the instances of double coincidence of wants in the above example? Even ifthere are two people who want each other s goods and are also willing to make an exchange, other issues could arise in what proportion should the two goods be exchanged? In such cases, it becomes difficult to compare the value of one good against another. If one of the people feels that the exchange is disadvantageous, they would not be interested in the exchange. This is because there is no common standard measure of value. In the situation given above, what are the cases where you could encounter the lack of a common standard measure of value? Similarly, you cannot exchange only a part of the ox for a sweater; this is the problem of divisibility. Taking the ox everywhere is a problem and leads to the problem of portability. You solved part of the problem by exchanging Chapter 11.indd 233 Double coincidence of wants: an economic concept that describes a situation where two people each have something the other wants and can exchange them directly. Common standard measure of value: an agreed-upon worth for a transaction that helps in determining the value of goods and services in the economy. Divisibility: The capacity of an object or material to be split into pieces or portions. Portability: The ability of an object or material to be carried or moved from one place to another. Economic Life Around Us 11 - From Barter to Money 08-04-2025 12:58:33 the ox for bags of wheat, but you cannot store the wheat for long; it would rot or get eaten by rats! Thus arises the problem of durability. Y THINK ABOUT IT What are the different ways in which money would make the above situation easier for the farmer? DON T MISS OUT Durability: Although money has Trait of an replaced traditional object or material that barter systems all around inaicates i the world, there are some ongevi P 9 and bility that still exist today! One to withstand of them is the Junbeel damage due . to which it can viel (jun means moon be stored for in Assamese and_ beel a longer time means wetland), a threepene day annual socio-cultural Fig. 11.3 fair at Junbeel in Morigaon district of Assam. Interestingly, the mela begins with the Agni Puja or worship of fire, a prayer for universal wellbeing. Beginning in the 15th century, the chiefs of the Tiwa, Karbi, Khasi, and _Jaintia tribal communities of Assam and Meghalaya would gather every year to discuss political issues and to maintain friendly relationships. Members of these communities began to gather around this event and soon it turned into a fair, where people would bring their produce and began exchanging them among each other. Fig. 11.4 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 SE Chapter 11.indd 234 08-04-2025 12:58:34 Chapter 11.indd 235 This continues