chiefs of the Tiwa, Karbi, Khasi, and _Jaintia tribal communities of Assam and Meghalaya would gather every year to discuss political issues and to maintain friendly relationships. Members of these communities began to gather around this event and soon it turned into a fair, where people would bring their produce and began exchanging them among each other. Fig. 11.4 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 SE Chapter 11.indd 234 08-04-2025 12:58:34 Chapter 11.indd 235 This continues to be an important socio-cultural event even today. Bartering begins early in the morning, with the trade of local products such as roots, vegetables, fruit, herbs, and spices. Also seen at the fair are handmade goods and artifacts, made from natural materials sourced from the forests of the hilly region. These are often exchanged with people from the plains for rice cakes, and other types of food that cannot be grown in the hills. Fig. 11.5 Book exchange: Think of a fun club where you can trade your old books with friends! It s like a treasure hunt for stories. \) You bring books J you ve read and pick new ones from a big collection. For example, you might swap your exciting jungle adventure book for a friend s mystery story. It s a cool way to discover new _ adventures | Fig. 11.6 without spending any money! One common example is the exchange of old clothes for new utensils, a practice that has persisted over the years. In this system, a vendor visits homes, offering Economic Life Around Us 11 - From Barter to Money 08-04-2025 12:58:35 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 SS Chapter 11.indd 236 Fig. 11.7 LET S EXPLORE households new _ utensils or other household items in return for their used clothes or fabrics. This exchange benefits both parties households get rid of items they no longer need, while vendors collect materials that can be resold, repurposed, or recycled. The illustrations above show you some of the ways in which people practise barter today. Have you observed similar practices in your locality? What are the types of experiences people have in this process? Basic Functions of Money It is said that necessity is the mother of invention. As the types and numbers of things that were being exchanged grew, and the distances across which barter was beginning to take place became longer, it became clear that there was a need for a different system. A common medium of exchange Fig. 11.8 would make trade easier and so, money came into existence. AS more and more people began to use it for transactions buying and selling goods and services it became the accepted method of payment. As we saw in the farmer s story above, he could not store the wheat for long as it would rot or get eaten 08-04-2025 12:58:36 If the farmer uses money instead of wheat as a medium of exchange, he can keep the money for