From Barter to Money [a Lu o. <x L U The importance of money flows from it being a link between the present and the future. John Maynard Keynes 20th century economist I . How did exchange tak The Big ow did exchange take place before money? Why did money come into existence? How has money transformed into various forms over time? Questions @ In the theme Tapestry of the Past , you read about the crops that people grew, such as food grains or goods they made like carnelian beads. How do you think they exchanged these goods for things that they needed? Chapter 11.indd 229 08-04-2025 12:58:29 Barter System: a way of exchanging goods and services without using money. Money: the common tool that everybody accepts and uses in order to make or receive payments in exchange for goods and services. Transaction: a piece of business that is done between people, especially an act of buying or selling. Commodities: Products or goods that can be traded, bought and sold. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 11.indd 230 People exchanged goods or services for other goods and services. This system is called the barter system. How did this work? Suppose you need a pencil and have an extra eraser. Meanwhile, your classmate forgot to bring their eraser but has an extra pencil. You could exchange your extra eraser for the extra pencil that your classmate has. Wouldn t this satisfy your and the classmate s needs? This is how the barter system works. Today, we use coins and notes to buy and sell things. People also use their mobile phones and computers for such transactions. The barter system was the earliest form of exchange. There is a lot of evidence of it from around the world. People used commodities such as cowrie shells, salt, tea, tobacco, cloth, cattle (cows, goats, horses, sheep), seeds, etc. : ben | Fig. 11.2.1. Stone Money: Giant discs of rock called Rai stones were used as money on the Yap Island, in the Pacific Ocean country of Micronesia. Fig.11.2.2. The Aztec copper Tajadero (Spanish word for chopping knife) was a form of money used in Central Mexico and parts of Central America. Fig. 11.2.3.Tevau (Red feather coil made from birds feathers) used as money on the Solomon Islands. 08-04-2025 12:58:31 Why Do we Need Money? LET'S EXPLORE Chapter 11.indd 231 spare. How would you be able to exchange the ox for all the different things you need from different people or places? What difficulties are you likely to face? For one, you would have to find someone who needed an ox. Now, swapping your ox for Imagine that you are a farmer and that people use a barter system where you live. You need a whole variety of things a pair of new shoes, a sweater, and medicines for your grandmother. But you only have an ox that you can a pair of shoes would hardly be a fair