of the currency notes you see look like this ... Indian currency include 50 paisa, 71, 2, 5, F10, ~20 coins and paper notes of 10, $20, 50, 100, 200, 500 and =1000. LET S EXPLORE => Look ata50 anda 100-rupee note. Can % you identify the motifs depicting India s { cultural heritage on the reverse side of the notes? Find out more about them. > Feel the surface of the notes. What special features of currency notes help visually impaired persons to identify the notes denominations? Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Fig. 11.17 SS Chapter ll.indd 242 10-Apr-25 10:58:44 AM Chapter 1l.indd 243 Earlier in this chapter, we read that in ancient times coins were issued by rulers. Today, in India, we have a central authority called the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) that controls the issue of currency. It is not legal for anybody other than the RBI to issue currency. New Forms of Money As time has progressed and technology has advanced, other forms of money have come to be used today. Let s look at some of them. Krishnappa sells seasonal fruit on a cart. Alongside the colourful fruit that he arranges neatly on his cart is a little card with a QR code. oe irs His customers scan the QR code with their mobile phones and pay for their purchase digitally. The payment then goes directly into Krishnappa s_ bank \ account. Fig. 11.18 Apart from tangible forms of money such as coins and paper notes, money has taken intangible forms that we cannot touch and feel. This is called digital money which is in electronic form. Have you observed other people around you making or receiving payments without using coins and notes? Different payment methods like debit cards, credit cards, net banking, UPI (Unified Payments Interface), etc., are also used for transactions. These mediums directly transfer money from one person s bank account into another. You will learn more about the modern methods of monetary transactions later. QR Code: Stands for quickresponse codes, these are collections of black and white squares, which are readable by devices like smartphones and QR scanners. They contain information about the receiver's bank account and are used for making monetary transactions. Economic Life Around Us 10-Apr-25 10:58:44 AM 11 - From Barter to Money Before we move on... > The barter system existed before money came into existence. A variety of commodities were used to facilitate exchange. > The limitations of the barter system led to the development of money as a medium of exchange. > Forms of money evolved through time, such as shells, coins, and paper currency. This evolution continues as we create new and easier ways to make and receive payments, including the QR code that you saw in the illustration above. Questions and activities 1. How does the barter system take place and what kinds of commodities were used for exchange under the system? 2. What were the limitations