various kingdoms and not just their own. This facilitated trade across geographies. The coins were made from precious metals like gold, silver, and copper or their alloys. They were called karshdpanas or panas. They had symbols punched on them called rupas. digital money debit cards and credit cards cowrie barter metal coinage iron, silver, gold, iron, silver, gold, copper 1980 official paper money UPI Fig. 11.10. Evolution of money in India - a broad timeline 08-04-2025 12:58:40 Chapter 1l.indd 239 today in India? Does this word sound familiar to a word we use for money * DON'T MISS OUT Is it not interesting that variations of the word pana continue to be used in Tamil, Telugu, and Malayalam as panam and in Kannada as hana for money? Alloys of silver and copper were used to mint coins. The coins we use today are also alloys consisting largely of iron. They contain other materials like chromium, silicon, and carbon in precise proportions. You will learn more about alloys in your science lessons. In ancient times, the two sides of the coins the head (obverse) and the tail (reverse) had different kinds of symbols and motifs engraved on them. These included nature motifs like animals, trees and hills, and those of kings or queens, and deities. For example, the coins of the Chalukyas had a Varaha image (avatar of Vishnu) on one side and decorated three-tiered parasol on the other. ss ~ Coinage from Chalukyas of Kalyana Silver coin showing tiger featuring Varaha (avatar of Vishnu) emblem of Cholas (850-1279 CE) and Royal Parasol Fig. 11.11 LET'S EXPLORE The coins shown in Fig. 11.12 were found during excavations in Pudukkottai in Tamil Nadu. Their heads embossed are those of Roman kings. What conclusions can we draw from such a finding? Obverse: the side of a coin or medal bearing the head or principal design. Economic Life Around Us 11 - From Barter to Money 10-Apr-25 10:58:40 AM Fig. 11.12. Roman gold coins excavated in Pudukottai India The use of coinage helped boost India s maritime trade with the world. For example, they were found in parts of Kerala and Tamil Nadu. This throws light on the trading activities of southern India with the rest of the world. Based on this finding, scholars conclude that the trade was in favour of India. o DON T MISS OUT c 1 anna was equal to 1/16 of a rupee! In 1947, one anna could buy a dozen bananas. @@0 1 half 1 quarter 1 anna, 1 paisa, anna, 1942 anna, 1918 1943 1945 Fig. 11.13 Today, we see coins of different sizes (Shown below) for various denominations with both Hindi and English used on each coin. Special coins are also minted to mark important events for the nation. % DON'T MISS OUT The sign was adopted by the Government of India in 2010. It was designed by Udaya Kumar from the Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay (Mumbai). The symbol is a mix of the Devanagari