of cross-country pipelines and is expected to soon reach over 34, 000 km as Gas Grid by linking all gas sources and consuming markets across the country including North Eastern states. Electricity Electricity has such a wide range of applications in today s world that, its percapita consumption is considered as an index of development. Electricity is generated mainly in two ways: by running water which drives hydro turbines to generate hydro electricity; and by burning other fuels such as coal, petroleum and natural gas to drive turbines to produce thermal power. Once generated the electricity is exactly the same. Activity Name some river valley projects and write the names of the dams built on these rivers. Hydro electricity is generated by fast flowing water, which is a renewable resource. India has a number of multi-purpose projects like the Bhakra Nangal, Damodar Valley corporation, the Kopili Hydel Project etc. producing hydroelectric power. Thermal electricity is generated by using coal, petroleum and natural gas. The thermal power stations use non-renewable fossil fuels for generating electricity. Reprint 2025-26 68 E 12 AFGHANISTAN 36 N PAKISTAN oN rain Ve a She @ Nashik ARABIAN SEA LAKSHADWEEP (INDIA) INDIAW 72 E Faridabad * KERR Bhata a INDIA POWER PLANTS Relhi ms Pas Woe, Serica : @ Panki : Nem, v yo4 sti Bongeigar 3 Barichh >. Barauni <f. fe > a ge? arg a at e F P wet fe H Vy 2 Ay Sean. x i ee * ~ 2 eis Fi .s rors ' mi aoet SG .BANGLADESYD Singrau Bg gid : _Buroabur fa paneer ee Ch iene Se 1 Satpura n ee ewe _* Mane Bhusawal Kora u Parli_, eS Si Rariiagundam e . ie Kottagudam,> A NUCLEAR @ THERMAL _Miayawata e Ennore Talcher BAY OF BENGAL = ener ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS (INDIA) 600 km -g eg 8 N 92 F India: Distribution of Nuclear and Thermal Power Plants MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES Reprint 2025-26 Collect information about thermal/hydel power plants located in your state. Show them on the map of India. Non-Conventional Sources of Energy The growing consumption of energy has resulted in the country becoming increasingly dependent on fossil fuels such as coal, oil and gas. Rising prices of oil and gas and their potential shortages have raised uncertainties about the security of energy supply in future, which in turn has serious repercussions on the growth of the national economy. Moreover, increasing use of fossil fuels also causes serious environmental problems. Hence, there is a pressing need to use renewable energy sources like solar energy, wind, tide, biomass and energy from waste material. These are called non-conventional energy sources. India is blessed with an abundance of sunlight, water, wind and biomass. It has the largest programmes for the development of these renewable energy resources. Nuclear or Atomic Energy It is obtained by altering the structure of atoms. When such an alteration is made, much energy is released in the form of heat and this is used to generate