a result of deposition, accumulation and concentration in horizontal strata. Coal and some forms of iron ore have been concentrated as a result of long periods under great heat and pressure. Another group of sedimentary minerals include gypsum, potash salt and sodium salt. These are formed as a result of evaporation especially in arid regions. (iii) Another mode of formation involves the decomposition of surface rocks, and the removal of soluble constituents, leaving a residual mass of weathered material containing ores. Bauxite is formed this way. CLASSIFICATION OF MINERALS Minerals _ _T es Metallic Ferrous (containing Non-Ferrous iron) e.g. iron ore, e.g. copper, lead, Manganese, nickel tin, bauxite, etc. cobalt, etc. Fig. 5.1 Precious e.g. gold, silver, platinum, etc. Non-Metallic Energy Minerals e.g. mica, salt, Coal potash, sulphur, Petroleum granite, limestone, Natural gas marble, sandstone, etc. MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES Reprint 2025-26 (iv) Certain minerals may occur as alluvial deposits in sands of valley floors and the base of hills. These deposits are called placer deposits and generally contain minerals, which are not corroded by water. Gold, silver, tin and platinum are most important among such minerals. (v) The ocean waters contain vast quantities of minerals, but most of these are too widely diffused to be of economic significance. However, common salt, magnesium and bromine are largely derived from ocean waters. The ocean beds, too, are rich in @ manganese nodules. Interesting Fact Rat-Hole Mining. Do you know that most of the minerals in India are nationalised and their extraction is possible only after obtaining due permission from the government? But in most of the tribal areas of the north-east India, minerals are owned by individuals or communities. In Meghalaya, there are large deposits of coal, iron ore, limestone and dolomite etc. Coal mining in Jowai and Cherapunjee is done by family member in the form of a long narrow tunnel, known as Rat hole mining. The National Green Tribunal has declared such activities illegal and recommended that these should be stopped forthwith. Dig a little deeper: What is the difference between an open pit mine, a quarry.and an underground mine with shafts? India is fortunate to have fairly rich and varied mineral resources. However, these are unevenly distributed. Broadly speaking, peninsular rocks contain most of the reserves of coal, metallic minerals, mica and many other non-metallic minerals. Sedimentary rocks on the western and eastern flanks of the peninsula, in Gujarat and Assam have most of the petroleum deposits. Rajasthan with the rock systems of the peninsula, has reserves of many CONTEMPORARY INDIA II non-ferrous minerals. The vast alluvial plains of north India are almost devoid of economic minerals. These variations exist largely because of the differences in the geological structure, processes and time involved in the formation of minerals. Let us now study the distribution of a few major minerals in India. Always remember that the concentration of mineral in the ore, the ease of extraction and closeness to the market play an important role in affecting the economic