in forest land already allotted to them by the states. Appearing for the PSU, solicitor general G E Vahanvati argued that the company had one of the best records for protection of environment and had won awards at the national and @ _ State level. He said the Rs 50 crore already deposited by the company was compensation enough for it to be allowed coal mining operations. Appearing for the ministry of environment and farecte eramnesl ANN Raa mines unsafe Law Kumar Mishra | tw Dhanbad: Three days after one of the worst mining disasters in decades left 54 people dead, the chief of the company which owns these mines, said no less than half the mines in the area did not meet the basic safety standards. Bharat Coking Coal Ltd (BCCL) chairman Partho Bhattacharya, however, said on Saturday the company shouldn't be blamed for operating unsafe mines because workers and trade unions had blocked moves to shut these for fear of losing jobs. He said only one out of 41 mines was operated scientifically and of the rest, the many were functioning against the advice of the Directorate General of Mines Safety. He described safety standards in 24 mines as poor. Bhattacharya said workers were aware that they would have to seek voluntary retirement if unsafe mines were shut. Bharat Coking Coal management on Sat also handed over employment letters to the immediate people nominated by families of victims. Ironically, these people, most likely, would go to work in mines deemed unsafe by the company. BCCL 's audit of the safety status of mines, graded second and third degrees, WAIT AND WATCH: A crowd watches the ongoing rescue operation outside the Bharat Coking Coal Ltd mine at Bhatdih in Jharkhand on Thursday Safety standards were not in place Law Kumar Mishra | twn Dhanbad: Union coal minister Shibu Soren on Thursday announced an ex gratia of Rs 3 lakh to the families of the mine tragedy victims. Soren said: y ts of the victims will be provided employment by the Bharat Coking Coal from today. A probe by the director general of mines safety and the labour commissioner will also be initiated. Soren also held discussions with Bharat Coking Coal officials and promised medical help to the four survivors. Stricter and tained, even though the director general of mine safety carries out surveys of the safety norms, an expert said. Some agitating miners alleged that there is no emergency measures inside the mine. We go deep between 400 feet and 1,500 ft into the mines with only an oxygen mask. The tragedy points to the lack of security measures by Bharat Coking Coal despite previous instances of disasters due to methane leak. At least 48 people were killed in explosions in Jeetpur mine, 43 in Sudamdeeh and 30 in safety regulations implementation of environmental laws are essential to prevent mining from becoming a killer industry . CONSERVATION OF MINERALS We all appreciate the strong dependence of industry and agriculture