e Haban comes to Guwahati with his father from a remote village. He sees people getting into strange house like objects which move along the road. He also sees a kitchen dragging a number of house along with it. He is amazed and asked his father Why don t our houses move like the one we saw in Guwahati, Ba? Ba replies, These are not houses, they are buses and trains. Unlike our houses these are not made of bricks and stones, metal like iron and alluminium are used in making @ these. They do not move on their own. They are driven by an engine which needs energy to work. We use different things in our daily life made from metal. Can you list a number of items used in your house made of metals. Where do these metals come from? You have studied that the earth s crust is made up of different minerals embedded in the rocks. Various metals are extracted from these minerals after proper refinement. Minerals are an indispensable part of our lives. Almost everything we use, from a tiny pin to a towering building or a big ship, all are made from minerals. The railway lines and the tarmac (paving) of the roads, our implements and machinery too are made from minerals. Cars, buses, trains, aeroplanes are manufactured from minerals and run on power resources derived from the earth. Even the food that we eat contains minerals. In all stages of development, human beings have used minerals for their livelihood, decoration, festivities, religious and ceremonial rites. and minerals A bright smile from toothpaste Toothpaste cleans your teeth. Abrasive minerals like silica, limestone, aluminium oxide and various phosphate minerals do the cleaning. Fluoride which is used to reduce cavities, comes from a mineral fluorite. Most toothpaste are made white with titanium oxide, which comes from minerals called rutile, ilmenite and anatase. The sparkle in some toothpastes comes from mica. The @ toothbrush and tube containing the paste are made of plastics from petroleum. Find out where these minerals are found? Dig a little deeper and find out how many minerals are used to make a light bulb? All living things need minerals Life processes cannot occur without minerals. Although our mineral intake represents only about 0.3 per cent of our total intake of @ nutrients, they are so potent and so important that without them we would not be able to utilise the other 99.7 per cent of foodstuffs. Dig a little deeper and collect Nutritional Facts printed on food labels. What is a mineral? Geologists define mineral as a homogenous, naturally occurring substance with a definable internal structure. Minerals are found in varied forms in nature, ranging from the hardest diamond to the softest talc. Why are they so varied? Reprint 2025-26 You have already learnt about rocks. Rocks are combinations of homogenous substances called minerals. Some rocks, for instance limestone, consist of a single mineral only, but majority of the rock consist of