belt in Karnataka has large reserves of iron ore. The Kudremukh mines located in the Western Ghats of Karnataka are a 100 per cent export unit. Kudremukh deposits are known to be one of the largest in the world. The ore is transported as slurry through a pipeline to a port near Mangaluru. Maharashtra-Goa belt includes the state of Goa and Ratnagiri district of Maharashtra. Though, the ores are not of very high quality, yet they are efficiently exploited. Iron ore is exported through Marmagao port. Manganese Manganese is mainly used in the manufacturing of steel and ferro-manganese alloy. Nearly 10 kg of manganese is required to manufacture one tonne of steel. It is also used in manufacturing bleaching powder, insecticides and paints. Andhra Others Pradesh WMH 10% Karnataka 12% Madhya Pradesh 33% Odisha 16% Maharashtra 27% Fig. 5.3: Production of Manganese showing state-wise share in per cent, 2018-19 Dig a little deeper: Superimpose the maps showing distribution of iron ore, manganese, coal and iron and steel industry. Do you see any correlation. Why? Non-Ferrous Minerals India s reserves and production of nonferrous minerals is not very satisfactory. However, these minerals, which include copper, bauxite, lead, zinc and gold play a vital role in a number of metallurgical, engineering and electrical industries. Let us study the distribution of copper and bauxite. MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES Reprint 2025-26 68 E 12 AFGHANISTAN 36 N INDIA IMPORTANT MINERALS PAKISTAN CHINA (TIBET) NM. XN. Sai 1 Wie fe, aire a Ss oy ia re BHUTAN 0 %& Ajmer ia: 5 YAR car Wa Beawar att - q oe a: Sg JS. = bt . 2 - Coe, aie 5 PUI ae on, ( Gaya oe . ~.' POTS Bb eee, a er *Banotavesiy) fo eteceenascnanna . Reeth een Rathi O -azepean vat 2 a wetSonnesssanantecceseandbgcetebarendnss*DUMDigeessosengtig Seveeecengnanneresdptanecseesecscessee gs fA L ic of Cancer pmaraniag 2 i Wt ee \p l Sundesgath A RS abhebl . . Balaghat >. na ee Bilaspur . * Nagpur fo) Adurg- Kendujhar Bhandara Waikae Hill A Chantiraptr . = ae ARABIAN ag? Baila e oom SEA m4 ot Vishakhapatnam IRON ORE FIELDS A IRON ORE MINES m= IRON ORE EXPORTING PORTS <> MANGANESE @ BAUXITE %& MICA LAKSHADWEEP (INDIA) ae! ay 8 N IN DYAN % 72 E 76 Q India: Distribution of Iron Ore, Manganese, Bauxite and Mica CONTEMPORARY INDIA II Reprint 2025-26 Copper India is critically deficient in the reserve and production of copper. Being malleable, ductile and a good conductor, copper is mainly used in electrical cables, electronics and chemical industries. The Balaghat mines in Madhya Pradesh, Khetri mines in Rajasthan and Singhbhum district of Jharkhand are leading producers of copper. Bauxite Though, several ores contain aluminium, it is from bauxite, a clay-like substance that alumina and later aluminium is obtained. Bauxite deposits are formed by the decomposition of a wide variety of rocks rich in aluminium silicates. Aluminium is an important metal because it combines the strength of metals such as iron, with extreme lightness