of Energy Coal: In India, coal is the most abundantly available fossil fuel. It provides a substantial part of the nation s energy needs. It is used for power generation, to supply energy to industry as well as for domestic needs. India is highly dependent on coal for meeting its commercial energy requirements. As you are already aware that coal is formed due the compression of plant material over millions of years. Coal, therefore, is found in a variety of forms depending on the degrees of compression and the depth and CONTEMPORARY INDIA II Fig. 5.9 (b): A view from outside of a coal mine time of burial. Decaying plants in swamps produce peat. Which has a low carbon and high moisture contents and low heating capacity. Lignite is a low grade brown coal, which is soft with high moisture content. The principal lignite reserves are in Neyveli in Tamil Nadu and are used for generation of electricity. Coal that has been buried deep and subjected to increased temperatures is bituminous coal. It is the most popular coal in commercial use. Metallurgical coal is high grade bituminous coal which has a special value for smelting iron in blast furnaces. Anthracite is the highest quality hard coal. In India coal occurs in rock series of two main geological ages, namely Gondwana, a little over 200 million years in age and in tertiary deposits which are only about 55 million years old. The major resources of Gondwana coal, which are metallurgical coal, are located in Damodar valley (West Bengal Reprint 2025-26 68 E 12 AFGHANISTAN 36 N 36 N INDIA CONVENTIONAL ENERGY RESOURCES PAKISTAN | ae CHINA (TIBET) pe we a. an I Bry a ee BHUTAN . 5 Harkatia New ~. ad in. oo na SS ~ ea 4 cooN a Boiron A Ratan ol Ee te mon * singaraul re Taicher Mumbai High m aw oS 5 ARABI@N aif Me BAY OF SEA we a BENGAL Coal Fields A Coal Mines B Oil Fields Major Natural Gas Reserves HVJ Natural Gas Pipeline ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS aad (INDIA) * 8 N INDIAN YE 76 0 India: Distribution of Coal, Oil and Natural Gas Activity Collect information about cross country natural gas pipelines laid by GAIL (India) under One Nation One Grid . MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES Reprint 2025-26 Jharkhand). Jharia, Raniganj, Bokaro are important coalfields. The Godavari, Mahanadi, Son and Wardha valleys also contain coal deposits. Tertiary coals occur in the north eastern states of Meghalaya, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh and Nagaland. Remember coal is a bulky material, which loses weight on use as it is reduced to ash. Hence, heavy industries and thermal power stations are located on or near the coalfields. Petroleum Petroleum or mineral oil is the next major energy source in India after coal. It provides fuel for heat and lighting, lubricants for machinery and raw materials for a number of manufacturing industries. Petroleum refineries act as a nodal industry for synthetic textile, fertiliser and numerous chemical