Pradesh is also an important producer in the country. Madhya Pradesh 13% Fig. 5.7: Production of Limestone showing state-wise share in per cent, 2018-19 e( Hazards of Mining r Have you ever wondered about the efforts the miners make in making life comfortab for you? What are the impacts of mining on the health of the miners and the environment? The dust and noxious fumes inhaled by miners make them vulnerable to pulmonary diseases. The risk of collapsing mine roofs, inundation and fires in coalmines are a constant threat to miners. The water sources in the region get contaminated due to mining. Dumping of waste and slurry leads to degradation of land, soil, and increase in stream and river pollution. Fig. 5.8: Air pollution due to generation of dust in mining areas CONTEMPORARY INDIA II Reprint 2025-26 Jharia to be shifted COAL FIRE CATASTROPHE 3. Unmined coal burns with oxygen drawn from pores and mine shafts 4. People are at risk Law Kumar Mishra | te Dhanbad: The government has decided to relocate an entire township Jharia because of the uncontrollable spread of underground fires that have been burning for years in the coal belt. The Centre has already sanctioned Rs 14 crore for the first phase of shifting. Claiming It to be one of the world s major evacuation drives, Soren said the shifting would be done in three phases in five vears and he alsn as. su 1990, According to the Rana |, the cost of shifting people will be at Rs 20,000 crore. The Rana panel had also said, It is profitable to shift people from Jharia, since coal worth Rs 60,000 crore is lying unutilisad heneath the Tharia Coalunitfined Over 50% Rs 300 cr in damages. Of COal-belt Dhananjay Mahapatra | Tw New Delhi: The Supreme Court has asked India s largest coal producing company South Eastern Coalfields Ltd to pay within a month Rs 300 crore as compensation for using forest land in Chhattisgarh. This is in addition to Rs 50 crore already paid by the PSU, which is a subsidiary of Coal India Ltd, to continue its operations in the state. SECL will have to pay Rs 100 crore within a week and the rest within a month, the forest Bench comprising CJI Y K Sabharwal and Justices Arijit Pasayat and SH Kapadia directed on Friday. The court, in its earlier judgment, had said that all companies were liable to pay Penal Compensatory Afforestation cost and amount of Net Present Value to continue operations in forest land already allotted to them by the states. Appearing for the PSU, solicitor general G E Vahanvati argued that the company had one of the best records for protection of environment and had won awards at the national and @ _ State level. He said the Rs 50 crore already deposited by the company was compensation enough for it to be allowed coal mining operations. Appearing for the ministry of environment and farecte eramnesl ANN Raa mines unsafe