a few drops of turmeric solution are added to solution B, it turns red. Finally, after adding a few drops of red rose extract to solution C, it turns green. Based on the observations, which of the following is the correct sequence for the nature of solutions A, B, and C? (i) Acidic, acidic, and acidic (ii) Neutral, basic, and basic (iii) Basic, basic, and acidic (iv) Basic, basic, and basic 3. Observe and analyse Figs. 2.13, 2.14, and 2.15, in which red rose extract paper strips are used. Label the nature of solutions present in each of the containers. Fig. 2.13 Fig. 2.14 Fig. 2.15 4, Aliquid sample from the laboratory was tested using various indicators: Indicator Red litmus Blue litmus Turmeric No change Turned red No change in colour (Zor sor ) maxnzs 3 = (= A ES aty | WHAT WILL HAPPEN fr Based on the tests, identify the acidic or basic nature of the liquid and justify your answer. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 WHY WHAT NoT /| SHOULD ae / / [-. 4 % _) Chapter 2.indd 20 4/3/2025 4:50:54 PM 5. Manya is blindfolded. She is given two unknown solutions to test and determine whether they are acidic or basic. Which indicator should Manya use to test the solutions and why? 6. Could you suggest various materials which can be used for writing the message on the white sheet of paper (given at the beginning of the chapter) and what could be in the spray bottle? Make a table of various possible combinations and the colour of the writing obtained. 7. Grape juice was mixed with red rose extract; the mixture got a tint of red colour. What will happen if baking soda is added to this mixture? Justify your answer. 8. Keerthi wrote a secret message to her grandmother on her birthday using orange juice. Can you assist her grandmother in revealing the message? Which indicator would you use to make it visible? 9. How can natural indicators be prepared? Explain by giving an example. 10. Three liquids are given to you. One is vinegar, another is a baking soda solution, and the third is a sugar solution. Can you identify them only using turmeric paper? Explain. 11. The extract of red rose turns the liquid X to green. What will the nature of liquid X be? What will happen when excess of amla juice is added to liquid X? 12. Observe and analyse the information given in the following flowchart. Complete the missing information. Imagine a garden with plants showing signs of poor health. The soil can be in nature. The soil can be in nature. Which indicator can be used to test the nature of the soil? The acidic soil can be treated The basic soil can be treated with . with . Exploring Substances: Acidic, Basic, and Neutral Chapter 2.indd 21 4/3/2025 4:50:55 PM q Dike ) Aman accidentally spilt vinegar on some pieces a of an