is added to this test tube, the colour of the solution eventually changes from red to blue. This shows that the solution in the test tube is no longer acidic. Lime water has neutralised the effect of the acid. When the solution of an acid is mixed with the solution of a base in sufficient quantity, we find that the resulting solution is neither acidic nor basic. Such reactions are called neutralisation reactions. In a neutralisation reaction, salt and water are formed with the evolution (i.e., release) of heat. Acid + Base Salt + Water + Heat There are many examples in everyday life where you can observe the use of neutralisation processes. Let us find out! 2.3 Neutralisation in Daily Life (pee eg) Situation 1: Keerthi was observing a butterfly in the garden with her hand resting on a tree trunk. Suddenly, a red ant bit hey, leaving her skin red with stinging pain (Fig. 2.11). Her brother helped her by applying moist baking soda to the affected area, which relieved the pain. What do you think might be the reason for this? When an ant bites, it injects an acidic liquid (formic acid) into the skin. The effect of the acid can be neutralised by rubbing moist baking soda, which is a base. Fig. 2.11: Stinging effect What remedies do people use to treat ant bites of an ant bite in your region? Situation 2: On the Farmer s Portal (an > ea online platform from the Department of Agriculture, Cooperation and Farmers Welfare), a query froma farmer states, My plants are not growing well lately . After a detailed discussion, it was found that ~ the excessive use of chemical fertilisers (substances added to soil to help plants grow better) made the soil acidic. What remedy might be provided to him? - When the soil is too acidic, the plants Fig. 2.12: Neutralising the acidic do not grow well. It can be treated with nature of soil lime, which is a base. (Fig. 2.12). Ds Wa | cc) ao] rT) oa 13) < a U n a] x td x = > wn ss) =] s) = -~ [ Migee Chapter 2.indd 18 4/3/2025 4:50:53 PM Chapter 2.indd 19 nO ~ If the soil is basic, organic matter like manure and composted leaves are added to it. Organic matter releases acids that neutralise the basic nature of the soil. Sometimes, the soil may be neutral, but the plants growing in it may still show poor health, which can be due to the deficiency of nutrients in the soil. Situation 3: Ashwin s friend Gurbir stays near an industrial area. He shared with him that the fish population in his neighbourhood lake was declining day by day! What do you think might be the causes for this? It may be due to factory waste being released into the lake. If the factory waste is acidic in nature, what could be done to save the fish in the lake?