can be due to the deficiency of nutrients in the soil. Situation 3: Ashwin s friend Gurbir stays near an industrial area. He shared with him that the fish population in his neighbourhood lake was declining day by day! What do you think might be the causes for this? It may be due to factory waste being released into the lake. If the factory waste is acidic in nature, what could be done to save the fish in the lake? The factory waste can be neutralised by adding basic substances before releasing into the lake. Let us wrap up! Now, can you explain why the words Welcome to the Wonderful World of Science appeared on Ashwin and Keerthi s paper sheets when the liquid was sprayed on them? Do you think that one possibility could be using a turmeric solution for the spraying liquid and a soap solution for writing on the paper? In a Nutshell (Ps Prro wicceeigg) + Substances around us may be classified as acidic, basic, and neutral in nature. * Extracts of lichen, red rose, red hibiscus, purple cabbage, turmeric, etc., can be used to indicate the nature of substances. ** Substances that show different colours in acidic and basic solutions are called acid-base indicators. + Acids turn the colour of blue litmus to red. Bases turn the colour of red litmus to blue. + Extract of red rose gives red colour in acidic solutions and green colour in basic solutions. + The yellow colour of turmeric turns red in basic solutions but remains unchanged in acidic and neutral solutions. * An acid and a base neutralise each other, forming salt and water, along with the evolution of heat. + Many day-to-day problems like a red ant bite, acidic or basic nature of soil, and industrial waste can be attempted to be managed by the process of neutralisation. ro = S o s < a i.) 2 u < o u < a 3 7) f=) <= 2. x ee 4/3/2025 4:50:53 PM Let Us Enhance Our Learning (Sp dL hel) 1. Asolution turns the red litmus paper to blue. Excess addition of which of the following solution would reverse the change? (i) Lime water (ii) Baking soda (iii) Vinegar (iv) Common salt solution 2. You are provided with three unknown solutions labelled A, B, and C, but you do not know which of these are acidic, basic, or neutral. Upon adding a few drops of red litmus solution to solution A, it turns blue. When a few drops of turmeric solution are added to solution B, it turns red. Finally, after adding a few drops of red rose extract to solution C, it turns green. Based on the observations, which of the following is the correct sequence for the nature of solutions A, B, and C? (i) Acidic, acidic, and acidic (ii) Neutral, basic, and basic (iii) Basic, basic, and acidic (iv) Basic, basic, and basic 3. Observe and analyse Figs. 2.13, 2.14, and 2.15,