ee ee ee ee ee ee eee eee een Here are some jackets of books. Discuss with your partner which of these look like jackets of science fiction books. Why do you think so? Give some reasons. Nee eee eee eee eee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee eee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee eee ee eee ee eZ Reprint 2025-26 1/7/2019 10:00:18 AM | Unit 1.indd 1 ej i) Vk) | Unit 1.indd 2 oO 3 READING COMPREHENSION virtual: carried out, accessed, or stored by means of a computer, especially over a network travel between commute: distance some one s home and place of work on a regular basis Gaye SME MS MSHS MSM EMS MS DEM Se MSM SMS MSHS HS MSH SMS 41S Me 4 Read the following passages and answer the questions that follow. THE FuTuRE Cars The story The Fun They Had takes us to the world of the future where children study in a virtual classroom. The learning is through computer software or the Internet, or by a robotic teacher. Many exciting new technologies would continue to transform the world and improve human welfare. Here are two of them. When these become reality, the then generation may ask with surprise, People were Ped ! driving the cars Self-driving Cars Self-driving cars exist today that are safer than humandriven cars in most driving conditions. Over the next 3-5 years they will get even safer and be in the mainstream. Just as cars reshaped the world in the 20th century, so will self-driving cars in the 21st century. In most cities, about 20-30% of usable space is taken up by parking spaces, and most cars are parked about 95% of the time. Self-driving cars will be in almost continuous use (most likely hailed from a smartphone app), thereby, dramatically reducing the need for parking. Cars will communicate with each other to avoid accidents and traffic jams, and riders will be able to spend commuting time on other activities like work, education and socialising. There would be more room for parks and expanded sidewalks. Autonomous vehicles would likely be electric, which would keep the air clean. WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] 29-05-2018 17:25:32 | Cars will be able to communicate with each other, which would help in eliminating traffic. Fewer human drivers would allow driverless cars to work more flawlessly and safely. There would be no street signs because driverless cars don t need them. Drones and Flying Cars Roads? Where we're going we don t need... roads? Dr Emmet Brown GPS (Global Positioning System) which started out as a military technology is now being used to hail taxis, get mapping directions, etc. Likewise, drones had started out as a military technology, but are increasingly being used for a wide range of consumer and commercial applications. For example, drones are being used to inspect critical infrastructure like bridges and power lines, to survey areas struck by natural disasters, and many other