we're going we don t need... roads? Dr Emmet Brown GPS (Global Positioning System) which started out as a military technology is now being used to hail taxis, get mapping directions, etc. Likewise, drones had started out as a military technology, but are increasingly being used for a wide range of consumer and commercial applications. For example, drones are being used to inspect critical infrastructure like bridges and power lines, to survey areas struck by natural disasters, and many other creative uses like fighting animal poaching. There are startups that use drones to deliver medical supplies to remote villages that can t be accessed by road. There is also a new wave of startups working on flying cars including two funded by the cofounder of Google, Larry Page. Flying cars use the same advanced technology used in drones but are large enough to carry people. Due to advances in materials, batteries and software, flying cars will be significantly more affordable and convenient than today s planes and helicopters. (Adapted from 11 reasons to be excited about the future of technology , by Chris Dixon, 19 Aug. 2016, Business Insider India) 1. How will the self-driving cars or driverless cars be safe? Qa S S om GAL & Unir 1 se: oe 6G ow NEMA MeMa Mea Meatata a Ma MatlaWatatatataMatiataable | Unit 1.indd 3 29-05-2018 17:25:92 | 2. What do you understand by cars will communicate with each other ? Ba [Fun fact [l Common Suffixes that make nouns -sion 3. What are the advantages of self-driving cars? depress depression impress impression -er found founder teach teacher 4. What is the use of GPS? 5. What is a drone? What are its advantages? BS [Fun fact Adjectives ending in ED Used to describe how a person feels ed 6. Which technology will be used in flying cars? Tired Confused Relaxed Satisfied Shocked 7. Howwill the flying cars be more convenient than planes ~~ and helicopters? @) Ni r) @/g, COG @ ) rs) @: WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] (TKS) SME MS MSHS MSM EMS MS DEM Se MSM SMS MSHS HS MSH SMS 41S Me 4 | Unit 1.indd 4 29-05-2018 17:25:92 | Humanoid Rosot, SopPuHIA BACK IN INDIA Not all of Bollywood superstar Shah Rukh Khan s legion of fans are human beings. One is a humanoid robot. The creation of American scientist David Hanson of Hanson Robotics of Hong Kong, Sophia, the world s first humanoid robot, enthralled the audiences on the second day of the World Congress on Information Technology (WCIT) 2018 with her witty answers to the rapid-fire queries by Rajiv Makhni, Group Managing Editor Tech, NDTV. When asked, who her favourite actor is in India, Sophia answered, Shah Rukh Khan without batting an eyelid as the audience applauded loudly. To the question about the perfect place for outing, she quickly replied: Space . And the person she would like to be in company with on an island is David (Hanson), her creator. He is also