on Information Technology (WCIT) 2018 with her witty answers to the rapid-fire queries by Rajiv Makhni, Group Managing Editor Tech, NDTV. When asked, who her favourite actor is in India, Sophia answered, Shah Rukh Khan without batting an eyelid as the audience applauded loudly. To the question about the perfect place for outing, she quickly replied: Space . And the person she would like to be in company with on an island is David (Hanson), her creator. He is also her favourite tech. person not Bill Gates or Mark Zuckerberg. On being asked if she wanted to see any change in the world, Sophia said, she would like people to develop a feeling of love for all . The humanoid robot, which uses Artificial Intelligence (AI) to understand the questions and answer them, said she wanted to use robotics to fight for the rights of women. When asked to react on her most controversial comment in the past that she wanted to kill human race, she said it was a bad joke which she had made when she was young. But I was told that humans have great sense of humour , she said. This is the second time that Sophia came to India, the first time being in Mumbai to attend a Techfest. When asked how she felt being in India, she said she had visited many places in the world, but Hong Kong continues to be her favourite place, because she was born there and has been with the Hanson Robotics family. She hopes that someday she would be in a position to express her emotional feelings. In response to the question, How much money has she invested in Bitcoin? , she Unir 1 oo eS (5 J . @ Os NEMA MeMa Mea Meatata a Ma MatlaWatatatataMatiataable | Unit 1.indd 5 29-05-2018 17:25:33 | replied, Well, I am just two-years old. It s not the legal age to open a bank account , sending the audience into peals of laughter. Speaking to media later, Hanson said he hopes that a fully grown and matured robot with body mind coordination would become a reality in another five or ten years. On his journey with Sophia in the last two years, he said it was a great progress. I have developed affinity to the robot whose facial expressions resemble that of my wife , he said. David asserts that robots would never be a thing of worry for the mankind. They will be friends. There should be mutual trust and respect between humans and robots , he says. Currently, Sophia is the only robot that interacts with people. (Source: Adapted from Humanoid Robot Sophia back in India , we Hindustan Times, e-paper updated: 21 Feb. 2018) i Fun fact 1. I before e... except when you run a feisty heist on a weird beige foreign neighbour. Who is Sophia and who is her creator? 2. Why were the audience excited on the second day of the World Congress on