friend or sibling to read aloud these excerpts. 1. Iremembered what Morrie said during our visit: The culture we have does not make people feel good about themselves. And you have to be strong enough to say if the culture doesn t work, don t buy it . Morrie, true to these words, had developed his own culture long before he got sick. Discussion groups, walks with friends, dancing to his music in the Harvard Square Church. He started a project called Greenhouse, where poor people could receive mental health services. He read books to find new ideas for his classes, visited his colleagues, kept up with old students, wrote letters to distant friends. He took more time eating and looking at nature and WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] 29-05-2018 17:25:33 | wasted no time in front of TV sitcoms or Movies of the Week . He had created a cocoon of human activities conversation, interaction, affection and it filled his life like an overflowing soup bowl. . The last class of my old professor s life took place once a week in his house, by a window in the study where he could watch a small hibiscus plant shed its pink leaves. The class met on Tuesdays. It began after breakfast. The subject was The Meaning of Life . It was taught from experience. No grades were given, but there were oral exams each week. You were expected to respond to questions, and you were expected to pose questions of your own. You were also required to perform physical tasks now and then, such as lifting the professor s head to a comfortable spot on the pillow or placing his glasses on the bridge of his nose. Kissing him goodbye earned you extra credit. No books were required, yet many topics were covered, including love, work, community, family, ageing, forgiveness and, finally, death. 1. Who is Morrie? 2. How did Morrie develop his own culture of living? 3. What was the name of the project Morrie had started? What was it about? Unir 1 Gl oS GS om ool eS o> OC os Nee Me MaMa Mata ta MaMaMataWatatiatiahatiatatatatt: | Unit 1.indd 15 29-05-2018 17:25:33 | fy @ @ Ni @ (0), : @ Sw sv ())) I vs. Me The easiest way to figure out which one is correct is to simply take away all other people in the sentence. Examples Alka, Ravi and I/me want to go to the mall. Alka, Ravi and I want to go to the mall. My mom gave Madhu, my brother and I/me candy. My mom gave Madhu, my brother and me candy. Gaye 4. What did human activities mean to Morrie? 5. Why was the subject of the class the meaning of life ? Ck] 3 SPEAKING 1. Prepare a speech for the school assembly based on the thoughts given below. Once we have computer outlets in every home, each of them hooked up to enormous libraries, where you can ask any