sorry a transformation came over my friend his face softened, the arrogance seemed to disappear and he began to cry he WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] 29-05-2018 17:25:33 | hugged me and said i am sorry too but i ve never been able to say it. (Source: Steps to English, Workbook for Class X, NCERT, 2003, p. 14) ME Active and Passive Voice For sentences in the active voice, the subject performs the action; for those in the Passive voice, the subject receives the action. Active Voice The man caught several fish. The planning committee discovered that the room wasn't available. Passive Voice Several fish were caught by the man. e It was discovered by the planning committee that the room wasn't available. 2. Rearrange each set of words to form meaningful sentences. Use appropriate punctuation marks. (a) wise, every, a, is, proverb, saying Gl (b) see, you, can, from, me, there oS GS om on eS Unir 1 s : oe 3] @ Nee Me MaMa Mata ta MaMaMataWatatiatiahatiatatatatt: | Unit 1.indd 13 29-05-2018 17:25:33 | [Fun fact [ fy @ @ ) e @ (0), : @ Sw PST4 Contradictory proverbs Do it well, or not at all. but Half a loaf is better than none. Don't cross your bridges before you come to them. but Forewarned is forearmed. Absence makes the heart grow fonder. but Out of sight, out of mind. Gaye SME MS MSHS MSM EMS MS DEM Se MSM SMS MSHS HS MSH SMS 41S Me 4 | Unit 1.indd 14 (c) happy, they, to, the, were, meet, visitor (d) impatient, do, be, not 3 LISTENING The following two excerpts have been taken from the book, Tuesdays with Morrie, written by Mitch Albom. The book is about a college Professor, Morrie and one of his students, Mitch Albom, who is also the author of the book. Mitch sees his professor in a television show and he is reminded of a promise he made sixteen years ago as his student, to keep in touch with him. He comes to know that the professor is stricken with a rare and incurable disease. Mitch travels a long distance to meet him and after the first meeting they meet every Tuesday till Morrie passes away. After reconnecting with his teacher, Mitch finds himself his teacher s pupil once again. Listen attentively to the two excerpts from the book, Tuesdays with Morrie and answer the questions that follow. You can listen to the recorded excerpts or you can ask your teacher, friend or sibling to read aloud these excerpts. 1. Iremembered what Morrie said during our visit: The culture we have does not make people feel good about themselves. And you have to be strong enough to say if the culture doesn t work, don t buy it . Morrie, true to these words, had developed his own culture long before he got sick. Discussion groups, walks with friends, dancing to his music in the Harvard Square Church. He started a