it properly. (b) Sita would have come first in class. She had not fallen ill. (c) You must not dive. You have been properly trained. (d) Medical evidence suggests that people would enjoy better health. They did not consume refined sugar. WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] 29-05-2018 17:25:33 | (e) I might have got the job. I hadn t been late for the interview. (f) You do not stop smoking. You will fall seriously ill. (g) You do not come now. I am going to leave without you. 3. Put the adverbs given at the end of the sentence at the appropriate place within the sentence. One is done for you. (a) Mr. Sharma died as the family was getting ready to go for the wedding. (suddenly) (b) My grandfather arrived to avoid the traffic rush. (early) (c) The man thanked me before he drove off. (profusely) Unir 1 Nea English words do not end in I, U, Vor J. we 8 Fun fact | Past, present and future all walk into a room. It was tense. Gl oS GS om CY) : S __< man 3K) (OTTK) Nee Me MaMa Mata ta MaMaMataWatatiatiahatiatatatatt: | Unit 1.indd 11 29-05-2018 17:25:33 | PST 4 a loaf of bread a piece of paper a Slice of pizza a bunch of grapes fy @ @ Ni Le) Ss QO ome Gaye SME MS MSHS MSM EMS MS DEM Se MSM SMS MSHS HS MSH SMS 41S Me 4 | Unit 1.indd 12 (d) The children clapped at the little girl s extraordinary performance. (admiringly) (e) The dog bit me when I was coming home from school. (hard) (f) The police had several photographs of the suspect. (fortunately) (g) Sunil left the room when he saw the bull coming in. (abruptly) 3 EpItine 1. Use capital letters, full-stops, commas and inverted commas wherever necessary in the following paragraph. Rewrite the paragraph in the space given below. The teacher gave an assignment to the students Go to people you love and tell them i am sorry. It sounded stupid to me but after one week i went to my teacher i confided i didn t have anyone to say those words to but as i began walking down home my conscience started talking. five months ago my friend and i had a vicious disagreement we avoided seeing each other we hardly spoke i convinced myself i should tell my friend i am sorry. at 5.30 in the evening I went to him and said i am sorry a transformation came over my friend his face softened, the arrogance seemed to disappear and he began to cry he WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] 29-05-2018 17:25:33 | hugged me and said i am sorry too but i ve never been able to say it. (Source: Steps to English, Workbook for Class X, NCERT, 2003, p. 14) ME Active and Passive Voice For sentences in the active voice, the subject performs the action; for those in the Passive voice, the