our real life situations, data is usually so large that to make a meaningful study it needs to be condensed as grouped data. So, we need to convert given ungrouped data into grouped data and devise some method to find its mean. Let us convert the ungrouped data of Example | into grouped data by forming class-intervals of width, say 15. Remember that, while allocating frequencies to each class-interval, students falling in any upper class-limit would be considered in the next class, e.g., 4 students who have obtained 40 marks would be considered in the classinterval 40-55 and not in 25-40. With this convention in our mind, let us form a grouped frequency distribution table (see Table 13.2). Table 13.2 Now, for each class-interval, we require a point which would serve as the representative of the whole class. Jt is assumed that the frequency of each classinterval is centred around its mid-point. So the mid-point (or class mark) of each class can be chosen to represent the observations falling in the class. Recall that we find the mid-point of a class (or its class mark) by finding the average of its upper and lower limits. That is, Upper class limit + Lower class limit Class mark = 10+ 25 17.5. Similarly, we can find the class marks of the remaining class intervals. We put them in Table 13.3. These class marks serve as our x, s. Now, in general, for the ith class interval, we have the frequency f corresponding to the class mark x,. We can now proceed to compute the mean in the same manner as in Example 1. With reference to Table 13.2, for the class 10-25, the class mark is ,1.e., Reprint 2025-26 174 MATHEMATICS Table 13.3 The sum of the values in the last column gives us X f,x,. So, the mean x of the given data is given by FX; _ 1860.0 62 Xf, 30 This new method of finding the mean is known as the Direct Method. xX = We observe that Tables 13.1 and 13.3 are using the same data and employing the same formula for the calculation of the mean but the results obtained are different. Can you think why this is so, and which one is more accurate? The difference in the two values is because of the mid-point assumption in Table 13.3, 59.3 being the exact mean, while 62 an approximate mean. Sometimes when the numerical values of x, and f, are large, finding the product of x, and f, becomes tedious and time consuming. So, for such situations, let us think of a method of reducing these calculations. We can do nothing with the fs, but we can change each x, to a smaller number so that our calculations become easy. How do we do this? What about subtracting a fixed number from each of these x, s? Let us try this method. The first step is to choose one among the x s as the assumed mean,