the town or GOVERNMENT village level Fig. 10.4 Reprint 2025-26 10 Grassroots Democracy - Part 1 03-02-2025 05:03:31 | Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy chapter10_310125.indd 156 4 DON'T MISS OUT In India, we have local governments, State governments, and Central or Union government (Fig. 10.4 on page 155). Imagine that following heavy rain for a few days, there is a flood in a part of a district. If it is not too severe, the local authorities may be able to deal with it. If it involves several towns and many villages, the State Government will step in and send rescue teams to help affected people. But if it s a massive flood affecting vast areas, the Central Government may also come to help by sending relief supplies, the army, etc. These are the three levels again. Many of our institutions have mottos inspired by the wisdom of our ancient texts. The Government of India s motto, for example, is Satyameva Jayate, which means Truth alone triumphs . The Supreme Court s motto is Yato Dharmastato Jayah, or, Where there is dharma, there is victory. The table on the facing page provides in summary a general framework of the main functions of the government s three organs at the national and State levels. Their details (including the precise role of the assemblies) will be studied in greater depth in Grade 7. (Local government is not mentioned here as we will look at it more closely in the next two chapters.) LET'S EXPLORE > Observe the table (Fig. 10.5). Highlight the functions and responsibilities that affect your life the most. > Asktwoorthreeadults abouttheir connection or interaction with the government at what levels does it take place and for what purpose? Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:03:31 | Judiciary Legislature Executive Functions and responsibilities of the Executive (the list is not exhaustive) | chapter10_310125.indd 157 ALL INDIA STATE LEVEL Supreme Court of India NATIONAL LEVEL STATE LEVEL Two houses Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha formulate national laws CENTRAL GOVERNMENT Led by the President of India (nominal head and Supreme Commander of the Indian Armed Forces), Prime Minister as the executive head Defence Foreign Affairs Atomic Energy * Communications * Currency Interstate Commerce e Education Formulation of National Policies Fig. 10.5 Reprint 2025-26 High Court One State Assembly or Vidhan Sabha (Note that most States have a single assembly; a few States have two) STATE GOVERNMENT Led by the Governor (nominal head), Chief Minister as the executive head e Police, law and order Adaptation and implementation of laws made by the Central government at the State level. Public health Education Agriculture Irrigation * Local government House: An assembly where laws are discussed or passed. Nominal: In name only. It means, in our case, that the President of India and the Governor of a State are not the actual executive heads. They do have certain powers under special circumstances, but normally do not interfere in the affairs of the Central or State government. 10