Grassroots Democracy Part 1 Governance CHAPTER rajanam dharmagoptaram dharmo rakshati rakshitah The ruler protects dharma and dharma protects those who protect it. The Mahabharata There is no peace without justice; no justice without equality; no equality without development; no democracy without respect to the identity and dignity of cultures and peoples. Rigoberta Menchu Tum What is the meaning of governance ? The Big ] 2. Why do we need a government? Questions @ 3. What is the meaning of democracy ? Why is it important? O0681CHIO Legislature Executives egiclaturce HXCCUTLVE Le es a q assembly Judiciary & | ATI T e representative oaleiary' Ly aw: xecutive tele Rater weg 1sial Judiciary parliament parliament Lok Sabha Executive contd, udiciary = governance di : ieee assembly amor] OK Sabha representative wn vd udiclary assembly eee J sp law democracy feprmcentati ment pevgovernance democracy q Sy parliament ee assem DLyiar representative law Legislature [Lok Sabha assembly gg Ex cutive" : law Legislature s0Vernance mritsse governance ery, governance Lok Sabha Reprint 2025-26 chapter10_310125.indd 149 & 03-02-2025 05:03:22 | Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy chapter10_310125.indd 150 Introduction Human beings have been living in communities for a long time. When a large number of people live together, there can be disagreements and disorder, and rules become necessary to maintain order and harmony in the society. There are probably some simple rules at home that you are expected to follow. The school where you study has rules too some for students, others for teachers. In higher classes, students appearing for examinations must follow certain rules. Drivers on the road are expected to obey traffic rules. People employed in all kinds of jobs also need to follow the rules set by their employer, while the employers must also follow rules which they have committed to their employees. What would happen if no one followed those rules? A simple answer is that society would not be able to function. LET'S EXPLORE > Describe the two pictures given in Fig. 10.1 on page 151 what differences do you see between them? > Howdo you connect this with our discussion on rules? > What are some of the rules in your school? Who made them? Who makes the rules and why? How are they made? These are some of the questions we will explore in this chapter. The process of taking decisions, organising the society s life with different sets of rules, and ensuring that they are followed, is called governance. The group of individuals or the system that makes the rules and ensures that they are followed is called a government. Some of the more important rules are called laws. This does not mean that rules and laws are set once and for all. Just as you might discuss a particular rule at home with your parents, or as a student body might ask the school or Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:03:23 | university management to change a rule, citizens also have a say in the laws and