Adaptation and implementation of laws made by the Central government at the State level. Public health Education Agriculture Irrigation * Local government House: An assembly where laws are discussed or passed. Nominal: In name only. It means, in our case, that the President of India and the Governor of a State are not the actual executive heads. They do have certain powers under special circumstances, but normally do not interfere in the affairs of the Central or State government. 10 Grassroots Democracy - Part 1 03-02-2025 05:03:31 | Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam Born in a humble family in Rameswaram, Tamil Nadu, in 1931, Dr. A.PJ. Abdul Kalam was a renowned scientist, nicknamed the Missile Man of India for his crucial role in the development of India s space programme, missile programme and nuclear capabilities. Dr. Abdul Kalam served as the 11 President of India from 2002 to 2007. Despite his high status, he remained deeply connected to the people, and the youth in particular, through his passion for good education and innovation. He inspired millions with his humility, dedication to social causes and commitment to the nation. He tirelessly encouraged young Indians to dream big and work hard to achieve their goals. Dr. Kalam showed that even though his position as the President of India was nominal, he could play an important role, impacting countless lives. Let us meditate on a few of his inspiring thoughts: "To succeed in your mission, you must have single-minded devotion to your goal. Look at the sky. We are not alone. The whole universe is friendly to us an conspires only to give the best to those who dream and work. Dream is not that which If you fail, never give up because chapter10_310125.indd 158 F.A.I.L. means First Attempt In Learning . End is not the end, in fact E.N.D. means Effort Never Dies . If you get no as an answer, remember N.O. means Next Opportunity . So let's be positive. you see while sleeping; it is something that does not let you sleep. Sl Tf four things are followed having a great aim, acquiring Reprint 2025-26 and perseverance se ; anything can be achieved. 03-02-2025 05:03:31 | Democracy You may have noticed that we earlier mentioned representatives of the people . This is one of the foundation stones ofthesystem of governance adopted by most countries of the world democracy. The word democracy comes from two Greek words d mos meaning people , and kratos meaning rule or power ; so democracy literally means the rule of the people . But can all people actually rule? It is clearly not possible. Imagine there is a problem that your class wants to bring to the attention of your school s principal maybe there is something wrong with the classroom, or with the school s infrastructure, or perhaps you would like to propose a certain date for a field trip. Will the entire class go to the | principal? It would clearly not be practical.