means the rule of the people . But can all people actually rule? It is clearly not possible. Imagine there is a problem that your class wants to bring to the attention of your school s principal maybe there is something wrong with the classroom, or with the school s infrastructure, or perhaps you would like to propose a certain date for a field trip. Will the entire class go to the | principal? It would clearly not be practical. In many schools, classes have a class monitor or class representative , whom the whole class elected; even if there is none, one representative can be selected for this specific purpose. It & will be enough to send the representative to the principal. It is the same principle at the State or national levels through elections, people vote for representatives, who will be the elected members of their respective assemblies. They are generally called Members of Legislative Assembly (or MLAs) at the State level, and Member of Parliament (or MPs) at the national level. All these members discuss laws, problems and solutions in the assemblies, and, through dialogue and debate, try to convince each other whenever there are different opinions. Like any modern democracy, therefore, India is arepresentative democracy. It is also the world s 10 Grassroots Democracy - Part 1 Reprint 2025-26 chapter10_310125.indd 159 & 03-02-2025 05:09:22 | Exploring Society: India and Beyond Governance and Democracy 3 | chapter10_310125.indd 160 largest democracy, with some 970 million voters in 2024! In principle, all Indian citizens above the age of 18 have the right to participate in these elections. Imagine that your class is planning to go for a picnic. There are two possible places, A and B. The class discusses the pros and cons distance, time, cost, availability of basic facilities, etc. It becomes difficult to arrive at a decision. So your teacher decides that voting can solve the problem. The number of students in favour of place A raise their hands, then the number of students in favour of place B raise theirs. The decision is taken by whichever option gets a larger number of raised hands. (This process is called voting.) This is a case of direct democracy where every student s opinion was taken to finalise the place. The term grassroots democracy refers to a system that enables and encourages the participation of ordinary citizens the base of the pyramid we saw in Fig. 10.4 on page 155. In such a system, the citizens can have a say in decisions which affect them. We will study more features of Indian democracy in the next two chapters and also in later grades. Before we move on... > Nocountry can run without governance and government. > Amodern government has three organs legislative, executive and judiciary which need to work together. > The Indian government functions at three levels Centre or national, State and local. > Democracy is the overall framework for this system. It functions through elected representatives, both