spirituality fuse together in these kshetras. Rivers and sangams (confluence of rivers) Rivers have been worshipped in India since Vedic times. The nadistuti sukta of the Rigveda is a hymn (sukta) in praise of (stuti) rivers (nadi) that invokes 19 major rivers of ancient northwest India. Even today, many rituals involving water invoke the presence of some of the most important rivers of India: gange cha yamune chaiva godavari sarasvati narmade sindhu kavertjalesmin sannidhim kuru Ganga, Yamuna, Godavari, Sarasvati, Narmada, Sindhu, and Kaveri, may you manifest in this water. Those rivers have been lifelines for the Indian civilisation. Their sources, tributaries and the places they flow through are often regarded as sacred too, and are visited by many pilgrims. In local languages, these rivers are referred to with respect for instance, Ganga ji or Yamuna ji . Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions 8 - How the Land Becomes Sacred 08-04-2025 12:53:26 DON'T MISS OUT Prayagraj hosts the Kumbh Mela every six years. Prayag is located at the confluence of three rivers Ganga, Yamuna and the invisible Sarasvati. A few years ago, UNESCO listed the Kumbh Mela as an intangible heritage of the world . An estimated 660 million people participated in the Kumbh Mela of 2025. What proportion of the population of India is this? Kumbh Mela The Kumbh Mela originates in the legend of amrita manthana. The devas and asuras (i.e., more or less, gods and demons), traditional enemies, for once joined forces in churning the cosmic ocean to extract amrita, the divine nectar that would give them immortality. To prevent the asuras from getting the amrita, Vishnu, in the form of Mohini, a beautiful lady, snatched the pitcher or kumbha which contained the amrita. In the process, a few drops fell over four places Haridwar, Prayagraj, Nashik, and Ujjain. These are the places where the Kumbh Mela has been held, and a dip in the rivers there during a prescribed period is considered most auspicious. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 ae ce N Chapter 8.indd 176 08-04-2025 12:53:27 Y THINK ABOUT IT Chapter 8.indd 177 How do you think these sacredplacesareconnected with the people s economic lives and activities? Draw a mind map to trace these connections. (Hint: The pictures above can provide some clues.) Mountains and Forests All over the world, mountains are often associated with legends, deities or heroes. Also mountains are seen as a symbolic gateway from earth to heaven because of their height. That is why many tirthas and temples in India are located on hilltops, as the physical journey to these peaks is seen as a symbolic journey to reach the divine. People would undertake arduous walks through mountain trails to those sites and shrines, which tested not only their physical abilities but also their mental strength. Today, such places are often accessible through roads and other modes of transport. a Fig. 8.9 Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions 8 - How the Land Becomes Sacred 08-04-2025