ona pilgrimage, three months long, up to Rameswaram, among other places. They came from two different villages north of Lucknow. They had various bundles of things and some earthen pots with them... They had taken all the necessities for their food atta, ghee, sugar with them ... I asked them, You are going to Delhi now? Yes! , they replied. You will stop in Delhi? No, we only have to change trains there. We re going to Haridwar! ... We don t have time ... We have to go to Haridwar. And then we have to get back home. 08-04-2025 12:53:23 Chapter 8.indd 171 LET'S EXPLORE > Read the excerpt. What are your observations? Locate the route the group must have taken from Rameswaram to Haridwar. Why do you think the group was going straight to Haridwar instead of stopping at Delhi? > In ancient times, when people were travelling from Madurai in Tamil Nadu to Varanasi in Uttar Pradesh, what languages would they come across? How would they communicate with people in those places? Where would they stay? What food would they eat? In the Jain tradition, the tirthas are associated with places where the Tirthankaras attained liberation or where significant events of their lives occurred. Trees, ponds, hills and mountains that the Tirthankaras visited or meditated at are also considered sacred. Examples of such places include Mount Abu, Girnar and the Shatrufijaya hill in Saurashtra (Gujarat). Another example is the pilgrimage to Sabarimala temple (Kerala), dedicated to the deity Ayyappa, which draws over ten million devotees every year. This hilltop shrine was traditionally reached by an immensely difficult trek through hills and forests. Such a challenging approach, common to many hilltop or mountain shrines all over the country, symbolises the difficulties of the inner path, with natural landmarks along the route being considered sacred. Fig. 8.4. Pandharpur wari, an 800-year-old tradition in Maharashtra. Wari means a pilgrimage that is held regularly, in this case annually. Pilgrims walk in large groups for 21 days to the famous Vithoba temple in Pandharpur. Tirthankara: Literally, someone who.makes a tirtha, that is, who guides the crossing from ordinary to higher life. In Jainism, the Tirthankaras are the supreme preachers of dharma. Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions 8 - How the Land Becomes Sacred 08-04-2025 12:53:24 @ Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 8.indd 172 More sacred sites Hindu and many folk and tribal belief systems go further. In Grade 6 we learnt that in such belief systems, people regard elements of Nature, such as mountains, rivers, trees, plants and animals, and sometimes stones too, as sacred. In Hinduism, for instance, this includes countless geographical sites or features of Nature, such as specific mountains, rivers and forests, which are regarded as particularly divine and are worshipped as deities; many rivers are regarded Mf as devis, while some species of trees, Fig. 8.5. In this image, animals and plants are particularly holy. Ae. i the form of 5