hunting, tree felling or mining. They saw those forests as the abodes of deities for example, Ryngkew or Basa in Meghalaya. Such special forests are called sacred groves in English (see the table below for a few names in regional languages) and, thanks to their sacred status, have come to shelter great biodiversity of flora and fauna. Many sacred groves are also home to small water bodies and thus help in water conservation. There were many thousands of sacred groves in India. Sadly, these numbers have been shrinking as people have started encroaching on them for various purposes, from agriculture to industry. Still, sacred groves continue to be protected in many regions of India. Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions 8 - How the Land Becomes Sacred Chapter 8.indd 179 08-04-2025 12:53:31 SS itt Fig. 8.13. Kalkai temple, Mulshi, Maharashtra Fig. 8.14. Mawphlong, Shillong Fig. 8.15. From the sacred Fig. 8.16. Udaiyankudukadu groves of the Bhils Karumbayiramkondan, Tamil Nadu Given below are the names of a few sacred groves in a few regional languages of India. Can you add to this? | | Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 2 | Chapter 8.indd 180 08-04-2025 12:53:33 Chapter 8.indd 181 In Tamil Nadu, local chronicles highlight the relationship between the deity of a sacred grove, Nature and humans. One such chronicle in the Thanjavur District states that the groves deities protect fruit bats, which are regarded as sacred spotting one of them is considered auspicious. Besides, bats play a critical role in the pollination of flowers and in the dispersal of seeds. Sacred groves thus evolve a harmonious relationship between the deity, the ecosystem, and humans. From pilgrimage to trade Pilgrims encounter traders and merchants along their journey. This interaction benefits both groups. Pilgrims need various items, which traders can provide. As a result, the pilgrimage routes and the trade routes often overlap. Some traders might also double as pilgrims, taking their wares to distant towns and cities while visiting sacred sites and shrines. Fig. 8.17 What routes did those traders use in ancient India? Revisit the map of trade routes (Fig. 5.5) in the chapter The Rise of Empires . Uttarapatha was a major trade route connecting the northwestern and eastern parts of the Subcontinent; the Dakshinapatha went from Kaushambi through Ujjayini (Ujjain) to Pratishthana (Paithan). As you know, some of the goods traded along these routes included precious stones like shells and pearls, coins, gold and diamonds, as well as cotton, spices, and sandalwood. LET'S EXPLORE Take a sheet of transparent paper that can be used for tracing. Trace a map of the trade routes from the chapter The Rise of Empires . Place it on top of the map of the important tirthas. What do you observe? Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions 8 - How the Land Becomes Sacred 08-04-2025 12:53:34 Sacred Geography beyond India The concept and practice of sacred geography are not unique to India. Ancient Greece had many sacred landmarks,