Sati immolated herself. Shiva was so livid that he took her body and refused to allow the last rites. Shiva s anger was dangerous for the world and the cosmos. So Vishnu used his chakra to cut up Sati s body. The Shakti pithas are the places across the Subcontinent where the body parts of the divine mother fell one by one. The symbol behind the story is clear: the whole land becomes the body of the divine mother. LET'S EXPLORE Note the locations of the char dham. What do you think it implied for the people when they travelled north-south and east-west? While visiting the major sacred places connected to their respective faiths, pilgrims would naturally cover the geography of India. They would come across diverse languages, customs, clothing and foods along the way, but would notice the commonalities too. The 12 jyotirlingas are sacred shrines dedicated to Shiva, a major deity of Hinduism. Each shrine has its own These networks crisscross India s length and _ynique mythology Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions 8 - How the Land Becomes Sacred 08-04-2025 12:53:25 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 @ Chapter 8.indd 174 40 N 30 N 20 N 10 N LEGEND Hl ee Z z . g 70 E 80 E 90 E Fig. 8.6. A map showing a few networks of traditional tirthas. LET'S EXPLORE Can you identify the names of a few traditional tirthas given in the map above? You can refer to the political map at the end of the book for help. NoOv NoOE NoOZ NoOT 08-04-2025 12:53:26 Chapter 8.indd 175 Why did people travel such long distances? Apart from religious motivations, some, like merchants and traders, travelled to exchange goods; others travelled to discuss, debate and popularise their beliefs or to learn and study from eminent teachers in different parts of the country. However, though they were travelling for different purposes, their routes often converged. Discussions and debates, sharing of goods, experiences, and tales, enriched everyone. New ideas emerged, and old ones were adapted. This complex process became a major factor in the cultural integration of the Indian Subcontinent. Sacred Ecology Tirthas are usually located on the banks of a river or a lake, ina forest or on a mountain. As we saw above, the natural landscape itself is thus seen or perceived as sacred space, or punyakshetra. This perception has helped us to protect and preserve Nature, since we are not distinct from her. So geography, culture and spirituality fuse together in these kshetras. Rivers and sangams (confluence of rivers) Rivers have been worshipped in India since Vedic times. The nadistuti sukta of the Rigveda is a hymn (sukta) in praise of (stuti) rivers (nadi) that invokes 19 major rivers of ancient northwest India. Even today, many rituals involving water invoke the presence of some of the most important rivers of India: gange cha yamune chaiva godavari sarasvati narmade sindhu kavertjalesmin sannidhim kuru Ganga, Yamuna, Godavari, Sarasvati, Narmada,