and temples in India are located on hilltops, as the physical journey to these peaks is seen as a symbolic journey to reach the divine. People would undertake arduous walks through mountain trails to those sites and shrines, which tested not only their physical abilities but also their mental strength. Today, such places are often accessible through roads and other modes of transport. a Fig. 8.9 Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions 8 - How the Land Becomes Sacred 08-04-2025 12:53:29 Trees, Forests and Sacred Groves In many parts of India, trees are adorned with offerings like turmeric and kumkum. One species of fig tree commonly called peepul (or pipal ), bo tree or bodhi tree (ashvattha in Sanskrit) is sacred to Hinduism, Buddhism, Sikhism and Jainism. In fact, its botanical name is Ficus religiosa (literally, in Latin, the religious or sacred fig tree). wee tq _ Fig. 8.10. The tree in the Mahabodhi Temple at Bodh Gaya is often cited as a direct descendant of the original tree under which, according to Buddhist tradition, the Buddha attained enlightenment hence the names bodhi tree and Bodh Gaya . ~ + tee In Grade 6 we read about the two epics of India, the Mahabharata and Ramayana. These texts have vivid descriptions of pilgrimages | undertaken and places visited, and of sacred rivers, forests and mountains. In almost every region of India, numerous rural and tribal traditions claim that the heroes of these texts passed through their locality, with shrines often marking such passages. Such legends allowed a wide diversity of communities to make the two epics their own. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 8.indd 178 08-04-2025 12:53:30 Fig. 8.11. A shrine in Bastar, Chhattisgarh, celebrating Rama s passing through the area 1 se Be ee rie Fig. 8.12. A seal from Lo ial gnet tara Mohenjo-daro ie am Observe this seal from Mohenjo-daro. Can you recognise the leaves at the top? As you can see, the peepul tree has been an important part of India s cultural geography for millennia. v THINK ABOUT IT | Many parts of the peepul tree have medical uses: the leaves are used to treat some skin ailments while the bark is useful for stomach ailments. Since it stays green almost through the year, it provides food and shelter to many types of birds and other animals. Over time, many rural and tribal communities across India decided to protect and preserve some natural forests from harmful activities such as hunting, tree felling or mining. They saw those forests as the abodes of deities for example, Ryngkew or Basa in Meghalaya. Such special forests are called sacred groves in English (see the table below for a few names in regional languages) and, thanks to their sacred status, have come to shelter great biodiversity of flora and fauna. Many sacred groves are also home to small water bodies and thus help in water conservation. There were many thousands of sacred groves