EXPLORE Take a sheet of transparent paper that can be used for tracing. Trace a map of the trade routes from the chapter The Rise of Empires . Place it on top of the map of the important tirthas. What do you observe? Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions 8 - How the Land Becomes Sacred 08-04-2025 12:53:34 Sacred Geography beyond India The concept and practice of sacred geography are not unique to India. Ancient Greece had many sacred landmarks, from mountains to sacred groves. The Native Americans used to have a special bond with Nature, which they viewed as sacred. The Maoris, the indigenous people of New Zealand, regard the Taranaki Maunga mountain as their ancestor and therefore as sacred; after many representations by the Maoris, a law recently granted this mountain the rights and responsibilities of a human being an acknowledgement of the Maori worldview. The elders of the community represent the voice of the mountain or river threatened with destruction. This ensures that the sacred places are not exploited and degenerated. Restoring and conserving the sacred Vv THINK ABOUT IT Fig. 8.18 Look carefully at these pictures of places and animals that are , considered sacred. The Yamuna in the north, the Mahanadiin the east or the Kaveri in the south are all sacred rivers. How come they have become so polluted? Are there sacred places in your locality or region that have been similarly polluted or degraded by human activity? Whose responsibility is it to preserve the sanctity of our sacred places? Discuss in class. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 8.indd 182 08-04-2025 12:53:36 Chapter 8.indd 183 A harmonious relationship that once existed between people and the sacred geography sustained Indian civilisation over millennia, creating values that were shared all over the Subcontinent. But today it is under great strain. Sacred geography continues to be relevant today. When there is a conflict in our relationship with Nature, when a river is overexploited to the point of disappearance, or a sacred mountain is challenged with competing ideas of development, people have spoken up to protect their environment, their deities and values. At a time when sustainability has become a global issue, a worldview that embeds sacred geography has a significant contribution to make. Before we move on... > All religions in India have their sacred places dotted over the landscape. In Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism, such places are usually associated with some of the great figures in these belief systems. > Hinduism has dense networks of pilgrimage sites, covering the entire geography of India. The practice of pilgrimage is interwoven with the lives of people, as it serves the individual development and spiritual growth, but also the socio-economic purposes of trade expansion and pan-Indian cultural integration. > In many Hindu, tribal and folk traditions, the very land is perceived as sacred. > Our sacred places are being polluted owing to widespread neglect and a lack of concern. It is our duty