or centres of spiritual authority for example, the Takht Sri Patna Sahib (in Patna), the Akal Takht (part of the Golden Temple at Amritsar, see Fig. 8.3), and Takht Sri Keshgarh Sahib (at Anandpur). Sikhs aspire to undertake pilgrimages to these Fig. 8.3 places at least once in their lifetimes, as they are associated with important Sikh Gurus and therefore have special significance. In addition, Sikh tradition records pilgrimages conducted by several Gurus, such as Guru Nanak, to places like Haridwar, Prayag, Mathura, Varanasi, Ayodhya, Puri and many more, besides a few Muslim shrines. Pilgrimage: A journey to asacred place that is significant within a religion or belief system. Shrine: A place regarded as holy because of its associations with the divine, a sacred relic, or a Spiritual figure. Relic: A part of a Saint s or other spiritual figure s body or sometimes to one of their belongings kept as an object of reverence. Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions 8 - How the Land Becomes Sacred 08-04-2025 12:53:23 Tirtha: Literally, a place where one can cross a river or other body of water. Symbolically, it becomes a place where one can cross from the ordinary worldly life to a higher, spiritual life. Such places are held in high reverence and regarded as sacred. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 8.indd 170 India has, for ages past, been a country of pilgrimages. All over the country, you find these ancient places, from Badrinath, Kedarnath and Amarnath, high up in the snowy Himalayas down to Kanyakumari in the south. What has drawn our people from the south to the north and from the north to the south in these great pilgrimages? It is the feeling of one country and one culture. Jawaharlal Nehru, 1961 Pilgrimages Many Indians undertake tirthaydatras or pilgrimages to various sacred sites (tirthas) during their lifetime. This ancient and continuous tradition of pilgrimage is not just a physical journey but also an inner journey that requires a specified code of conduct. For at least 3,000 years, and with no modern means of transportation available, Indians have been crisscrossing the Subcontinent, resulting in its entire geography being considered sacred. We will return to this soon. Here s an excerpt from the writings of Dharampal, a historian and thinker: I was travelling from Gwalior to Delhi... when I met a group of people ... about twelve of them, some three or four women and seven or eight men... They said that they had been ona pilgrimage, three months long, up to Rameswaram, among other places. They came from two different villages north of Lucknow. They had various bundles of things and some earthen pots with them... They had taken all the necessities for their food atta, ghee, sugar with them ... I asked them, You are going to Delhi now? Yes! , they replied. You will stop in Delhi? No, we only have to change trains there. We re going to Haridwar! ... We