Hinduism has dense networks of pilgrimage sites, covering the entire geography of India. The practice of pilgrimage is interwoven with the lives of people, as it serves the individual development and spiritual growth, but also the socio-economic purposes of trade expansion and pan-Indian cultural integration. > In many Hindu, tribal and folk traditions, the very land is perceived as sacred. > Our sacred places are being polluted owing to widespread neglect and a lack of concern. It is our duty to protect our national heritage, as our Constitution also reminds us. Questions and activities 1. Read the following statement by a well-known environmental thinker, David Suzuki: The way we see the world shapes the way we treat it. If a mountain is a deity, not a pile of ore; if a river is one of the veins of the land, not potential irrigation water; if a forest Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions 8 - How the Land Becomes Sacred 08-04-2025 12:53:37 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 | Chapter 8.indd 184 is a sacred grove, not timber; if other species are biological kin, not resources; or if the planet is our mother, not an opportunity then we will treat each other with greater respect. Thus is the challenge, to look at the world from a different perspective. Discuss in small groups. What do you think this statement means? What implication does it have for our actions with respect to the air, water, land, trees and mountains around us? List the sacred sites in your region. Enquire into why they are considered sacred. Are there stories connected with these sacred places? Write a short essay of 150 words. (Hint: You could speak to elders in your family and community, discuss with your teacher, read books and articles, etc., to gather relevant information.) Why do you think natural elements like rivers, mountains and forests are considered sacred for the people? How do they contribute to our lives? Why do people visit a tirtha or other sacred sites? How did the ancient pilgrimage routes help in fostering trade during those times? Do you think the sacred sites help in developing the economy of the region? How do sacred places influence the culture and traditions of the people living near them? From the various sacred sites of India, select two of your choice and create a project explaining their significance. What is the two-fold significance of a tirthayatra or a pilgrimage? 08-04-2025 12:53:37