systems, people regard elements of Nature, such as mountains, rivers, trees, plants and animals, and sometimes stones too, as sacred. In Hinduism, for instance, this includes countless geographical sites or features of Nature, such as specific mountains, rivers and forests, which are regarded as particularly divine and are worshipped as deities; many rivers are regarded Mf as devis, while some species of trees, Fig. 8.5. In this image, animals and plants are particularly holy. Ae. i the form of 5 This tradition comes from the perception a demon and saves wo Bhidevi (Mother Earth), of a divine presence in all of Nature. snown here sitting on his Ultimately, the whole of planet Earth is elbow (from the Belur considered sacred she is Mother Earth ="? / , Karnataka) or Bhtdevi. Here are a few more examples of such traditions: = The Niyam Dongar hill in the Niyamgiri Range of Jharkhand is sacred to the Dongria Khond tribe. They believe that the hill is the abode of Niyam Raja, the supreme deity who provides everything they need for sustenance. Cutting trees here is prohibited and considered a sign of disrespect to the deity. = In the early 2000s, the Government of Sikkim identified several sacred mountains, caves, lakes, rocks and hot springs that were to be protected against all forms of damage. = Inthe Nilgiris of Tamil Nadu, the Todas, a tribal community, regard many mountain peaks as sacred and associate them with their gods. To them, this sense of sacredness extends to many plants (which often become part of their rituals), Shola forests, wetlands, and even specific stones and individual trees. 08-04-2025 12:53:24 Chapter 8.indd 173 Becoming Aware of Sacred Geography Some sacred places are marked on the map (Fig. 8.6) given on the next page. Though spread all over India, they are also interconnected. For example, some Hindus aspire to do the char dham yatra, and those four sites appear to have been deliberately located in the southern, northern, eastern and western corners of India! A similar aspiration exists with respect to the 12 jyotirlingas, which are considered highly auspicious. The 51 Shakti pithas, too, cover the entire map of India (even parts of present-day Bangladesh and Pakistan). And there are many more regional networks. breadth, creating a sacred geography. As a result, and name. the land itself becomes sacred. There is a story about the 51 Shakti pithas. Shakti, the divine mother in the form of Sati, and her consort, Shiva, were insulted by her father. An angry Sati immolated herself. Shiva was so livid that he took her body and refused to allow the last rites. Shiva s anger was dangerous for the world and the cosmos. So Vishnu used his chakra to cut up Sati s body. The Shakti pithas are the places across the Subcontinent where the body parts of the divine mother fell one by one. The symbol behind the story is clear: the whole land becomes the body of the divine mother. LET'S