Chapter 8:indd 1167 How the Land Becomes Sacred Ether, air, fire, water, earth, planets, all creatures, directions, trees and plants, rivers and seas, are organs of the supreme Lord s body. Bhagavata Purana - oe e in < on wer? + inh r fe . be ? 5 , re > Oh MRD aw a = =S S 0781CHO8 8704-2025 12539 LET S EXPLORE Do any of the pictures look familiar to you? Can you name similar places found in your neighbourhood? What is Sacredness ? Sacredness can have many meanings. In the limited context of this chapter, sacredness is finding something of deep religious or spiritual significance, worthy of respect and reverence, holy or divine. But what is this something ? It can be a special location or shrine that evokes such deep feelings, high thoughts or emotions. It can also be, as we will see in this chapter, a journey of a special kind (often called a pilgrimage ), the route the journey takes, or even the very land covered. Sacredness, therefore, is not just connected with religion and spirituality, but also with geography, all sorts of traditions, and, in the case of India, with something more that we will discover soon. Let us focus on sacred places first. You will find that almost every school of thought and religion in India has its own sacred places. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 8.indd 168 08-04-2025 12:53:22 Chapter 8.indd 169 The places in these pictures are revered by followers of Islam, Christianity, Judaism and Zoroastrianism religions that originated outside India. People visit or congregate in these places for prayer and worship. Followers from other faiths also visit them, as can be seen at the Dargah Sharif of Ajmer (Rajasthan) or the Velankanni Church in Tamil Nadu. People go on pilgrimages to these shrines on special occasions. Naturally, when we turn to religions that originated in India, we find that they have many more sacred sites. In the case of Buddhism, those are often places that were visited by the Buddha or where his relics are kept. Among them is the Great Stipa at Sanchi (Madhya Pradesh), which is a relic stipa (you saw this in the chapter on The Rise of Empires ), and the Mahabodhi Sttpa in Bodh Gaya (Bihar), where, according to Buddhist tradition, the Buddha attained enlightenment. They are important sites for pilgrims; Bodh Gaya, for instance, receives more than four million visitors every year. In Sikhism, takhts are seats or centres of spiritual authority for example, the Takht Sri Patna Sahib (in Patna), the Akal Takht (part of the Golden Temple at Amritsar, see Fig. 8.3), and Takht Sri Keshgarh Sahib (at Anandpur). Sikhs aspire to undertake pilgrimages to these Fig. 8.3 places at least once in their lifetimes, as they are associated with important Sikh Gurus and therefore have special significance. In addition, Sikh tradition records pilgrimages conducted by several Gurus, such as Guru Nanak, to places like