an upright position, and a small toy or some other object. e Place the two mirrors side by side in an upright position on a table. Keep the object in front of them at a small distance (3-4 cm away) as shown in Fig. 10.5a. What kind of 3 images do you see in each mirror? @ } (b) Are the images of the same size as Fig. 10.5: An object placed in front of concave and the object? Are they erect? Do you convex mirrors at (a) Small distance; (b) Large distance see lateral inversion in the images? Write down your observations in your notebook. e Now slowly move the object away from the mirrors. What changes do you see in the images in both the mirrors? Do the images become smaller or larger? Do they continue to be erect? Again, note down your observations. e Repeat the steps with each mirror individually. e Analyse your observations and draw conclusions. Convex mirror ~ Concave mirror 6/28/2025 6:01:07 PM In the concave mirror, when the object is placed close to the mirror, the image is erect but larger than the object in size, that is, enlarged. However, when the object is moved farther away, the image becomes inverted. Initially, the image is enlarged in size and then keeps getting smaller. In case of a convex mirror, the image is always erect and smaller than the object, that is diminished. However, the size of the image decreases slightly as the object is moved away from the convex mirror. This activity shows that spherical mirrors (concave and convex) behave differently from plane mirrors. A plane mirror always forms an erect image of the same size as the object. However, in the concave and convex mirrors, the size of the image changes as the distance of the object from the mirror changes. In addition, in the case of a concave mirror, the image also gets inverted when the object is taken away from the mirror. Lateral inversion of the image is seen in all three types of mirrors. I just got an idea. We can also identify whether a mirror is plane, or concave, or convex by looking at the images of an object formed in them! Yes. But where do we find concave and convex mirrors being used in our surroundings? The reflectors of torches, headlights of cars and scooters are concave in shape (Fig. 10.6a). Have you ever noticed a dental mirror used by a dentist for inspecting teeth? It is a concave (a) (b) mirror which provides an enlarged view of teeth Fig. 10.6: Use of concave mirror (a)Asa_ when held close to the teeth inside the mouth reflector of a torch; (b) By a dentist (Fig. 10.6b). A step further Do you remember learning about the use of telescope in the chapter Beyond Earth in Curiosity, Grade 6? Most modern telescopes are reflecting telescope that use curved mirrors, with the main mirror being a large concave mirror. Look at