representation lens placed at small distance; (b) Convex lens placed at large distance; (c) Concave lens 6/28/2025 6:02:26 PM | Activity 10.10: Let us investigate e Collect a thin transparent glass plate, a convex lens, a concave lens, a torch and a comb to obtain multiple parallel beams of light, a paper clip to hold the comb upright, two identical books, and sheets of white paper. e Using two books placed adjacent to each other, fix the glass plate or lens upright in between them as shown in Fig. 10.18. Spread paper sheets on both books. e Now let the multiple parallel beams of light fall upon the thin glass plate, convex lens, and concave lens one by one as shown in Fig. 10.18. Does the parallel beam of light pass through as it is in all three cases? e Record and analyse your observations. The light beam passes through the thin glass plate as it is. The convex lens converges the light falling on it while the concave lens diverges the light. A convex lens is also called a converging lens while a concave lens is called a diverging lens. Thin transparent glass plate Convex lens Concave lens (a) (b) (c) Fig. 10.18: Multiple parallel beams of light fall upon the (a) Thin glass plate; (b) Convex lens; (c) Concave lens A step further If we draw what we observed in Activity 10.10, we get the figures like those shown below. Since convex lens converges a light beam, can it also burn a paper? uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade ) __ ___} Chapter 10.indd 164 6/28/2025 6:02:47 PM $< ___{hapte 10 Light: Mirrors and Lenses) 165 | Activity 10.11: Let us investigate Do not lookat the Sun directly or through the lens as it may damage your eyes. e Repeat Activity 10.7 by putting a convex lens in the path of sunrays in place of a concave mirror. Could you burn the paper? Where all are the lenses used? Lenses are important and are used everywhere around us. The eyeglasses that people wear to help them see clearly are lenses! Cameras, telescopes, and microscopes all use lenses to work. Even our eye has a convex lens inside it. It is quite an amazing lens that can change its shape, which is what allows us to read a book or see (a) (b) something far away. Fig. 10.20: (a) Eyeglasses; (b) Smartphone camera lenses Fig. 10.19: Converging sunlight on paper using a convex lens Snapshots Image formed by aconcave mirror can be enlarged, diminished or of the same size as the object, and it may be erect or inverted, depending upon the distance of the object from the mirror. Image formed by a convex mirror is always erect and diminished in size. Two laws of reflection are: o The angle of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection. o The incident ray, the normal to the mirror at the point of incidence, and the reflected ray, all lie