Science for Grade } >_<} Chapter 10.indd 158 6/28/2025 6:01:27 PM $< {crate 10 Light: Mirrors and Lenses) 159 | Activity 10.5: Let us experiment e Use the same setup as in Activity 10.4, but place a stiff sheet of chart paper flat on a table such that part of it extends beyond the edge of the table. e Shine a beam of light on the mirror placed on the sheet and observe the reflected beam on the extended portion (Fig. 10.10a). e Now, bend the extended part of the sheet along the edge of the table. Do you still see the reflected beam on the extended = portion? : e Flatten the paper again and observe. The reflected beam disappears when the sheet is bent but reappears when it is flattened again. This shows that the reflected beam lies in the same plane as that of the incident beam. Bending the sheet creates a new plane, breaking this alignment. A) The incident ray, the normal to the (b) mirror at the point of incidence, and the Fig. 10,10: (a) Reflected beam visible along the reflected ray, all lie in the same plane. extended portion of paper; (b) Reflected beam not This is another law of reflection. visible along the bent portion of paper A step further In the two cases, even though the directions of incident rays are different, they fall at the same point on the mirror, and thus, the directions of normal are the same. However, the direction of the reflected ray is such that the incident ray, the normal at the point of incidence, and the reflected ray all lie in the same plane in both cases. Y le Incident ray Incident ray x -- Normal x Reflected ray SS. Normal Reflected ray Mirror Mirror U Chapter 10.indd 159 6/28/2025 6:01:37 PM Are laws of reflection applicable to spherical mirrors also? The laws of reflection are valid for all kinds of mirrors plane and spherical. But if multiple parallel rays fall on the spherical mirrors, we observe something interesting. Activity 10.6: Let us explore e Collect a plane mirror, a concave mirror, a convex mirror, stand for mirrors, a torch, a comb, and a (a) paper clip to hold the comb upright. e Use the same setup as Activity 10.4 again, but instead of a single slit, leave many openings of the comb uncovered to obtain multiple parallel beams of light (Fig. 10.114). e Let the multiple parallel beams of light fall upon the plane mirror, concave mirror, and convex mirror, one by one. Observe the reflected beams. Is your maeeve a observation similar to what is shown in Fig. 10.11 : (b), (c), and (d)? When multiple parallel beams of light fallupona plane mirror, the multiple reflected beams are also parallel (Fig. 10.11b). However, when multiple beams of light fall upon a concave mirror, the multiple reflected beams get closer, that is, they converge (Fig. 10.11c). Whereas, in the case of a convex mirror, the