at the same distance. Match each image with the correct @ (i) (it) type of lens or glass. Fig. 10.24 ae (i) Flat transparent glass piece (ii) Convex lens (iii) Concave lens 5. When the light is incident along the normal on the mirror, which of the following statements is true: (i) Angle of incidence is 90 (ii) Angle of incidence is 0 (iii) Angle of reflection is 90 (iv) No reflection of light takes place in this case = 6. Three mirrors plane, concave and convex are _ placed in Fig. 10.25. On the basis of the images of the graph sheet formed in the mirrors, identify the Fig. 10.25 mirrors and write their names above the mirrors. 7. In a museum, a woman walks towards a large convex mirror (Fig. 10.26). She will see that: (i) her erect image keeps decreasing in size. (ii) her inverted image keeps decreasing in size. (iii) her inverted image keeps increasing in size and eventually it becomes erect and magnified. (iv) her erect image keeps increasing in size. 8. Hold a magnifying glass over text and identify the distance where you can see the text bigger Fig. 10.26 than they are written. Now move it away from the text. What do you notice? Which type of lens is a magnifying glass? Chapter 10.indd 167 6/28/2025 6:03:28 PM | Chapter 10.indd 168 (b) Fig. 10.27 9. Match the entries in Column I with those in Column II. Column II (a) Spherical mirror with a reflecting i) Concave mirror ; @) surface that curves inwards. (b) It forms an image which is always erect ii) Convex mirror Loe . (i) and diminished in size. (c) Object placed behind it may appear iii) Convex lens . . (iii) inverted at some distance. (d) Object placed behind it always appears iv) Concave lens nae . Oe, diminished in size. 10. The following question is based on Assertion/Reason. Assertion: Convex mirrors are preferred for observing the traffic behind us. Reason: Convex mirrors provide a significantly larger view area than plane mirrors. Choose the correct option: (i) Both Assertion and Reason are correct and Reason is the correct explanation for Assertion. (ii) Both Assertion and Reason are correct but Reason is not the correct explanation for Assertion. (iii) Assertion is correct but Reason is incorrect. (iv) Both Assertion and Reason are incorrect. . In Fig. 10.27, note that O stands for object, M for mirror, and I for image. Which of the following statements is true? (i) Figure (a) indicates a plane mirror and Figure (b) indicates a concave mirror. (ii) Figure (a) indicates a convex mirror and Figure (b) indicates a concave mirror. (iii) Figure (a) indicates a concave mirror and Figure (b) indicates a convex mirror. (iv) Figure (a) indicates a plane mirror and Figure (b) indicates a convex mirror. Prepare some questions based on your learnings so far ... 6/28/2025 6:03:34 PM $< {crate 10 Light: Mirrors and Lenses) 169 12. Place a pencil behind