(a) indicates a plane mirror and Figure (b) indicates a concave mirror. (ii) Figure (a) indicates a convex mirror and Figure (b) indicates a concave mirror. (iii) Figure (a) indicates a concave mirror and Figure (b) indicates a convex mirror. (iv) Figure (a) indicates a plane mirror and Figure (b) indicates a convex mirror. Prepare some questions based on your learnings so far ... 6/28/2025 6:03:34 PM $< {crate 10 Light: Mirrors and Lenses) 169 12. Place a pencil behind a transparent glass tumbler i (Fig. 10.28a). Now fill the tumbler halfway with water (Fig. 10.28b). How does the pencil appear when viewed through the water? Explain why its shape appears changed. i} 4 } Discover, design, and debate e Visit a nearby hospital or the clinic of an ENT specialist, or a dentist, with your teacher or parents. Request the doctor to show you the mirrors used for examining ear, nose, throat, and teeth. Identify the kind of mirror used in these instruments. (a) Fig. 1028. e Harnessing sunlight is key to solving future energy challenges. In devices like solar cookers (Fig. 10.29), mirrors are used to converge sunlight and generate heat. In India, such designs are used in villages, thus saving electricity and reducing fossil fuel use. Think of a design for a solar cooker for your school or home and prepare Fig. 10.29 a detailed proposal for it including the budget required. e Use online tools or animation to do virtual experiments with spherical mirrors and lenses. Move objects in the simulation and observe how the image changes. Our scientific heritage More than 800 years ago, during the time of the great Indian mathematician Bhaskara II, astronomers used shallow bowls of water to observe the stars and planets. By carefully looking at their reflected images through tubes placed at appropriate angles, they could measure the positions of stars and planets in the sky. Even though the laws of reflection are not mentioned in literature, their instruments and methods indicate that they might have understood it in practice! i. Shouldn't it But we be... j thought... eee a 5 x Reflect on the questions framed by your friends and try to answer... SOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO Ono on oon ooo ooo SOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO Ono on oon ooo ooo SOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO Ono on oon ooo ooo SOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO Ono on oon ooo ooo Peer ccccccccccccccccccccccceeccccec ee cccceeceececeeeseceeesereceessereeeserecseeseoee Chapter 10.indd 169 6/28/2025 6:04:16 PM |