a concave (a) (b) mirror which provides an enlarged view of teeth Fig. 10.6: Use of concave mirror (a)Asa_ when held close to the teeth inside the mouth reflector of a torch; (b) By a dentist (Fig. 10.6b). A step further Do you remember learning about the use of telescope in the chapter Beyond Earth in Curiosity, Grade 6? Most modern telescopes are reflecting telescope that use curved mirrors, with the main mirror being a large concave mirror. Look at the side-view mirrors on vehicles. These mirrors are convex. They always form an erect image of the traffic behind and smaller than the actual vehicles. Also, since the convex mirror is uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade ) __ ___} Chapter 10.indd 156 6/28/2025 6:01:13 PM $< {crate 10 Light: Mirrors and Lenses) 157 (a) (b) (c) Fig. 10.7: Use of convex mirror as a (a) Side-view mirror; (b) Road safety mirror; (c) Surveillance mirror curved outside, it provides a much wider area of the road behind. Further, such convex mirrors are installed at road intersections or sharp bends to provide drivers from both sides the visibility of the { We have observed images formed by other side and prevent collisions. | three types of mirrors plane, concave, Convex mirrors are also installed | 28d convex. But are there any laws in big stores to monitor a large which govern the image formation? area to deter thefts. 10.3 What Are the Laws of Reflection? Let us now repeat an activity which we did earlier in grade 7, but this time we will extend it further. Do you remember doing the activity for observing the reflection of a beam of light from a plane mirror? | Activity 10.4: Let us experiment e Collect a plane mirror with stand, a torch, a comb, a paper clip to hold the comb upright, a sheet of white paper, and a strip of black paper. iy e As you did earlier, make a thin slit by covering all openings of the comb using black paper, @ except for one in the middle. e Spread a sheet of white paper on a table. Place the plane mirror upright on it. e Using the thin slit and torch, obtain a thin beam of light along the paper and adjust it to fall upon the mirror as shown in Fig. 10.8a. . e Now, move the slit and torch slightly so that the beam of light falls at a different angle on the .. ; ; ; mirror (Fig. 10.8b). Does the reflected beam of Pig: oe ton ad a one ales one light also shift? (b) At another angle (b) Chapter 10.indd 157 6/28/2025 6:01:25 PM Pl [ aibjeestiieth e Make the beam of light fall on the mirror at different angles and observe how the direction of the reflected beam changes. To understand this better, let us draw this on a paper, step by (@ step. But before doing that, let us learn how to represent