concave mirror, and convex mirror, one by one. Observe the reflected beams. Is your maeeve a observation similar to what is shown in Fig. 10.11 : (b), (c), and (d)? When multiple parallel beams of light fallupona plane mirror, the multiple reflected beams are also parallel (Fig. 10.11b). However, when multiple beams of light fall upon a concave mirror, the multiple reflected beams get closer, that is, they converge (Fig. 10.11c). Whereas, in the case of a convex mirror, the multiple reflected beams spread, that is, they diverge (Fig. 10.11d). In the case of spherical mirrors, even though each ray of light follows the laws of reflection, the curved surface of spherical mirrors causes the parallel beam of rays to either converge (concave) or diverge (convex) on reflection depending on the shape of the mirror. Fig. 10.11: (a) Multiple slits; A step further Multiple parallel beams of light fall upon (b) Plane mirror; (c) Concave mirror; Plane mirror Convex mirror If we draw what we observed in Activity 10.6, we get the (d) Convex mirror figures like those shown below. Oe VIX Convex mirror uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade ) __ ___} Plane mirror Concave mirror Chapter 10.indd 160 6/28/2025 6:01:51 PM Chapter 10.indd 161 $< {crate 10 Light: Mirrors and Lenses) 161 So, the concave mirror converges a light beam while the convex mirror diverges it. This is indeed interesting! Since the concave mirror converges the light beam, wouldn t light get concentrated in a small area? | Activity 10.7: Let us explore Always perform this activity under the supervision of a teacher or an adult. Do not look towards the Sun or into the mirror reflecting the Sun. Focus the reflected light only on a piece of paper, not Me Zin towards anyone s face or eyes. | e Take a concave mirror and a sheet of thin paper or newspaper. e Holdthe concave mirror with its reflecting surface facing the Sun. Direct the light of the Sun reflected by the mirror on the sheet of paper. e Adjust the distance of the paper until you get a sharp bright spot on it as shown in Fig. 10.12. e Hold the mirror and the sheet of paper steady for a few minutes. Does the paper start to burn Fig. 10.12: Converging sunlight on producing smoke? paper using a concave mirror The bright spot is formed on the paper because light from the Sun, after reflection from the mirror, gets concentrated on this point. This produces sufficient heat at this point which can ignite the paper. A step further Devices which concentrate sunlight into a small area, using mirrors and lenses, are called solar concentrators. The concentrated sunlight is used to heat a liquid to produce steam which can be used to generate electricity or for providing heat for various purposes, such as large scale cooking or for solar furnaces. Solar furnaces are even used for melting steel! Do you remember learning in an earlier chapter, about electric