Light: Mirrors and Lenses 0877CH10 Can we make mirrors which can give enlarged or diminished images? On side-view mirrors of vehicles, there is a warning that says Objects in mirror are closer than they appear . Why is this warning written there? Why is there a curved line on some reading glasses? Chapter 10.indd 152 6/28/2025 6:00:41 PM | Chapter 10.indd 153 $< ___{hapte 10 Light: Mirrors and Lenses) 153 During the summer holidays, Meena went to a science centre with her family. The centre had many fascinating displays on nature, space, and technology. While her parents explored a section on saving water and electricity, Meena and her brother wandered off to look around. In one corner, Meena noticed a row of unusual, curved mirrors. Curious, she stepped closer and looked into one. Her face appeared unusually large, while her brother, standing a little farther away, looked upside down! At another mirror, she saw a tiny version of herself. Meena was puzzled. She remembered doing activities with a mirror earlier where the image formed by the mirror was of the same size as the object and was erect (in the chapter Light: Shadows and Reflections in Curiosity, Grade 7). Seeing her confusion, a guide from the science centre walked up to her and smiled. These are not plane mirrors, the guide explained. These are spherical mirrors. When the mirror is curved inward or outward, your image looks different in them! Meena s curiosity grew and she decided to talk to her teacher about these spherical mirrors. 10.1 What Are Spherical Mirrors? | Activity 10.1: Let us explore e Take a shiny metallic spoon and hold its curved surface close to your face. Can you see your image in it? e Notice the image of your face. Is it different from the image you see in a plane mirror? e While observing the image, slowly move the spoon away from your face. Do you observe any change in the image? ; (a) e Now'flip the spoon and repeat the same steps. Fig. 10.1: Image formed in a shiny Did you notice that the shiny metallic spoonacted etallic spoon from its (a) Inner curved like a mirror and you could see your image in it? When you looked at the inner side of the spoon which is curved inwards, you must have observed that the image was inverted (Fig. 10.1a). When you looked at the outer side of the spoon which bulges outwards, the image of your face was erect but smaller in size (Fig. 10.1b). Curved mirrors, like the spoon, can also be specially made. Spherical mirrors are a common type of curved mirrors which are shaped like a part of a hollow glass sphere. Mirrors, whose reflecting surfaces are spherical are called spherical mirrors. (b) surface; (b) Outer curved surface 6/28/2025 6:00:46 PM The reflecting surface of the spherical mirror may be curved inwards or outwards. A spherical mirror, which has a reflecting surface that curves inwards, is called a