in size (Fig. 10.1b). Curved mirrors, like the spoon, can also be specially made. Spherical mirrors are a common type of curved mirrors which are shaped like a part of a hollow glass sphere. Mirrors, whose reflecting surfaces are spherical are called spherical mirrors. (b) surface; (b) Outer curved surface 6/28/2025 6:00:46 PM The reflecting surface of the spherical mirror may be curved inwards or outwards. A spherical mirror, which has a reflecting surface that curves inwards, is called a concave mirror (Fig. 10.2a). Its schematic representation is shown in Fig. 10.2b. The outline of the surface of the mirror is circular. iin (a) (b) (a) (b) Fig. 10.2: (a) Concave mirror; Fig. 10.3: (a) Convex mirror; (b) Its representation (b) Its representation A spherical mirror which has a reflecting surface that curves outwards is called a convex mirror (Fig. 10.3a). Its schematic representation is shown in Fig. 10.3b. In the representation of both the mirrors, the non-reflecting surface of the mirror is shown as shaded. A step further The shape of a spherical mirror is such that it can be thought of as a part of an imaginary hollow sphere. However, remember that spherical mirrors are not made by slicing a hollow glass sphere. Instead, they are created by grinding and polishing a flat glass piece into a curved surface. If a reflective coating (like a thin layer of aluminium) is applied on the outer curved surface, it forms a concave mirror. If the coating is applied on the inner curved surface, it forms a convex mirror. Coated Imaginary surface hollowx_ ~ sphere / / Reflecting Reflecting surface surface SS ~ A piece of imaginary Concave Convex hollow sphere mirror mirror uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade ) __ ___} 6/28/2025 6:00:55 PM Chapter 10.indd 154 Chapter 10.indd 155 $< {crate 10 Light: Mirrors and Lenses) 155 Activity 10.2: Let us distinguish e Place concave and convex mirrors on a table with their reflecting surfaces facing upwards. e Now view them from the side, keeping your eye at their level, to identify whether the reflecting surface is curved inwards or outwards (Fig. 10.4). How can we distinguish between concave and convex mirrors? Convex mirror qj Concave mirror Fig. 10.4: Identifying concave and convex mirrors from their side view 10.2 What Are the Characteristics of Images Formed by Spherical Mirrors? | Activity 10.3: Let us explore e Take a concave mirror, a convex Concave Convex mirror, two small wooden blocks mirror mirror or something similar to place the mirrors in an upright position, and a small toy or some other object. e Place the two mirrors side by side in an upright position on a table. Keep the object in front of them at a small distance (3-4 cm away) as shown in Fig. 10.5a. What kind of 3 images do you see in each mirror? @ } (b) Are the images of the same size as Fig. 10.5: An object placed in front of concave and the object? Are