1062CH10 CIRCLES 10.1 Introduction You have studied in Class IX that a circle is a collection of all points in a plane which are at a constant distance (radius) from a fixed point (centre). You have also studied various terms related to a circle like chord, segment, sector, arc etc. Let us now examine the different situations that can arise when a circle and a line are given in a plane. So, let us consider a circle and a line PQ. There can be three possibilities given in Fig. 10.1 below: eae (i) (ii) (iii) Fig. 10.1 In Fig. 10.1 (i), the line PQ and the circle have no common point. In this case, PQ is called a non-intersecting line with respect to the circle. In Fig. 10.1 (ii), there are two common points A and B that the line PQ and the circle have. In this case, we call the line PQ a secant of the circle. In Fig. 10.1 (iii), there is only one point A which is common to the line PQ and the circle. In this case, the line is called a tangent to the circle. Reprint 2025-26 CIRCLES 145 You might have seen a pulley fitted over a well which is used in taking out water from the well. Look at Fig. 10.2. Here the rope on both sides of the pulley, if considered as a ray, is like a tangent to the circle representing the pulley. Is there any position of the line with respect to the circle other than the types given above? You can see that there cannot be any other type of position of the line with respect to the circle. In this chapter, we will study about the existence of the tangents to a circle and also study some of their properties. 10.2 Tangent to a Circle In the previous section, you have seen that a tangent* to a circle is a line that intersects the circle at only one point. To understand the existence of the tangent to a circle at a point, let us perform the following activities: Activity 1 : Take a circular wire and attach a straight wire AB at a point P of the circular wire so that it can rotate about the point P in a plane. Put the system on a table and gently rotate the wire AB about the point P to get different positions of the straight wire [see Fig. 10.3(i)]. In various positions, the wire intersects the circular wire at P and at another point Q, or Q, or Q,, etc. In one position, you will see that it will intersect the circle at the point P only (see position A B of AB). This shows that a tangent exists at the point P of the circle. On rotating further, you can observe that in all other positions of AB, it will intersect the circle at P and at another point, say R, or R, or R,, etc. So, you