radius 5 cm meets a line through the centre O at a point Q so that OQ = 12 cm. Length PQ is: (A) 12cm (B) 13cm (C) 85cm (D) 119 cm. . Draw a circle and two lines parallel to a given line such that one is a tangent and the other, a secant to the circle. Number of Tangents from a Point on a Circle To get an idea of the number of tangents from a point on a circle, let us perform the following activity: Reprint 2025-26 Activity 3 : Draw a circle on a paper. Take a point P inside it. Can you draw a tangent to the circle through this point? You will find that all the lines through this point intersect the circle in two points. So, it is not possible to draw any tangent to a circle through a point inside it [see Fig. 10.6 (i)]. Next take a point P on the circle and draw tangents through this point. You have already observed that there is only one tangent to the circle at such a point [see Fig. 10.6 (11)]. Finally, take a point P outside the circle and try to draw tangents to the circle from this point. What do you observe? You will find that you can draw exactly two tangents to the circle through this point [see Fig. 10.6 (iii)]. We can summarise these facts as follows: Case 1 : There is no tangent to a circle passing through a point lying inside the circle. Case 2 : There is one and only one tangent to a circle passing through a point lying on the circle. Case 3 : There are exactly two tangents to a circle through a point lying outside the circle. In Fig. 10.6 (iii), T,and T, are the points of contact of the tangents PT, and PT, respectively. The length of the segment of the tangent from the external point P and the point of contact with the circle is called the length of the tangent from the point P to the circle. MATHEMATICS ON S (i) T, (iii) Fig. 10.6 Note that in Fig. 10.6 (iii), PT, and PT, are the lengths of the tangents from P to the circle. The lengths PT, and PT, have a common property. Can you find this? Measure PT, and PT,. Are these equal? In fact, this is always so. Let us give a proof of this fact in the following theorem. Reprint 2025-26 CIRCLES Theorem 10.2 : The lengths of tangents drawn from an external point to a circle are equal. Proof : We are given a circle with centre O, a point P lying outside the circle and two tangents PQ, PR on the circle from P (see Fig. 10.7). We are required to prove that PQ = PR. For this, we join OP, OQ and OR. Then Z OQP and Z ORP are right angles, because these are angles between the radii and tangents, and