P and at another point Q, or Q, or Q,, etc. In one position, you will see that it will intersect the circle at the point P only (see position A B of AB). This shows that a tangent exists at the point P of the circle. On rotating further, you can observe that in all other positions of AB, it will intersect the circle at P and at another point, say R, or R, or R,, etc. So, you can observe that there is only one tangent at a point of the circle. Fig. 10.3 (i) While doing activity above, you must have observed that as the position AB moves towards the position A B , the common point, say Q,, of the line AB and the circle gradually comes nearer and nearer to the common point P. Ultimately, it coincides with the point P in the position A B of A B . Again note, what happens if AB is rotated rightwards about P? The common point R, gradually comes nearer and nearer to P and ultimately coincides with P. So, what we see is: The tangent to a circle is a special case of the secant, when the two end points of its corresponding chord coincide. *The word tangent comes from the Latin word tangere , which means to touch and was introduced by the Danish mathematician Thomas Fineke in 1583. Reprint 2025-26 146 MATHEMATICS Activity 2 : On a paper, draw a circle and a secant PQ of the circle. Draw various lines parallel to the secant on both sides of it. You will find that after some steps, the length of p the chord cut by the lines will gradually decrease, i.e., the two points of intersection of the line and the circle are coming closer and closer [see Fig. 10.3(ii)]. In one case, it becomes zero on one side of the secant and in another case, it becomes zero on the other side of the secant. See the positions P Q and P Q of the secant in Fig. 10.3 (11). These are the tangents to the circle parallel to the given secant PQ. This also helps you to see that there cannot Fig. 10.3) (ai) be more than two tangents parallel to a given secant. p Q This activity also establishes, what you must have observed, while doing Activity 1, namely, a tangent is the secant when both of the end points of the corresponding chord coincide. The common point of the tangent and the circle is called the point of contact [the point A in Fig. 10.1 (i1i)Jand the tangent is said to touch the circle at the common point. Now look around you. Have you seen a bicycle or a cart moving? Look at its wheels. All the spokes of a wheel are along its radii. Now note the position of the wheel with respect to its movement on the ground. Do you see any tangent anywhere? (See Fig. 10.4). In