and the circle is called the point of contact [the point A in Fig. 10.1 (i1i)Jand the tangent is said to touch the circle at the common point. Now look around you. Have you seen a bicycle or a cart moving? Look at its wheels. All the spokes of a wheel are along its radii. Now note the position of the wheel with respect to its movement on the ground. Do you see any tangent anywhere? (See Fig. 10.4). In fact, the wheel moves along a line which is a tangent to the circle representing the wheel. Also, notice that in all positions, the radius through the point of contact with the ground appears to be at right angles to the tangent (see Fig. 10.4). We shall Fig. 10.4 now prove this property of the tangent. Theorem 10.1 : The tangent at any point of a circle is perpendicular to the radius through the point of contact. Proof : We are given a circle with centre O and a tangent XY to the circle at a point P. We need to prove that OP is perpendicular to XY. Reprint 2025-26 CIRCLES 147 Take a point Q on XY other than P and join OQ (see Fig. 10.5). Since this happens for every point on the line XY except the point P, OP is the shortest of all the distances of the point O to the points of XY. So OP is perpendicular to XY. (as shown in Theorem A 1.7.) The point Q must lie outside the circle. (Why? Note that if Q lies inside the circle, XY will become a secant and not a tangent to the circle). Therefore, OQ is longer than the radius OP of the circle. That is, OQ > OP. Remarks 1. By theorem above, we can also conclude that at any point on a circle there can be one and only one tangent. 2. The line containing the radius through the point of contact is also sometimes called the normal to the circle at the point. 10.3 EXERCISE 10.1 . How many tangents can a circle have? . Fillin the blanks : (i) A tangent to a circle intersects it in _______ point (s). (ii) A line intersecting a circle in two points is called a (iii) A circle can have ________ parallel tangents at the most. (iv) The common point of a tangent to a circle and the circle is called . A tangent PQ at a point P of a circle of radius 5 cm meets a line through the centre O at a point Q so that OQ = 12 cm. Length PQ is: (A) 12cm (B) 13cm (C) 85cm (D) 119 cm. . Draw a circle and two lines parallel to a given line such that one is a tangent and the other, a secant to the circle. Number of Tangents from a Point on a Circle To get an idea of the number of tangents from a point on