soil. In some states like Bihar maize is grown in rabi season also. Use of modern inputs such as HYV seeds, fertilisers and irrigation have contributed to the increasing production of maize. Major maize-producing states are Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana. Fig. 4.7: Maize Cultivation Reprint 2025-26 68 E Ps AFGHANISTAN 36 N PAKISTAN CHINA T PBwT ) a 4 CS ; B BHUTAN}. 4 sie MYANMAR ARABIAN SEA [| MAJOR AREA [ MINOR AREA mJ ag ? _ & es ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS LAKSHADWEEP i (INDIA) (INDIA) . INDIAN 72 E | be. India: Distribution of Wheat 4 v AYN AGRICULTURE (35> Bi Reprint 2025-26 Pulses: India is the largest producer as well as the consumer of pulses in the world. These are the major source of protein in a vegetarian diet. Major pulses that are grown in India are tur (arhar), urad, moong, masur, peas and gram. Can you distinguish which of these pulses are grown in the kharif season and which are grown in the rabi season? Pulses need less moisture and survive even in dry conditions. Being leguminous crops, all these crops except arhar help in restoring soil fertility by fixing nitrogen from the air. Therefore, these are mostly grown in rotation with other crops. Major pulse producing states in India are Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan, Maharashtra, Uttar Pradesh and Karnataka. Food Crops other than Grains Sugarcane: It is a tropical as well as a subtropical crop. It grows well in hot and humid climate with a temperature of 21 C to 27 C and an annual rainfall between 75cm. and 100cm. Irrigation is required in the regions of low rainfall. It can be grown ona Fig. 4.9: Groundnut, sunflower and mustard are a 36 CONTEMPORARY INDIA II variety of soils and needs manual labour from sowing to harvesting. India is the second largest producer of sugarcane only after Brazil. It is the main source of sugar, gur (jaggary), khandsari and molasses. The major sugarcane-producing states are Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Bihar, Punjab and Haryana. Oil Seeds: In 2020 India was the second largest producer of groundnut in the world after China. Different oil seeds are grown covering approximately 12 per cent of the total cropped area of the country. Main oil-seeds produced in India are groundnut, mustard, coconut, sesamum (til), soyabean, castor seeds, cotton seeds, linseed and sunflower. Most of these are edible and used as cooking mediums. However, some of these are also used as raw material in the production of soap, cosmetics and ointments. Groundnut is a kharif crop and accounts for about half of the major oilseeds produced in the country. Gujarat was the largest producer of groundnut followed by Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu in 2019-20. Linseed and mustard are rabi crops. Sesamum is a kharif crop in north and rabi crop in south India. Castor seed is grown both as rabi and kharif crop. Tea: Tea cultivation is an example of