Reprint 2025-26 SOME APPLICATIONS OF TRIGONOMETRY 135 (ii) the angle of elevation, Z BAC, of the top of the minar (iti) the height AE of the student. Assuming that the above three conditions are known, how can we determine the height of the minar? In the figure, CD =CB + BD. Here, BD = AE, which is the height of the student. To find BC, we will use trigonometric ratios of Z BAC or Z A. In A ABC, the side BC is the opposite side in relation to the known Z A. Now, which of the trigonometric ratios can we use? Which one of them has the two values that we have and the one we need to determine? Our search narrows down to using either tan A or cot A, as these ratios involve AB and BC. BC AB Therefore, tan A= AB cotA = BC which on solving would give us BC. By adding AE to BC, you will get the height of the minar. Now let us explain the process, we have just discussed, by solving some problems. Example 1 : A tower stands vertically on the ground. From a point on the ground, which is 15 m away from the foot of the tower, the angle of elevation of the top of the tower is found to be 60 . Find the height of the tower. Solution : First let us draw a simple diagram to represent the problem (see Fig. 9.4). Here AB represents the tower, CB is the distance of the point from the tower and Z ACB is the angle of elevation. We need to determine the height of the tower, i.e., AB. Also, ACB is a triangle, right- angled at B. To solve the problem, we choose the trigonometric ratio tan 60 (or cot 60 ), as the ratio involves AB and BC. N tan 60 = AB Ow, an = BC AB 3-7 1. ., 15 ie., AB = 15V3 Hence, the height of the tower is 15/3 m. Reprint 2025-26 136 MATHEMATICS Example 2 : An electrician has to repair an electric fault on a pole of height 5 m. She needs to reach a point 1.3m below the top of the pole to undertake the repair work (see Fig. 9.5). What should be the length of the ladder that she should use which, when inclined at an angle of 60 to the horizontal, would enable her to reach the required position? Also, how far from the foot of the pole should she place the foot of the ladder? (You may take 3 = 1.73) Solution : In Fig. 9.5, the electrician is required to reach the point B on the pole AD. So, BD = AD - AB = (5 - 1.3)m = 3.7 m. Fig..9.5 Here, BC represents the ladder. We need to find its length, 1.e., the hypotenuse of the right triangle BDC. Now, can you think which trigonometic ratio should we consider? It should be