The distance between Fig. 9.11 the foot of the tree to the point where the top touches the ground is 8 m. Find the height of the tree. . Acontractor plans to install two slides for the children to play in a park. For the children below the age of 5 years, she prefers to havea slide whose top is at a height of 1.5 m, and is inclined at an angle of 30 to the ground, whereas for elder children, she wants to have a steep slide at a height of 3m, and inclined at an angle of 60 to the ground. What should be the length of the slide in each case? . The angle of elevation of the top of a tower from a point on the ground, which is 30 m away from the foot of the tower, is 30 . Find the height of the tower. . Akite is flying at a height of 60 m above the ground. The string attached to the kite is temporarily tied to a point on the ground. The inclination of the string with the ground is 60 . Find the length of the string, assuming that there is no slack in the string. . A 1.5 m tall boy is standing at some distance from a 30 m tall building. The angle of elevation from his eyes to the top of the building increases from 30 to 60 as he walks towards the building. Find the distance he walked towards the building. . From a point on the ground, the angles of elevation of the bottom and the top of a transmission tower fixed at the top of a 20 m high building are 45 and 60 respectively. Find the height of the tower. Reprint 2025-26 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. MATHEMATICS . A statue, 1.6 m tall, stands on the top of a pedestal. From a point on the ground, the angle of elevation of the top of the statue is 60 and from the same point the angle of elevation of the top of the pedestal is 45 . Find the height of the pedestal. . The angle of elevation of the top of a building from the foot of the tower is 30 and the angle of elevation of the top of the tower from the foot of the building is 60 . If the tower is 50 m high, find the height of the building. Two poles of equal heights are standing opposite each other on either side of the road, which is 80 m wide. From a point between them on the road, the angles of elevation of the top of the poles are 60 and 30 , respectively. Find the height of the poles and the distances of the point from the poles. A TY tower stands vertically on a bank of a canal. From a point on the other bank directly opposite the tower, the angle of elevation of the