each other on either side of the road, which is 80 m wide. From a point between them on the road, the angles of elevation of the top of the poles are 60 and 30 , respectively. Find the height of the poles and the distances of the point from the poles. A TY tower stands vertically on a bank of a canal. From a point on the other bank directly opposite the tower, the angle of elevation of the top of the tower is 60 . From another point 20 m away from this point on the line joing this point to the foot of the tower, the angle of elevation of the top of the tower is 30 (see Fig. 9.12). Find the height of the tower and the width of Fig. 9.12 the canal. From the top of a 7 m high building, the angle of elevation of the top of a cable tower is 60 and the angle of depression of its foot is 45 . Determine the height of the tower. As observed from the top of a 75 m high lighthouse from the sea-level, the angles of depression of two ships are 30 and 45 . If one ship is exactly behind the other on the same side of the lighthouse, find the distance between the two ships. A 1.2 mtall girl spots a balloon moving uo ew with the wind in a horizontal line at a iG an height of 88.2 m from the ground. The | angle of elevation of the balloon from . the eyes of the girl at any instant is : we 88. 2m 60 . After some time, the angle of 602. a elevation reduces to 30 (see Fig. 9.1 3). ag & BOT oc ceceeeecesseeeseeeeeeees | a? Find the distance travelled by the A Fig. 9.13 balloon during the interval. A straight highway leads to the foot of a tower. A man standing at the top of the tower observes a car at an angle of depression of 30 , which is approaching the foot of the Reprint 2025-26 SOME APPLICATIONS OF TRIGONOMETRY 143 tower with a uniform speed. Six seconds later, the angle of depression of the car is found to be 60 . Find the time taken by the car to reach the foot of the tower from this point. 9.2 Summary In this chapter, you have studied the following points : 1. () The line of sight is the line drawn from the eye of an observer to the point in the object viewed by the observer. (ii) The angle of elevation of an object viewed, is the angle formed by the line of sight with the horizontal when it is above the horizontal level, i.e., the case when we raise our head to look at the object. (iii) The angle of depression of an object viewed, is the angle formed by the line of sight with the horizontal when it is below the