drawing-room to have a nice talk with Father and Mother . But the little girl always found Mother reading and Father stretched out on the sofa, his handkerchief on his face, his feet on one of the best cushions, sleeping soundly and snoring. The little girl always found Mother reading and Father stretched out on the sofa. The Little Girl / 33 @ Reprint 2025-26 She sat on a stool, gravely watched him until he woke and stretched, and asked the time then looked at her. Don t stare so, Kezia. You look like a little brown owl. One day, when she was kept indoors with a cold, her grandmother told her that father s birthday was next week, and suggested she should make him a pin-cushion for a gift out of a beautiful piece of yellow silk. Laboriously, with a double cotton, the little girl stitched three sides. But what to fill it with? That was the question. The grandmother was out in the garden, and she wandered into Mother s bedroom to look for scraps. On the bed-table she discovered a great many sheets of fine paper, gathered them up, tore them into tiny pieces, and stuffed her case, then sewed up the fourth side. That night there was a hue and cry in the house. Father s great speech for the Port Authority had been lost. Rooms were searched; servants questioned. Finally Mother came into Kezia s room. Kezia, I suppose you didn t see some papers on a table in our room? Oh yes, she said, I tore them up for my surprise. What! screamed Mother. Come straight down to the dining-room this instant. And she was dragged down to where Father was pacing to and fro, hands behind his back. Well? he said sharply. Mother explained. He stopped and stared at the child. Did you do that? N-n-no , she whispered. Mother, go up to her room and fetch down the damned thing see that the child s put to bed this instant. & 34 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 laboriously: with a lot of effort or difficulty wandered into: went into, by chance scraps: small pieces of cloth or paper, etc. that are not needed hue and cry: angry protest vl @ 7. Crying too much to explain, she lay in the shadowed room watching the evening light make a sad little pattern on the floor. Then Father came into the room with a ruler in his hands. I am going to beat you for this, he said. Oh, no, no , she screamed, hiding under the bedclothes. He pulled them aside. Sit up, he ordered, and hold out your hands. You must be taught once and for all not to touch what does not belong to you. But it was for your b-b-birthday. Down came the ruler on her little, pink palms. 8. Hours later, when Grandmother had wrapped her in a shawl and rocked her in the rocking-chair, the child clung to her