1. & 3. The Little Girl 0959CHO3 Before You READ e Do you feel you know your parents better now, than when you were much younger? Perhaps you now understand the reasons for some of their actions that used to upset you earlier. e This story about a little girl whose feelings for her father change from fear to understanding will probably find an echo in every home. To the little girl he was a figure to be feared and avoided. Every morning before going to work he came into her room and gave her a casual kiss, to which she responded with Goodbye, Father . And oh, there was a glad sense of relief when she heard the noise of the carriage growing fainter and fainter down the long road! In the evening when he came home she stood near the staircase and heard his loud voice in the hall. Bring my tea into the drawing-room... Hasn t the paper come yet? Mother, go and see if my paper s out there and bring me my slippers. Kezia, Mother would call to her, if you re a good girl you can come down and take off father s boots. Slowly the girl would slip down the stairs, more slowly still across the hall, and push open the drawing-room door. By that time he had his spectacles on and looked at her over them in a way that was terrifying to the little girl. Well, Kezia, hurry up and pull off these boots and take them outside. Have you been a good girl today? I d-d-don t know, Father. Reprint 2025-26 a figure to be feared: a person to be feared slip down: come down quietly and unwillingly You d-d-don t know? If you stutter like that Mother will have to take you to the doctor. She never stuttered with other people had quite given it up but only with Father, because then given it up: stopped she was trying so hard to say the words properly. 4 imgit What s the matter? What are you looking so wretched about? Mother, I wish you taught this child not to appear on the brink of suicide... Here, Kezia, wretched: unhappy carry my teacup back to the table carefully. on the brink of He was so big his hands and his neck, suicide: about to especially his mouth when he yawned. Thinking Commit suicide about him alone was like thinking about a giant. On Sunday afternoons Grandmother sent her down to the drawing-room to have a nice talk with Father and Mother . But the little girl always found Mother reading and Father stretched out on the sofa, his handkerchief on his face, his feet on one of the best cushions, sleeping soundly and snoring. The little girl always found Mother reading and Father stretched out on the sofa. The Little Girl / 33 @ Reprint 2025-26 She sat on a stool, gravely watched him until he woke and stretched, and asked