this, he said. Oh, no, no , she screamed, hiding under the bedclothes. He pulled them aside. Sit up, he ordered, and hold out your hands. You must be taught once and for all not to touch what does not belong to you. But it was for your b-b-birthday. Down came the ruler on her little, pink palms. 8. Hours later, when Grandmother had wrapped her in a shawl and rocked her in the rocking-chair, the child clung to her soft body. What did God make fathers for? she sobbed. Here s a clean hanky, darling. Blow your nose. Go to sleep, pet; you'll forget all about it in the morning. I tried to explain to Father but he was too upset to listen tonight. But the child never forgot. Next time she saw him she quickly put both hands behind her back and a red colour flew into her cheeks. 9. The Macdonalds lived next door. They had five children. Looking through a gap in the fence the little girl saw them playing tag in the evening. tag: achildren s The father with the baby, Mao, on his shoulders, game of catching one two little girls hanging on to his coat pockets 7% ran round and round the flower-beds, shaking with laughter. Once she saw the boys turn the hose on him and he tried to catch them laughing all the time. Then it was she decided there were different sorts of fathers. Suddenly, one day, Mother became ill, and she and Grandmother went to hospital. The little girl was left alone in the house with Alice, the cook. That was all right in the daytime, The Little Girl / 35 @ Reprint 2025-26 The little girl saw through a gap the Macdonalds playing tag in the evening. but while Alice was putting her to bed she grew suddenly afraid. 10. What'll I do if I have a nightmare? she asked. I often have nightmares and then Grannie takes me into her bed I can t stay in the dark it all gets whispery ... You just go to sleep, child, said Alice, pulling off her socks, and don t you scream and wake your poor Pa. s 36 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 nightmare: a bad dream 11. 12. But the same old nightmare came the butcher with a knife and a rope, who came nearer and nearer, smiling that dreadful smile, while she could not move, could only stand still, crying out, Grandma! Grandma! She woke shivering to see Father beside her bed, a candle in his hand. What s the matter? he said. Oh, a butcher a knife I want Grannie. He blew out the candle, bent down and caught up the child in his arms, carrying her along the passage to the big bedroom. A newspaper was on the bed. He put away the paper, then carefully tucked up the child. He lay down beside her. Half asleep still, still with the butcher s smile all