see Father beside her bed, a candle in his hand. What s the matter? he said. Oh, a butcher a knife I want Grannie. He blew out the candle, bent down and caught up the child in his arms, carrying her along the passage to the big bedroom. A newspaper was on the bed. He put away the paper, then carefully tucked up the child. He lay down beside her. Half asleep still, still with the butcher s smile all about her it seemed, she crept close to him, snuggled her head under his arm, held tightly to his shirt. Then the dark did not matter; she lay still. Here, rub your feet against my legs and get them warm, said Father. Tired out, he slept before the little girl. A funny feeling came over her. Poor Father, not so big, after all and with no one to look after him. He was harder than Grandmother, but it was a nice hardness. And every day he had to work and was too tired to be a Mr Macdonald... She had torn up all his beautiful writing... She stirred suddenly, and sighed. What s the matter? asked her father. Another dream? Oh, said the little girl, my head s on your heart. I can hear it going. What a big heart you've got, Father dear. KATHERINE MANSFIELD Reprint 2025-26 tucked up: covered up nicely in bed snuggled: moved into a warm, comfortable position, close to another person The Little Girl / 37 @ my Sf Thinking about the Text I. Given below are some emotions that Kezia felt. Match the emotions in Column A with the items in Column B. A B fear or terror (i) father comes into her room to give her a goodbye kiss glad sense of relief (ii) noise of the carriage grows fainter a funny feeling, perhaps | (iii) father comes home of understanding (iv) speaking to father (v) going to bed when alone at home (vi) father comforts her and falls asleep (vii) father stretched out on the sofa, snoring II. Answer the following questions in one or two sentences. 1. Why was Kezia afraid of her father? 2. Who were the people in Kezia s family? 3. What was Kezia s father s routine (i) before going to his office? (ii) after coming back from his office? (iii) on Sundays? 4. In what ways did Kezia s grandmother encourage her to get to know her father better? Ill. Discuss these questions in class with your teacher and then write down your answers in two or three paragraphs each. 1. Kezia s efforts to please her father resulted in displeasing him very much. How did this happen? 2. Kezia decides that there are different kinds of fathers . What kind of father was Mr Macdonald, and how was he different from Kezia s father? 3. How does Kezia begin to see her father as a human being who needs her sympathy? & me Thinking about