freedom in our land; Respect those who have worked to butld and develop our country; and Believe that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united tn our diversity. We therefore, through our freely elected representatives, adopt this Constitution as the supreme law of the Republic so as to Heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on democratic values, soctal justice and fundamental human rights; Lap the foundations for ademocratic and open society in which government is based on the will of the people and every citisen ts equally protected by law; / SHmoprove the quality of life of all citisens and free the potential of each person; and Build a united and democratic South Africa able to take its rightful place as a sovereign state tn the famtly of nations. $Hlay God protect our people. Pkosi Sikelel (Afrika. Morena boloka setjhaba sa heso. God seen Suid-Afrika. God bless South Africa. fh tnisdchat | int order fo form a more - union, establish justice, insure domestic Hudsimu fhatutshedsa Afurika. Host katekisa Afrika. | u _ -_- el, ee ae - ee 28 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 WE, THE PEOPLE OF INDIA SOVEREIGN SOCIALIST inequalities. SECULAR Citizens have complete freedom to follow any religion. But there is no official religion. Government treats all religious beliefs and practices with equal respect. DEMOCRATIC A form of government where people enjoy equal political rights, elect their rulers and hold them accountable. The government is run according to some basic rules. Let us read the Preamble of our Constitution very carefully and understand the meaning of each of its key words. The Preamble of the Constitution reads like a poem on democracy. It contains the philosophy on which the entire Constitution has been built. It provides a standard to examine and evaluate any law and action of JUSTICE government, to find out whether it is good or bad. It is the soul of the Indian Constitution. se > an = AAS pe Note: *The terms Socialist and Secular were added in Preamble through the 42" Constitutional Amendment in 1976. CONSTITUTIONAL DESIGN Reprint 2025-26 REPUBLIC LIBERTY thoughts in action. EQUALITY All are equal before the law. The traditional social inequalities have to be ended. The government should ensure equal opportunity for all. FRATERNITY Allofus should behave as if we are members of the same family. No one should treat a fellow citizen as inferior. Compare the Preambles to the constitutions of the United States of America, India and South Africa. = Make a list of ideas that are common to all these three. = Note down atleast one of the major differences among these. = Which of the three makes a reference to the past? = Which of these does not invoke God? Institutional design A constitution is not merely a statement of values and philosophy. As we noted above, a constitution is mainly about embodying these values into institutional arrangements. Much of the document called Constitution of India is