guiding values of the constitution. Treason: The offence of attempting to overthrow the government of the state to which the offender owes allegiance. Tryst: A meeting or meeting place that has been agreed upon. DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 Here are some false statements. Identify the mistake in each case and rewrite these correctly based on what you have read in this chapter. a Leaders of the freedom movement had an open mind about whether the country should be democratic or not after independence. b Members of the Constituent Assembly of India held the same views on all provisions of the Constitution. ec A country that has a constitution must be a democracy. d Constitution cannot be amended because it is the supreme law of a country. Which of these was the most salient underlying conflict in the making of a democratic constitution in South Africa? a Between South Africa and its neighbours b Between men and women c Between the white majority and the black minority d Between the coloured minority and the black majority Which of these is a provision that a democratic constitution does not have? a Powers of the head of the state b Name of the head of the state c Powers of the legislature d Name of the country Match the following leaders with their roles in the making of the Constitution: a Motilal Nehru i President of the Constituent Assembly bB.R. Ambedkar ii Member of the Constituent Assembly c Rajendra Prasad _ iii Chairman of the Drafting Committee d Sarojini Naidu iv Prepared a Constitution for India in 1928 Read again the extracts from Nehru s speech Tryst with Destiny and answer the following: a Why did Nehru use the expression not wholly or in full measure in the first sentence? b What pledge did he want the makers of the Indian Constitution to take? c The ambition of the greatest man of our generation has been to wipe every tear from every eye . Who was he referring to? Here are some of the guiding values of the Constitution and their meaning. Rewrite them by matching them correctly. a Sovereign i Government will not favour any religion. b Republic ii People have the supreme right to make decisions. c Fraternity iii Head of the state is an elected person. d Secular iv People should live like brothers and sisters. CONSTITUTIONAL DESIGN 31, Reprint 2025-26 How did your school celebrate the Constitution Day on November 26th? Prepare a brief report. Here are different opinions about what made India a democracy. How much importance would you give to each of these factors? a Democracy in India is a gift of the British rulers. We received training to work with representative legislative institutions under the British rule. b Freedom Struggle challenged the colonial exploitation and denial of different freedoms to Indians. Free India could not be anything but democratic. c We were lucky to have leaders who had democratic convictions. The denial of democracy in several