not unique to South Africa. Every country has diverse groups of people. Their relationship may not have been as bad as that between the whites and the blacks in South Africa. But all over the world people have differences of opinion and interests. Whether democratic or not, most countries in the world need to have these basic rules. This applies not just to governments. Any association needs to have its constitution. It could be a club in your area, a cooperative society or a political party, they all need a constitution. ACTIVITY Approach a club or cooperative society or union or Thus, the constitution of a country is a set of written rules that are accepted by all people living together in a country. Constitution is the supreme law that determines the relationship among people living in a territory (called citizens) and also the relationship between the people and government. A constitution does many things: = First, it generates a degree of trust and coordination that is necessary for different kind of people to live together; a Second, it specifies how the government will be constituted, who will have power to take which decisions; = Third, it lays down limits on the powers of the government and tells us what the rights of the citizens are; and =Fourth, it expresses the aspirations of the people about creating a good society. All countries that have constitutions are not necessarily democratic. But all countries that are democratic will have constitutions. After the War of Independence against Great Britain, the Americans gave themselves a constitution. After the Revolution, the French people approved a democratic constitution. Since then it has become a practice in all democracies to have a written constitution. This is not fair! What was the point in having a Constituent Assembly in India if all the basics were already decided? DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 Vallabhbhai Jhaverbhai Patel (1875-1950) born: Gujarat. Minister of Home, Information and Broadcasting in the Interim Government. Lawyer and leader of Bardoli peasant satyagraha. Played a decisive role in the integration of the Indian princely states. Later: Deputy Prime Minister. Abul Kalam Azad (1888-1958) born: Saudi Arabia. Educationist, author and theologian; scholar of Arabic. Congress leader, active in the national movement. Opposed Muslim separatist politics. Later: Education Minister in the first union cabinet. T.T.Krishnamachari (1899-1974) born: Tamil Nadu. Member, Drafting Committee. Entrepreneur and Congress leader. Later: Finance Minister in the Union Cabinet. All sketches by Rajeev Kumar 2.3 MAKING OF THE INDIAN CONSTITUTION Like South Africa, India s Constitution was also drawn up under very difficult circumstances. The making of the constitution for a huge and diverse country like India was not an easy affair. At that time the people of India were emerging rom the status of subjects to that of citizens. The country was born through a partition on the basis of religious differences. This was a traumatic experience for the people of India and Pakistan. Atleast ten lakh people were killed on both sides of