= Make a list of ideas that are common to all these three. = Note down atleast one of the major differences among these. = Which of the three makes a reference to the past? = Which of these does not invoke God? Institutional design A constitution is not merely a statement of values and philosophy. As we noted above, a constitution is mainly about embodying these values into institutional arrangements. Much of the document called Constitution of India is about these arrangements. It is a very long and detailed document. Therefore it needs to be amended quite regularly to keep it updated. Those who crafted the Indian Constitution felt that it has to be in accordance with people s aspirations and changes in society. They did not see it as a sacred, static and unalterable law. So, they made provisions to incorporate changes from time to time. These changes are called constitutional amendments. The Constitution describes the institutional arrangements in a very legal language. If you read the Constitution for the first time, it can be quite difficult to understand. Yet the basic institutional design is not very difficult to understand. Like any Constitution, the Indian Constitution lays down a procedure for choosing persons to govern the country. It defines who will have how much power to take which decisions. And it puts limits to what the government can do by providing some rights to the citizen that cannot be violated. The remaining three chapters in this book are about these three aspects of the working of Indian constitution. We shall look at some key constitutional provisions in each chapter and understand how they work in democratic politics. But this textbook will not cover all the salient features of the institutional design in the Indian Constitution. Some other aspects will be covered in your textbook next year. CHECK YOUR PROGRESS Apartheid: The official policy of racial separation and ill treatment of blacks followed by the government of South Africa between 1948 and 1989. Clause: A distinct section of a document. Constituent Assembly: An assembly of people s representatives that writes a constitution for a country. Constitution: Supreme law of a country, containing fundamental rules governing the politics and society in a country. Constitutional amendment: A change in the constitution made by the supreme legislative body in a country. Draft: A preliminary version of a legal document. Philosophy: The most fundamental principles underlying one s thoughts and actions. Preamble: An introductory statement in a constitution which states the reasons and guiding values of the constitution. Treason: The offence of attempting to overthrow the government of the state to which the offender owes allegiance. Tryst: A meeting or meeting place that has been agreed upon. DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 Here are some false statements. Identify the mistake in each case and rewrite these correctly based on what you have read in this chapter. a Leaders of the freedom movement had an open mind about whether the country should be democratic or