spoken in the Constituent Assembly has been recorded and preserved. These are called Constituent Assembly Debates . When printed, these debates are 12 bulky volumes! These debates provide the rationale behind every provision of the Constitution. These are used to interpret the meaning of the Constitution. Read the information about all the makers of the Indian Constitution given in the side columns here. You don t need to memorise this information. Just give examples from these to support the following statements: 1. The Assembly had many members who were not with the Congress 2. The Assembly represented members from different social groups 3. Members of the Assembly believed in different ideologies Baldev Singh (1901-1961 born: Haryana. A successful entrepreneur and leader of the Akali Party in the Assembly. A nom ) Panthic Punjab inee of the Congress in the Constituent Assembly. Later: Defence Minister in the Union Cabi net. 2.4 GUIDING VALUES OF THE INDIAN CONSTITUTION In this book we shall study the exact provisions of the Constitution on different subjects. At this stage let us begin by understanding the overall philosophy of what our Constitution is all about. We can do this in two ways. We can understand it by reading the views of some of our major leaders on our Constitution. But it is equally important to read what the Constitution says about its own philosophy. This is what the preamble to the Constitution does. CONSTITUTIONAL DESIGN Reprint 2025-26 Let us turn to these, one by one. The Dream and the Promise Some of you may have noticed a name missing from the sketches of the makers of the constitution: Mahatma Gandhi. He was not a member of the Constituent Assembly. Yet there were many members who followed his vision. Years ago, writing in his magazine Young India in 1931, he had spelt out what he wanted the Constitution to do: I shall strive for a constitution which will release India from all thralldom and patronage ... 1 shall work for an India in which the poorest shall feel that it is their country in whose making they have an effective voice; an India in which there shall be no high class and low class of people; an India in which all communities shall live in perfect harmony. There can be no room in such an India for the curse of untouchability or the curse of the intoxicating drinks and drugs. Women will enjoy the same rights As men ... I shall be satisfied with nothing else. This dream of an India that has eliminated inequality was shared by Dr. Ambedkar, who played a key role in the making of the Constitution but he had a different understanding of how inequalities could be removed. He often bitterly criticised Mahatma Gandhi and his vision. In his concluding speech to the Constituent Assem bly he stated his anxiety very clearly: on the 26" of Jamary 1950 we are Going to enter-a life of contradictions. In politics we will have equality