will awake to life and freedom. A moment comes, which comes but rarely in history, when we step out from the old to the new, when an age ends, and when the soul of a nation, long suppressed, finds utterance. It is fitting that at this solenm moment we take the pledge of dedication to the service of India and her people and to the stil larger cause of humanity ... Freedom and power bring responsibility. The responsibility rests upon this Assembly, a sovereign body representing the sovereign people of tndia. Before the birth of freedom we have endured all the pains of labour and our hearts are heavy with the memory of this sorrow. Some of those pains continne even now. Nevertheless, the past is over and it is the future that beckons to us now. That future is not one of ease or vesting but of incessant striving so that we may fulfil the pledges we have so often taken and the one we shall take today. The service of India means the service of the millions who suffer. 1t means the ending of poverty and ignorance and disease and inequality of opportunity. The ambition of the greatest man of our generation has been to wipe every tear from every eye. That may be beyond us, but as long as there are tears and suffering, so long our work will not be over. Read the three quotations above carefully. = Can you identify one idea that is common to all these three? = What are the differences in their ways of expressing that common idea? CONSTITUTIONAL DESIGN 27 Reprint 2025-26 articles of the Indian Constitution. The Constitution begins with a short Values that inspired and guided the statement of its basic values. This freedom struggle and were in turn is called the Preamble to the nurtured by it, formed the constitution. Taking inspiration foundation for India s democracy. from American model, most These values are embedded in the countries in the contemporary Preamble of the Indian world have chosen to begin their Constitution. They guide all the constitutions with a ee we tranquility, provide for the common defense, promote the general welfare, and secure the blessings of liberty fo ourselves and our posterity, do ordain ard establish (hig onstitution for fhe Anited Snteles of Wietica. " eal . es eS ett oe . a. 4 ~~ eee 4 % We, the people of South Africa, Recognise the tnjustices of our past; Honour those who suffered for justice and freedom in our land; Respect those who have worked to butld and develop our country; and Believe that South Africa belongs to all who live in it, united tn our diversity. We therefore, through our freely elected representatives, adopt this Constitution as the supreme law of the Republic so as to Heal the divisions of the past and establish a society based on democratic values, soctal justice and fundamental human rights; Lap the foundations for ademocratic and open society in