e
Haban comes to Guwahati with his father
from a remote village.

He sees people getting into strange
house like objects which move along the
road. He also sees a kitchen dragging a
number of house along with it. He is amazed
and asked his father Why don t our houses
move like the one we saw in Guwahati, Ba? 

Ba replies, These are not houses, they
are buses and trains. Unlike our houses these
are not made of bricks and stones, metal like
iron and alluminium are used in making

@ these. They do not move on their own. They
are driven by an engine which needs energy
to work. 

We use different things in our daily life made
from metal. Can you list a number of items
used in your house made of metals. Where do
these metals come from?

You have studied that the earth s crust is
made up of different minerals embedded in the
rocks. Various metals are extracted from these
minerals after proper refinement.

Minerals are an indispensable part of our
lives. Almost everything we use, from a tiny pin
to a towering building or a big ship, all are
made from minerals. The railway lines and the
tarmac (paving) of the roads, our implements
and machinery too are made from minerals.
Cars, buses, trains, aeroplanes are
manufactured from minerals and run on
power resources derived from the earth. Even
the food that we eat contains minerals. In all
stages of development, human beings have
used minerals for their livelihood, decoration,
festivities, religious and ceremonial rites.

and minerals

 
A bright smile from toothpaste

Toothpaste cleans your teeth. Abrasive
minerals like silica, limestone, aluminium
oxide and various phosphate minerals do the
cleaning. Fluoride which is used to reduce
cavities, comes from a mineral fluorite. Most
toothpaste are made white with titanium
oxide, which comes from minerals called
rutile, ilmenite and anatase. The sparkle in
some toothpastes comes from mica. The
 @ toothbrush and tube containing the paste are

made of plastics from petroleum. Find out
where these minerals are found?

Dig a little deeper and find out how many
minerals are used to make a light bulb?

 
All living things need minerals
Life processes cannot occur without minerals.
Although our mineral intake represents only
about 0.3 per cent of our total intake of
@ nutrients, they are so potent and so important

that without them we would not be able to
utilise the other 99.7 per cent of foodstuffs.

Dig a little deeper and collect Nutritional
Facts printed on food labels.

What is a mineral?

Geologists define mineral as a
 homogenous, naturally occurring substance
with a definable internal structure. Minerals
are found in varied forms in nature, ranging
from the hardest diamond to the softest talc.
Why are they so varied?

Reprint 2025-26

You have already learnt about rocks.
Rocks are combinations of homogenous
substances called minerals. Some rocks, for
instance limestone, consist of a single mineral
only, but majority of the rock consist of several
minerals in varying proportions. Although,
over 2000 minerals have been identified, only
a few are abundantly found in most of the
rocks.

A particular mineral that will be formed
from a certain combination of elements
depends upon the physical and chemical
conditions under which the material forms.
This, in turn, results in a wide range of colours,
hardness, crystal forms, lustre and density that
a particular mineral possesses. Geologists use
these properties to classify the minerals.

e- 

Study of Minerals by Geographers

and Geologists

Geographers study minerals as part of the
earth s crust for a better understanding of
landforms. The distribution of mineral
resources and associated economic activities
are of interest to geographers. A geologist,

e@ however, is interested in the formation of
minerals, their age and physical and
chemical composition.

However, for general and commercial
purposes minerals can be classified as under.

MopDE oF OCCURRENCE OF MINERALS

Where are these minerals found?

Minerals are usually found in ores . The
term ore is used to describe an accumulation
of any mineral mixed with other elements.
The mineral content of the ore must be in

sufficient concentration to make its extraction
commercially viable. The type of formation or
structure in which they are found determines
the relative ease with which mineral ores may
be mined. This also determines the cost of
extraction. It is, therefore, important for us
to understand the main types of formations
in which minerals occur.
Minerals generally occur in these forms:

(i) In igneous and metamorphic rocks
minerals may occur in the cracks,
crevices, faults or joints. The smaller
occurrences are called veins and the
larger are called lodes. In most cases,
they are formed when minerals in liquid/
molten and gaseous forms are forced
upward through cavities towards the
earth s surface. They cool and solidify as
they rise. Major metallic minerals like tin,
copper, zinc and lead etc. are obtained
from veins and lodes.

(ii) In sedimentary rocks a number of minerals
occur in beds or layers. They have been
formed as a result of deposition,
accumulation and concentration in
horizontal strata. Coal and some forms of
iron ore have been concentrated as a result
of long periods under great heat and
pressure. Another group of sedimentary
minerals include gypsum, potash salt and
sodium salt. These are formed as a result
of evaporation especially in arid regions.

(iii) Another mode of formation involves the
decomposition of surface rocks, and the
removal of soluble constituents, leaving
a residual mass of weathered
material containing ores. Bauxite is
formed this way.

CLASSIFICATION OF MINERALS

Minerals

 _ _T es

Metallic

Ferrous (containing Non-Ferrous
iron) e.g. iron ore, e.g. copper, lead,
Manganese, nickel tin, bauxite, etc.
cobalt, etc.

Fig. 5.1

Precious
e.g. gold, silver,
platinum, etc.

Non-Metallic Energy Minerals

e.g. mica, salt, Coal
potash, sulphur, Petroleum
granite, limestone, Natural gas

marble, sandstone, etc.

MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES

Reprint 2025-26

(iv) Certain minerals may occur as alluvial
deposits in sands of valley floors and the
base of hills. These deposits are called
 placer deposits and generally contain
minerals, which are not corroded by water.
Gold, silver, tin and platinum are most
important among such minerals.

(v) The ocean waters contain vast quantities
of minerals, but most of these are too widely
diffused to be of economic significance.
However, common salt, magnesium and
bromine are largely derived from ocean
waters. The ocean beds, too, are rich in

@ manganese nodules.

Interesting Fact

Rat-Hole Mining. Do you know that most
of the minerals in India are nationalised
and their extraction is possible only after
obtaining due permission from the
government? But in most of the tribal
areas of the north-east India, minerals are
owned by individuals or communities. In
Meghalaya, there are large deposits of coal,
iron ore, limestone and dolomite etc. Coal
mining in Jowai and Cherapunjee is done
by family member in the form of a long
narrow tunnel, known as Rat hole 
mining. The National Green Tribunal has
declared such activities illegal and
recommended that these should be
stopped forthwith.

Dig a little deeper: What is the difference
between an open pit mine, a quarry.and an
underground mine with shafts?

India is fortunate to have fairly rich and
varied mineral resources. However, these are
unevenly distributed. Broadly speaking,
peninsular rocks contain most of the reserves
of coal, metallic minerals, mica and many other
non-metallic minerals. Sedimentary rocks on
the western and eastern flanks of the peninsula,
in Gujarat and Assam have most of the
petroleum deposits. Rajasthan with the rock
systems of the peninsula, has reserves of many

CONTEMPORARY INDIA II

non-ferrous minerals. The vast alluvial plains
of north India are almost devoid of economic
minerals. These variations exist largely because
of the differences in the geological structure,
processes and time involved in the formation
of minerals.

Let us now study the distribution of a few
major minerals in India. Always remember that
the concentration of mineral in the ore, the ease
of extraction and closeness to the market play
an important role in affecting the economic
viability of a reserve. Thus, to meet the demand,
a choice has to be made between a number of
possible options. When this is done a mineral
 deposit or reserve turns into a mine.

Ferrous Minerals

Ferrous minerals account for about threefourths of the total value of the production of
metallic minerals. They provide a strong base
for the development of metallurgical industries.
India exports substantial quantities of ferrous
minerals after meeting her internal demands.

Iron Ore

Iron ore is the basic mineral and the backbone
of industrial development. India is endowed
with fairly abundant resources ofiron ore. India
is rich in good quality iron ores. Magnetite is
the finest iron ore with a very high content of
iron up to 70 per cent. It has excellent magnetic
qualities, especially valuable in the electrical
industry. Hematite ore is the most important
industrial iron ore in terms of the quantity
used, but has a slightly lower iron content than
magnetite. (50-60 per cent). In 2018-19 almost
entire production of iron ore (97%) accrued
from Odisha, Chhattisgarh, Karnataka and
Jharkhand. The remaining production (3%)
was from other states.

Do you know?

Kudre in Kannada means horse. The
highest peak in the western ghats of
Karnataka resembles the face of a horse.
The Bailadila hills look like the hump of
an ox, and hence its name.

Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 5.2: Iron ore mine

The major iron ore belts in India are:

Odisha-Jharkhand belt: In Odisha high
grade hematite ore is found in Badampahar
mines in the Mayurbhanj and Kendujhar
districts. In the adjoining Singbhum
district of Jharkhand haematite iron ore is
mined in Gua and Noamundi.

Durg-Bastar-Chandrapur belt lies in
Chhattisgarh and Maharashtra. Very high
grade hematites are found in the famous
Bailadila range of hills in the Bastar district
of Chhattisgarh. The range of hills
comprise of 14 deposits of super high
grade hematite iron ore. It has the best
physical properties needed for steel
making. Iron ore from these mines is
exported to Japan and South Korea via
Vishakhapatnam port.

Ballari-Chitradurga-ChikkamagaluruTumakuru belt in Karnataka has large
reserves of iron ore. The Kudremukh mines
located in the Western Ghats of Karnataka
are a 100 per cent export unit. Kudremukh
deposits are known to be one of the largest
in the world. The ore is transported as
slurry through a pipeline to a port near
Mangaluru.

Maharashtra-Goa belt includes the state
of Goa and Ratnagiri district of

Maharashtra. Though, the ores are not of
very high quality, yet they are efficiently
exploited. Iron ore is exported through
Marmagao port.

Manganese

Manganese is mainly used in the
manufacturing of steel and ferro-manganese
alloy. Nearly 10 kg of manganese is required
to manufacture one tonne of steel. It is also
used in manufacturing bleaching powder,
insecticides and paints.

Andhra Others
Pradesh WMH
10%

Karnataka
12%
Madhya

Pradesh
33%

Odisha
16%

Maharashtra
27%

Fig. 5.3: Production of Manganese showing
state-wise share in per cent, 2018-19

Dig a little deeper: Superimpose the maps

showing distribution of iron ore, manganese,

coal and iron and steel industry. Do you see
any correlation. Why?

Non-Ferrous Minerals

India s reserves and production of nonferrous minerals is not very satisfactory.
However, these minerals, which include
copper, bauxite, lead, zinc and gold play a
vital role in a number of metallurgical,
engineering and electrical industries. Let us
study the distribution of copper and
bauxite.

MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES

Reprint 2025-26

68 E 12 

AFGHANISTAN
36 N

INDIA
IMPORTANT MINERALS

PAKISTAN
CHINA
(TIBET)

NM. XN. Sai 1
Wie fe, aire a Ss oy
ia re BHUTAN 0
%& Ajmer ia: 5 YAR car Wa
Beawar att - q oe a: Sg JS.

= bt . 2

- Coe, aie 5 PUI ae on, ( Gaya oe . ~.'
POTS Bb eee, a er *Banotavesiy)

 
 

fo eteceenascnanna . Reeth een Rathi O -azepean vat 2 a

wetSonnesssanantecceseandbgcetebarendnss*DUMDigeessosengtig Seveeecengnanneresdptanecseesecscessee gs fA L ic of Cancer
pmaraniag 2 i Wt ee

\p

l

Sundesgath A RS abhebl .
. Balaghat >. na
ee Bilaspur .

* Nagpur fo) Adurg- Kendujhar
Bhandara Waikae Hill

A
Chantiraptr . = ae

ARABIAN ag? Baila e oom
SEA m4 ot
Vishakhapatnam

IRON ORE FIELDS
A IRON ORE MINES
m= IRON ORE EXPORTING PORTS
<> MANGANESE
@ BAUXITE
%& MICA

LAKSHADWEEP
(INDIA)
 ae!
ay 8 N
IN DYAN %
72 E 76 Q

India: Distribution of Iron Ore, Manganese, Bauxite and Mica

CONTEMPORARY INDIA II

Reprint 2025-26

Copper

India is critically deficient in the reserve and
production of copper. Being malleable, ductile
and a good conductor, copper is mainly used
in electrical cables, electronics and chemical

industries. The Balaghat mines in Madhya
Pradesh, Khetri mines in Rajasthan and
Singhbhum district of Jharkhand are leading
producers of copper.

Bauxite

Though, several ores
contain aluminium, it
is from bauxite, a
clay-like substance
that alumina and
later aluminium is
obtained. Bauxite
deposits are formed
by the decomposition
of a wide variety of
rocks rich in
aluminium silicates.

Aluminium is an
important metal
because it combines
the strength of metals
such as iron, with
extreme lightness
and also with good
conductivity and
great malleability.

Indias bauxite
deposits are mainly
found in the
Amarkantak plateau, Maikal hills and the
plateau region of Bilaspur Katni.

Madhya

Maharashtra Pradesh
6% 3

Chhattisgarh

Odisha

Jharkhand

Fig. 5.5: Production of Bauxite showing state-wise
share in per cent, 2018-19

Odisha was the largest bauxite producing
state in India in 2018-19. Panchpatmali
deposits in Koraput district are the most
important bauxite deposits in the state.

Fig.5.6: Bauxite Mine

Dig a little deeper: Locate the mines of
Bauxite on the physical map of India.

MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES

Reprint 2025-26

 .
Interesting Fact

After the discovery of aluminium
Emperor Napoleon III wore buttons and
hooks on his clothes made of aluminium
and served food to his more illustrious
guests in aluminium utensils and the
less honourable ones were served in gold
and silver utensils. Thirty years after this
incident aluminium bowls were most
common with the beggars in Paris.

Rock Minerals

Limestone is found in association with rocks
composed of calcium carbonates or calcium
and magnesium carbonates. It is found in
sedimentary rocks of most geological
formations. Limestone is the basic raw
material for the cement industry and
essential for smelting iron ore in the blast
furnace.

Dig a little deeper: Study the maps to explain

why Chota Nagpur is a storehouse of minerals.

Non-Metallic Minerals

Mica is a mineral made up ofa series of plates
or leaves. It splits easily into thin sheets. These
sheets can be so thin that a thousand can be
layered into a mica sheet of a few centimeters
high. Mica can be clear, black, green, red yellow
or brown. Due to its excellent di-electric
strength, low power loss factor, insulating
properties and resistance to high voltage, mica
is one of the most indispensable minerals used
in electric and electronic industries.

Mica deposits are found in the northern
edge of the Chota Nagpur plateau. Koderma
Gaya Hazaribagh belt of Jharkhand is the
leading producer.

In Rajasthan, the major mica producing
area is around Ajmer. Nellore mica belt of
Andhra Pradesh is also an important producer
in the country.

Madhya Pradesh
13%

Fig. 5.7: Production of Limestone showing
state-wise share in per cent, 2018-19

e(

Hazards of Mining r

Have you ever wondered about the efforts the miners make in making life comfortab
for you? What are the impacts of mining on
the health of the miners and the environment?

The dust and noxious fumes inhaled by
miners make them vulnerable to pulmonary
diseases. The risk of collapsing mine roofs,
inundation and fires in coalmines are a
constant threat to miners.

The water sources in the region get
contaminated due to mining. Dumping of waste
and slurry leads to degradation of land, soil,
and increase in stream and river pollution.

Fig. 5.8: Air pollution due to
generation of dust in mining areas

CONTEMPORARY INDIA II

Reprint 2025-26

Jharia to be shifted

COAL FIRE CATASTROPHE

3. Unmined coal
burns with oxygen
drawn from pores
and mine shafts

4. People are at risk

Law Kumar Mishra | te

Dhanbad: The government
has decided to relocate an entire township Jharia because of the uncontrollable
spread of underground fires
that have been burning for
years in the coal belt.

 The Centre has already
sanctioned Rs 14 crore for the
first phase of shifting. 

Claiming It to be one of the
world s major evacuation
drives, Soren said the shifting
would be done in three phases in five vears and he alsn as.
su

1990, According to the Rana

|, the cost of shifting people will be at Rs 20,000 crore.
The Rana panel had also said,
 It is profitable to shift people
from Jharia, since coal worth
Rs 60,000 crore is lying
unutilisad heneath the Tharia

Coalunitfined Over 50%
Rs 300 cr in
damages. Of COal-belt

Dhananjay Mahapatra | Tw

New Delhi: The Supreme Court
has asked India s largest coal
producing company South
Eastern Coalfields Ltd to pay
within a month Rs 300 crore as
compensation for using forest
land in Chhattisgarh. This is in
addition to Rs 50 crore already
paid by the PSU, which is a subsidiary of Coal India Ltd, to continue its operations in the state.

SECL will have to pay Rs 100
crore within a week and the rest
within a month, the forest Bench
comprising CJI Y K Sabharwal
and Justices Arijit Pasayat and
SH Kapadia directed on Friday.

 The court, in its earlier judgment, had said that all companies were liable to pay Penal
Compensatory Afforestation
cost and amount of Net Present
Value to continue operations in
forest land already allotted to
them by the states.

Appearing for the PSU, solicitor general G E Vahanvati argued that the company had one
of the best records for protection of environment and had
won awards at the national and

@ _ State level. He said the Rs 50
crore already deposited by the
company was compensation
enough for it to be allowed coal
mining operations. Appearing
for the ministry of environment

and farecte eramnesl ANN Raa

mines unsafe 

Law Kumar Mishra | tw

Dhanbad: Three days after one of the worst
mining disasters in decades left 54 people
dead, the chief of the company which
owns these mines, said no less than half the
mines in the area did not meet the basic
safety standards.

Bharat Coking Coal Ltd (BCCL) chairman Partho Bhattacharya, however, said
on Saturday the company shouldn't be
blamed for operating unsafe mines because
workers and trade unions had blocked
moves to shut these for fear of losing jobs.
He said only one out of 41 mines was operated scientifically and of the rest, the many
were functioning against the advice of the
Directorate General of Mines Safety. He described safety standards in 24 mines as poor.

Bhattacharya said workers were aware
that they would have to seek voluntary retirement if unsafe mines were shut.

Bharat Coking Coal management on Sat
also handed over employment letters
to the immediate people nominated by families of victims. Ironically, these people,
most likely, would go to work in mines
deemed unsafe by the company.

BCCL 's audit of the safety status of
mines, graded second and third degrees,

WAIT AND WATCH: A crowd watches the ongoing rescue operation
outside the Bharat Coking Coal Ltd mine at Bhatdih in Jharkhand

on Thursday

 Safety standards
were not in place 

Law Kumar Mishra | twn

Dhanbad: Union coal minister
Shibu Soren on Thursday announced an ex gratia of Rs 3
lakh to the families of the mine
tragedy victims. Soren said:
y ts of the victims will
be provided employment by the
Bharat Coking Coal from today.
A probe by the director general of mines safety and the
labour commissioner will also
be initiated. 

Soren also held discussions
with Bharat Coking Coal officials and promised medical
help to the four survivors.

Stricter

and

tained, even though the director general of mine safety carries out surveys of the safety
norms, an expert said.

Some agitating miners alleged that there is no emergency measures inside the
mine. We go deep between
400 feet and 1,500 ft into the
mines with only an oxygen
mask. The tragedy points to
the lack of security measures
by Bharat Coking Coal despite
previous instances of disasters
due to methane leak.

At least 48 people were killed
in explosions in Jeetpur mine,
43 in Sudamdeeh and 30 in

safety

regulations

implementation of environmental laws are
essential to prevent mining from becoming a
 killer industry .

CONSERVATION OF MINERALS

We all appreciate the strong dependence of
industry and agriculture upon mineral
deposits and the substances manufactured
from them. The total volume of workable
mineral deposits is an insignificant fraction
i.e. one per cent of the earth s crust. We are
rapidly consuming mineral resources that

required millions of years to be created and
concentrated. The geological processes of
mineral formation are so slow that the rates
of replenishment are infinitely small in
comparison to the present rates of
consumption. Mineral resources are,
therefore, finite and non-renewable. Rich
mineral deposits are our country s extremely
valuable but short-lived possessions.
Continued extraction of ores leads to
increasing costs as mineral extraction comes

from greater depths along with decrease @,

in quality.

MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES

Reprint 2025-26

Aconcerted effort has to be made in order
to use our mineral resources in a planned
and sustainable manner. Improved
technologies need to be constantly evolved to
allow use of low grade ores at low costs.
Recycling of metals, using scrap metals and
other substitutes are steps in conserving our
mineral resources for the future.

Dig a little deeper: Make a list of items where
substitutes are being used instead of minerals.
Where are these substitutes obtained from?

Energy Resources

Energy is required for all activities. It is needed
to cook, to provide light and heat, to propel
vehicles and to drive machinery in industries.

Energy can be generated from fuel
minerals like coal, petroleum, natural gas,
uranium and from electricity. Energy
resources can be classified as conventional
and non-conventional sources. Conventional
sources include: firewood, cattle dung cake,
coal, petroleum, natural gas and electricity
(both hydel and thermal). Non-conventional
sources include solar, wind, tidal, geothermal,
biogas and atomic energy. Firewood and cattle
dung cake are most common in rural India.
According to one estimate more than 70 per
cent energy requirement in rural households
is met by these two ; continuation of these is
increasingly becoming difficult due to
decreasing forest area. Moreover, using dung
cake too is being discouraged because it
consumes most valuable manure which could
be used in agriculture.

Conventional Sources of Energy

Coal: In India, coal is the most abundantly
available fossil fuel. It provides a substantial
part of the nation s energy needs. It is used
for power generation, to supply energy to
industry as well as for domestic needs. India
is highly dependent on coal for meeting its
commercial energy requirements.

As you are already aware that coal is
formed due the compression of plant material
over millions of years. Coal, therefore, is
found in a variety of forms depending on the
degrees of compression and the depth and

CONTEMPORARY INDIA II

Fig. 5.9 (b): A view from outside of a coal mine

time of burial. Decaying plants in swamps
produce peat. Which has a low carbon and
high moisture contents and low heating
capacity. Lignite is a low grade brown coal,
which is soft with high moisture content. The
principal lignite reserves are in Neyveli in Tamil
Nadu and are used for generation of
electricity. Coal that has been buried deep
and subjected to increased temperatures is
bituminous coal. It is the most popular coal
in commercial use. Metallurgical coal is high
grade bituminous coal which has a special
value for smelting iron in blast furnaces.
Anthracite is the highest quality hard coal.

In India coal occurs in rock series of two
main geological ages, namely Gondwana, a
little over 200 million years in age and in
tertiary deposits which are only about 55
million years old. The major resources of
Gondwana coal, which are metallurgical coal,
are located in Damodar valley (West Bengal
Reprint 2025-26

68 E 12

AFGHANISTAN

36 N

36 N
INDIA

CONVENTIONAL ENERGY RESOURCES

PAKISTAN | ae

CHINA

(TIBET) pe we

a. an I Bry a
ee BHUTAN . 5 Harkatia
New ~. ad in.
oo
na SS ~ ea 4 cooN

a Boiron A Ratan ol Ee te mon

* singaraul re

Taicher

Mumbai High m aw oS 5
ARABI@N aif Me BAY OF
SEA we a BENGAL
Coal Fields
A Coal Mines
B Oil Fields
Major Natural Gas Reserves
 HVJ Natural Gas Pipeline

ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS
aad (INDIA)
* 8 N
INDIAN 
YE 76 0

India: Distribution of Coal, Oil and Natural Gas

Activity
Collect information about cross country natural gas pipelines laid by GAIL
(India) under One Nation One Grid .

MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES

Reprint 2025-26

Jharkhand). Jharia, Raniganj, Bokaro are
important coalfields. The Godavari,
Mahanadi, Son and Wardha valleys also
contain coal deposits.

Tertiary coals occur in the north eastern
states of Meghalaya, Assam, Arunachal
Pradesh and Nagaland.

Remember coal is a bulky material, which
loses weight on use as it is reduced to ash.
Hence, heavy industries and thermal power
stations are located on or near the coalfields.

Petroleum

Petroleum or mineral oil is the next major
energy source in India after coal. It provides
fuel for heat and lighting, lubricants for
machinery and raw materials for a number of
manufacturing industries. Petroleum refineries
act as a nodal industry for synthetic textile,
fertiliser and numerous chemical industries.

Most of the petroleum occurrences in India
are associated with anticlines and fault traps
in the rock formations of the tertiary age. In
regions of folding, anticlines or domes, it
occurs where oil is trapped in the crest of the
upfold. The oil bearing layer is a porous
limestone or sandstone through which oil may
flow. The oil is prevented from rising or
sinking by intervening non-porous layers.

Petroleum is also found in fault traps
between porous and non-porous rocks. Gas,
being lighter usually occurs above the oil.

Mumbai High, Gujarat and Assam are

major petroleum production areas in India.
From the map locate the 3 major off shore
fields of western India. Ankeleshwar is the
most important field of Gujarat. Assam is the
oldest oil producing state of India. Digboi,
Naharkatiya and Moran-Hugrijan are the
important oil fields in the state.

Natural Gas

Natural Gas is found with petroleum deposits
and is released when crude oil is brought to
the surface. It can be used as a domestic and
industrial fuel. It is used as fuel in power sector
to generate electricity, for heating purpose in
industries, as raw material in chemical,
petrochemical and fertilizer industries, as
transport fuel and as cooking fuel. With the
expansion of gas infrastructure and local city

CONTEMPORARY INDIA II

gas distribution (COD) networks, natural gas
is also emerging as a preferred transport fuel
(CNG) and cooking fuel (PNG) at homes. India s
major gas reserves are found in the Mumbai
High and allied fields along the west coast
which are supplemented by finds in the
Cambay basin. Along the East Coast, new
reserves of natural gas have been discovered
in the Krishna-Godavari basin.

The first 1,700 km long Hazira-VijaipurJagdishpur (HVJ) cross country gas pipeline,
constructed by GAIL (India), linked Mumbai
High and Bassein gas fields with various
fertilizer, power and industrial complexes in
western and northen India. This artery
provided impetus to Indian gas market
development. Overall, India s gas infrastructure
has expanded over ten times from 1,700 km
to 18,500 km of cross-country pipelines and
is expected to soon reach over 34, 000 km as
Gas Grid by linking all gas sources and
consuming markets across the country
including North Eastern states.

Electricity

Electricity has such a wide range of
applications in today s world that, its percapita
consumption is considered as an index of
development. Electricity is generated mainly in
two ways: by running water which drives hydro
turbines to generate hydro electricity; and by
burning other fuels such as coal, petroleum
and natural gas to drive turbines to produce
thermal power. Once generated the electricity
is exactly the same.

Activity
Name some river valley projects and write
the names of the dams built on these rivers.

Hydro electricity is generated by fast
flowing water, which is a renewable resource.
India has a number of multi-purpose projects
like the Bhakra Nangal, Damodar Valley
corporation, the Kopili Hydel Project etc.
producing hydroelectric power.

Thermal electricity is generated by using
coal, petroleum and natural gas. The thermal
power stations use non-renewable fossil fuels
for generating electricity.

Reprint 2025-26

68 E 12 

AFGHANISTAN
36 N

PAKISTAN
oN rain Ve a She

 @ Nashik

ARABIAN
SEA
LAKSHADWEEP
(INDIA)

INDIAW
72 E

Faridabad

* KERR Bhata a

INDIA
POWER PLANTS

Relhi ms Pas Woe,

Serica
: @ Panki : Nem, v yo4 sti Bongeigar 3
 Barichh >. Barauni <f. fe > a
ge? arg a at e F P
wet fe H

Vy 2
Ay
 Sean.

 
x

i ee

* ~ 2
eis Fi .s rors '

mi aoet SG .BANGLADESYD

Singrau Bg gid : _Buroabur fa

paneer ee Ch iene Se 1
Satpura n ee ewe

_* Mane

Bhusawal Kora u
Parli_, eS Si
Rariiagundam e . ie

 Kottagudam,>
A NUCLEAR
@ THERMAL

_Miayawata e
Ennore

Talcher

BAY OF
BENGAL

= ener

ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS
(INDIA)

 
600 km -g

eg 8 N
92 F

India: Distribution of Nuclear and Thermal Power Plants

MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES

Reprint 2025-26

Collect information about thermal/hydel
power plants located in your state. Show
them on the map of India.

Non-Conventional Sources of Energy

The growing consumption of energy has
resulted in the country becoming increasingly
dependent on fossil fuels such as coal, oil and
gas. Rising prices of oil and gas and their
potential shortages have raised uncertainties
about the security of energy supply in future,
which in turn has serious repercussions on the
growth of the national economy. Moreover,
increasing use of fossil fuels also causes
serious environmental problems. Hence, there
is a pressing need to use renewable energy
sources like solar energy, wind, tide, biomass
and energy from waste material. These are
called non-conventional energy sources.

India is blessed with an abundance of
sunlight, water, wind and biomass. It has the
largest programmes for the development of
these renewable energy resources.

Nuclear or Atomic Energy

It is obtained by altering the structure of
atoms. When such an alteration is made, much
energy is released in the form of heat and this
is used to generate electric power. Uranium and
Thorium, which are available in Jnarkhand and
the Aravalli ranges of Rajasthan are used for
generating atomic or nuclear power. The
Monazite sands of Kerala is also rich in
Thorium.

Locate the 6 nuclear power stations and find
out the state in which they are located.

Solar Energy

India is a tropical country. It has enormous
possibilities of tapping solar energy.
Photovoltaic technology converts sunlight
directly into electricity. Solar energy is fast
becoming popular in rural and remote areas.
Some big solar power plants are being
established in different parts of India which
will minimise the dependence of rural
households on firewood and dung cakes,
which in turn will contribute to environmental
conservation and adequate supply of manure

4 @) in agriculture.
A

CONTEMPORARY INDIA II

Fig. 5.10: Solar operated electronic milk
testing equipment

Activity
Collect information about newly established
solar power plants in India.

Wind power

India has great potential of wind power. The
largest wind farm cluster is located in Tamil
Nadu from Nagarcoil to Madurai. Apart from
these, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Gujarat,
Kerala, Maharashtra and Lakshadweep have
important wind farms. Nagarcoil and
Jaisalmer are well known for effective use of
wind energy in the country.

Fig. 5.11: Wind mills Nagarcoil

Biogas

Shrubs, farm waste, animal and human waste
are used to produce biogas for domestic
consumption in rural areas. Decomposition
of organic matter yields gas, which has higher
thermal efficiency in comparison to kerosene,
dung cake and charcoal. Biogas plants are
set up at municipal, cooperative and
individual levels. The plants using cattle dung
are known as Gobar gas plants in rural India.
These provide twin benefits to the farmer in
the form of energy and improved quality of

Reprint 2025-26

manure. Biogas is by far the most efficient
use of cattle dung. It improves the quality of
manure and also prevents the loss of trees
and manure due to burning of fuel wood
and cow dung cakes.

Fig. 5.12: Biogas Plant

Tidal Energy

Oceanic tides can be used to generate
electricity. Floodgate dams are built across
inlets. During high tide water flows into the
inlet and gets trapped when the gate is closed.
After the tide falls outside the flood gate, the
water retained by the floodgate flows back to
the sea via a pipe that carries it through a
power -generating turbine.

In India the Gulf of Khambhat, the Gulf
of Kuchchh in Gujarat on the western coast
and Gangetic delta in Sunderban regions of
West Bengal provide ideal conditions for
utilising tidal energy.

Geo Thermal Energy

Geo thermal energy refers to the heat and
electricity produced by using the heat from
the interior of the Earth. Geothermal energy
exists because, the Earth grows progressively
hotter with increasing depth. Where the

geothermal gradient is high, high temperatures
are found at shallow depths. Groundwater in
such areas absorbs heat from the rocks and
becomes hot. It is so hot that when it rises to
the earth s surface, it turns into steam. This
steam is used to drive turbines and generate
electricity.

There are several hundred hot springs in
India, which could be used to generate
electricity. Two experimental projects have been
set up in India to harness geothermal energy.
One is located in the Parvati valley near
Manikaran in Himachal Pradesh and the other
is located in the Puga Valley, Ladakh.

Conservation of Energy Resources

Energy is a basic requirement for economic
development. Every sector of the national
economy agriculture, industry, transport,
commercial and domestic needs inputs of
energy. The economic development plans
implemented since Independence necessarily
required increasing amounts of energy to
remain operational. As a result, consumption
of energy in all forms has been steadily rising
all over the country.

In this background, there is an urgent need
to develop a sustainable path of energy
development. Promotion of energy conservation
and increased use of renewable energy sources
are the twin planks of sustainable energy.

India is presently one of the least energy
efficient countries in the world. We have to
adopt a cautious approach for the judicious
use of our limited energy resources. For
example, as concerned citizens we can do our
bit by using public transport systems instead
of individual vehicles; switching off electricity
when not in use, using power-saving devices
and using non-conventional sources of energy.
After all, energy saved is energy produced .

EXERCISES

1. Multiple choice questions.

(i) Which one of the following minerals is formed by decomposition of rocks,
leaving a residual mass of weathered material?

(a) coal (b) bauxite

(ii) Koderma, in Jharkhand is the leading producer of which one of the following

minerals?

(a) bauxite (b) mica

(c) gold (d) zinc

(c) iron ore (d) copper

MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES

Reprint 2025-26

(iii) Minerals are deposited and accumulated in the stratas of which of the
following rocks?

(a) sedimentary rocks (c) igneous rocks
(b) metamorphic rocks (d) none of the above

(iv) Which one of the following minerals is contained in the Monazite sand?
(a) oil (b) uranium (c) thorium (d) coal

2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.

(i) Distinguish between the following in not more than 30 words.
(a) ferrous and non-ferrous minerals
(b) conventional and non-conventional sources of energy

(ii) What is a mineral?

(iii) How are minerals formed in igneous and metamorphic rocks?

(iv) Why do we need to conserve mineral resources ?

3. Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Describe the distribution of coal in India.
(ii) Why do you think that solar energy has a bright future in India?

Activity

Fill the name of the correct mineral in the crossword below:

2 1
P|} et yey te} | ey fT

Oa A OO OOO
PEt; tT Ey eet | EE

CONTEMPORARY INDIA II

Reprint 2025-26

ACROSS

NOGA ON

A ferrous mineral (9)

Raw material for cement industry (9)
Finest iron ore with magnetic properties (9)
Highest quality hard coal (10)

Aluminium is obtained from this ore (7)
Khetri mines are famous for this mineral (6)
Formed due to evaporation (6)

Down

1. Found in placer deposit (4)

2. Iron ore mined in Bailadila (8)

3. Indispensable for electrical industry (4)

4. Geological Age of coal found in north east

gu

India (8)
Formed in veins and lodes (3)

MINERALS AND ENERGY RESOURCES

Reprint 2025-26