Hey Pinky, did you see those awesome T.V.
reports on floods in Assam? My God! What

You already know that three-fourth of the
earth s surface is covered with water, but only
a small proportion of it accounts for
freshwater that can be put to use. This
freshwater is mainly obtained from surface
run off and ground water that is continually
being renewed and recharged through the
hydrological cycle. All water moves within the
hydrological cycle ensuring that water is a
renewable resource.

You might wonder that if three-fourth of
the world is covered with water and water is
a renewable resource, then how is it that
countries and regions around the globe suffer
from water scarcity? Why is it predicted that
by 2025, nearly two billion people will live in
absolute water scarcity?

havoc they have created it has destroyed and
swept away everything in its path.

Yes, Chintu, I did. Isn't it strange that
water can give life and take life as well.
What would we do without water?

We need water to drink, cook our

food, wash our clothes and wash
ourselves as well. My father was
telling me that in his factory they

need a lot of water for a number of
things. Did you know that they even
need water for cooling the machines?
In fact, the factory runs on the power supplied by the
hydel power plant. Now, I can understand why

through the ages we humans have chosen to live

near water courses along the rivers and other water
sources like springs, lakes, ponds and oases.

WATER SCARCITY AND THE NEED FOR WATER
CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT

Given the abundance and renewability of
water, it is difficult to imagine that we may
suffer from water scarcity. The moment we
speak of water shortages, we immediately
associate it with regions having low rainfall
or those that are drought prone. We
instantaneously visualise the deserts of
Rajasthan and women balancing many
 matkas (earthen pots) used for collecting
and storing water and travelling long
distances to get water. True, the availability
of water resources varies over space and time,
mainly due to the variations in seasonal and
annual precipitation, but water scarcity in

Reprint 2025-26

most cases is caused by over-exploitation,
excessive use and unequal access to water
among different social groups.

Where is then water scarcity likely to
occur? As you have read in the hydrological
cycle, freshwater can be obtained directly
from precipitation, surface run off and
groundwater.

Is it possible that an area or region may
have ample water resources but is still facing
water scarcity? Many of our cities are such
examples. Thus, water scarcity may be an
outcome of large and growing population and

consequent greater demands for water, and
unequal access to it. A large population
requires more water not only for domestic
use but also to produce more food. Hence, to
facilitate higher food-grain production, water
resources are being over-exploited to expand
irrigated areas for dry-season agriculture.
Irrigated agriculture is the largest consumer
of water. Now it is needed to revolutionise the
agriculture through developing drought
resistant crops and dry farming techniques.
You may have seen in many television
advertisements that most farmers have their

Ue sit Sasa WA 25 Veh, sitea atta aat are eer A ae ar ats
are Fat Fat Gat sit 114 Ah, site anfties aut art eat Sor
wife act feet errr HY ear arava agar Bi Ser A ret at Saereray Bite
Wah ST H arpa aaa Hema 4 BMA Hh SHrcor Haat ar set
aat-arel Ff asi A agent Bag F wen arent rae at H are
were at aay Sor AH fore ort at ait H Sta Fi A st ger areor F eat
W weia ara, fra ea afer waters SH gre st
Frafira at wena FI

Water, Water Everywhere, Not a Drop to Drink:
After a heavy downpour, a boy collects drinking
water in Kolkata. Life in the city and its adjacent

=
districts was paralysed as incessant overnight rain,
meaning a record 180 mm, flooded vast area and =
disrupted traffic.

 
a

A Kashmiri earthquake survivor carries water in
the snow in a devastated village.

Fig. 3.1: Water Scarcity

Reprint 2025-26

own wells and tube-wells in their farms for
irrigation to increase their produce. But have
you ever wondered what this could result in?
That it may lead to falling groundwater levels,
adversely affecting water availability and food
security of the people.

Post-independent India witnessed
intensive industrialisation and urbanisation,
creating vast opportunities for us. Today, large
industrial houses are as commonplace as the
industrial units of many MNCs (Multinational
Corporations). The ever-increasing number of
industries has made matters worse by exerting
pressure on existing freshwater resources.
Industries, apart from being heavy users of
water, also require power to run them. Much
of this energy comes from hydroelectric power.
Moreover, multiplying urban centres with
large and dense populations and urban
lifestyles have not only added to water and
energy requirements but have further
aggravated the problem. If you look into the
housing societies or colonies in the cities, you
would find that most of these have their own
groundwater pumping devices to meet their
water needs. Not surprisingly, we find that
fragile water resources are being overexploited and have caused their depletion in
several of these cities.

Do you know?

Atal Bhujal Yojana (Atal Jal) is being
implemented in 8220 water stressed Gram
Panchayats of 229 administrative blocks /
talukas in 80 districts of seven states, viz.
Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, and
Uttar Pradesh. The selected States account
for about 37 per cent of the total number
of water stressed (over-exploited, critical
and semi-critical) blocks in India. One of
the key aspects of Atal Jal is to bring in
behavioural changes in the community,
from the prevailing attitude of
consumption to conservation and smart
water management.

Source: Annual Report, Ministry of Jal Shakti,
Government of India 2022-23

So far we have focused on the quantitative
aspects of water scarcity. Now, let us consider
another situation where water is sufficiently

available to meet the needs of the people, but,
the area still suffers from water scarcity. This
scarcity may be due to bad quality of water.
Lately, there has been a growing concern that
even if there is ample water to meet the needs
of the people, much of it may be polluted by
domestic and industrial wastes, chemicals,
pesticides and fertilisers used in agriculture,
thus, making it hazardous for human use.
Government of India has accorded highest
priority to improve the quality of life and
enhance ease of living of people especially those
living in rual areas by announcing the Jal
Jeevan Mission (JJM). The Goal of JJM is to
enable every rural household get assured
supply of potable piped water at a service level
of 55 litres per capita per day regularly on
long-term basis by ensuring functionality of
the tap water connections. (Source: Economic
Survey 2020-21, p.357)

You may have already realised that the need
of the hour is to conserve and manage our
water resources, to safeguard ourselves from
health hazards, to ensure food security,
continuation of our livelihoods and productive
activities and also to prevent degradation of our
natural ecosystems. Over exploitation and
mismanagement of water resources will
impoverish this resource and cause ecological
crisis that may have profound impact on
our lives.

Activity
From your everyday experiences, write a short
proposal on how you can conserve water.

MULTI-PURPOSE RIVER PROJECTS AND
INTEGRATED WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT

But, how do we conserve and manage water?
Archaeological and historical records show
that from ancient times we have been
constructing sophisticated hydraulic
structures like dams built of stone rubble,
reservoirs or lakes, embankments and canals
for irrigation. Not surprisingly, we have
continued this tradition in modern India by
building dams in most of our river basins.

Hydraulic Structures in Ancient India

 In the first century B.C., Sringaverapura
near Allahabad had sophisticated water

WATER RESOURCES

Reprint 2025-26

en!

$
\ }

harvesting system channelling the flood Multi-purpose projects, launched after

water of the river Ganga. Independence with their integrated water
* During the time of Chandragupta Maurya, resources management approach, were thought
dams, lakes and irrigation systems were of as the vehicle that would lead the nation to
extensively built. development and progress, overcoming the
* Evidences of sophisticated irrigation works ; ; ; 
have also been found in Kalinga, A dam is a barrier across flowing water that
(Odisha), Nagarjunakonda (Andhra obstructs, directs or retards the flow, often
Pradesh), Bennur (Karnataka), Kolhapur creating a reservoir, lake or impoundment.
(Maharashtra), etc. Dam refers to the reservoir rather than the

structure. Most dams have a section called a
spillway or weir over which or through which

 h . it is intended that water will flow either
 Inthe 14 Century, the tank in Hauz Khas, intermittently or continuously. Dams are
@ Delhi was constructed by Iltutmish for

\ e classified according to structure, intended
supplying water to Siri Fort area. purpose or height. Based on structure and
Source: Dying Wisdom, CSE, 1997. the materials used, dams are classified as

timber dams, embankment dams or masonry
dams, with several subtypes. According to
e the height, dams can be categorised as large

dams and major dams or alternatively as low
dams, medium height dams and high dams.

handicap ofits colonial past. Jawaharlal Nehru
proudly proclaimed the dams as the temples of
modern India ; the reason being that it would
integrate development of agriculture and the
village economy with rapid industrialisation and
growth of the urban economy.

 Inthe 11 Century, Bhopal Lake, one of the
largest artificial lakes of its time was built.

ee

7 = ~Activity
Fig. 3.2: Hirakud Dam Find out more about any one traditional

What are dams and how do they help us method of building dams and irrigation works.
in conserving and managing water? Dams
were traditionally built to impound rivers and @
rainwater that could be used later to irrigate We have sown the crops in Asar
agricultural fields. Today, dams are built not We will bring Bhadu in Bhadra
just for irrigation but for electricity generation,
water supply for domestic and industrial Floods have swollen the Damodar
uses, flood control, recreation, inland The sailing boats cannot sail

navigation and fish breeding. Hence, dams are
now referred to as multi-purpose projects
where the many uses of the impounded water Reduce the floods a little
are integrated with one another. For example,
in the Sutluj-Beas river basin, the Bhakra 
Nangal project water is being used both for Let the boats sail on your surface

hydel power production and irrigation. (This popular Bhadu song in the Damodar valley

Similarly, the Hirakud project in the e region narrates the troubles faced by people
Mahanadi basin integrates conservation of oe the to the pooding of Damodar river known
water with flood control. as the river of sorrow.)

CONTEMPORARY INDIA II

Oh! Damodar, we fall at your feet

Bhadu will come a year later

Reprint 2025-26

In recent years, multi-purpose projects
and large dams have come under great
scrutiny and opposition for a variety of
reasons. Regulating and damming of rivers
affect their natural flow causing poor sediment
flow and excessive sedimentation at the bottom
of the reservoir, resulting in rockier stream
beds and poorer habitats for the rivers aquatic
life. Dams also fragment rivers making it
difficult for aquatic fauna to migrate, especially
for spawning. The reservoirs that are created
on the floodplains also submerge the existing
vegetation and soil leading to its
decomposition over a period of time.

Do you know?

Sardar Sarovar Dam has been built over
the Narmada River in Gujarat. This is one
of the largest water resource projects of
India covering four states Maharashtra,
Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat and Rajasthan.
The Sardar Sarovar project would meet the
requirement of water in drought-prone and
desert areas. Sardar Sarovar Project will
provide irrigation facilities to 18.45 lakh
hectare of land, covering 3112 villages in
15 districts of Gujarat. It will also irrigate
2,46,000 hectare of land in the strategic
desert districts of Barmer and Jalore in
Rajasthan and 37,500 hectare in the tribal
hilly tract of Maharashtra through lift.
About 75 per cent of the command area in
Gujarat is drought prone while entire
command in Rajasthan is drought prone.
Assured water supply will soon make this
area drought proof.

Source: Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Ltd.
https://www.sardarsarovardam. org/

Ironically, the dams that were constructed
to control floods have triggered floods due to
sedimentation in the reservoir. Moreover, the
big dams have mostly been unsuccessful in
controlling floods at the time of excessive
rainfall.

Activity
Collect information about floods occurred in
different parts of the country due to heavy
rainfall in recent times.

These floods have not only devastated life
and property but also caused extensive soil
erosion. Sedimentation also meant that the flood
plains were deprived of silt, a natural fertiliser,
further adding on to the problem of land
degradation. It was also observed that the multipurpose projects induced earthquakes, caused
water-borne diseases and pests and pollution
resulting from excessive use of water.

Irrigation has also changed the cropping
pattern of many regions with farmers shifting
to water intensive and commercial crops. This
has great ecological consequences like
salinisation of the soil.

Pradhan Mantri Krishi Sinchayee Yojana
has been started which ensures access to some
means to protective irrigation for all agricultural
farms in the country, thus bringing much
desired rural prosperity. Some of the broad
objectives of this programme are to enhance
the physical access of water on the farm and
expand cultivable area under assured
irrigation (har khet ko pani), improve on-farm
water use efficiency to reduce wastage and
increase availability both in duration and
extent, irrigation and other water saving
technologies (per drop more crop) and
introduce sustainable water conservation
practices, etc.

Do you know?

Do you know that the Krishna-Godavari
dispute is due to the objections raised by
Karnataka and Andhra _ Pradesh
governments? It is regarding the diversion
of more water at Koyna by the Maharashtra
government for a multipurpose project. This
would reduce downstream flow in their
states with adverse consequences for
agriculture and industry.

Activity

Make a list of inter-state water disputes.

WATER RESOURCES

Reprint 2025-26

&
"

|

68 E nex

AFGHANISTAN
36 N
INDIA
MAJOR RIVERS AND DAMS

CHINA
CT'ie2Et')
Tsangpo R.

Kota Barrag

Rana Pratap-Saga'
Gandhi Sagar { ae Taya

Konar@._

Sardar Sarovar
Narmada R. Hirakud
ARABIAN BAY OF
SEA BENGAL

16 & Nagarjuna Sagar
P =< ns
 ,

Tungabhadra 4 ae

ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS
LAKSHADWEEP (INDIA)

(ON) 0 200 400 600 km * 4
e ee} ss
2 8N
INDIAN
76 88 92 E %

India: Major Rivers and Dams

\ 24 Contemporary INDIA II

Reprint 2025-26

RAINWATER HARVESTING

Many thought that given the disadvantages
and rising resistance against the multipurpose projects, water harvesting system
was a viable alternative, both socioeconomically and environmentally. In
ancient India, along with the sophisticated
hydraulic structures, there existed an
extraordinary tradition of water-harvesting
system. People had in-depth knowledge of
rainfall regimes and soil types and developed
wide ranging techniques to harvest
rainwater, groundwater, river water and flood
water in keeping with the local ecological
conditions and their water needs. In hill and
mountainous regions, people built diversion
channels like the guls or kuls of the
Western Himalayas for agriculture. Rooftop
rainwater harvesting was commonly

 FLOODS

Basic Safety Precautions To Be Taken :

practised to store drinking water,
particularly in Rajasthan. In the flood plains
of Bengal, people developed inundation
channels to irrigate their fields. In arid and
semi-arid regions, agricultural fields were
converted into rain fed storage structures
that allowed the water to stand and moisten
the soil like the khadins in Jaisalmer and
 Johads in other parts of Rajasthan.

In the semi-arid and arid regions of
Rajasthan, particularly in Bikaner, Phalodi
and Barmer, almost all the houses
traditionally had underground tanks or
tankas for storing drinking water. The tanks
could be as large as a big room; one
household in Phalodi had a tank that was
6.1 metres deep, 4.27 metres long and 2.44
metres wide. The tankas were part of the welldeveloped rooftop rainwater harvesting

THE RIDE OF HIS LIFE

Listen to radio/TV for the latest weather bulletins and flood warnings. Pass on the

information to others.

Make a family emergency kit which should include; a portable radio/transistor,
torch, spare batteries, a first aid box along with essential medicines, ORS, dry
food items, drinking water, matchboxes, candles and other essential items.

Keep hurricane lamp, ropes, rubber tubes, umbrella and bamboo stick in your
house. These could be useful.

Keep your cash, jewellery, valuables, important documents etc. in a safe place.

if there is a flood, move along with your family members and cattle to safe areas like
relief camps, evacuation centres, elevated grounds where you can take shelter.

Turn off power and gas connections before leaving your house.

8 <0 ROAR hatcopter rescues a woman and he chi trom the
village of Mamarashien's Hinges cestret In aft

Ti caspee wey rotant ie nena ouretaanotiees Bete pera AO IAP hetcopter rescons # worker who was bigger

the Roodeters of the Taw ver in Juemns on Tharscioy

Heavy rain drowns Kolkata

During floods
Don't enter into flood waters; it could be dangerous.
Don't allow children to play in or near flood waters.
Stay away from sewerage line, gutters, drains, culverts etc.
Be careful of snakes; snakebites are common during floods.
Stay away from electric poles and fallen power-lines to avoid electrocution.
Don t use wet electrical appliances - get them checked before use.
Eat freshly cooked and dry food. Always keep your food covered.
Use boiled and filtered drinking water.
Keep all drains, gutters near your house clean.

Stagnation of water can breed vector/water-borne diseases .In case of sickness,
seek medical assistance.
Use bleaching powder and lime to disinfect the surroundings.

PSR pak Ay Ae ML PRU NE 2

 waver Exprom Par Igee and Jo couned by 3 serievel depresiinn came

mba sete ss dempane fe city ratte

traim were ory with thei ast animate pups shop

Gerrit Crees Artes} Kanes lee ping (in reads weer eragey with few

Expeess Vets EMU and Circular rasbeay services eseadten peg ere

Collect information about flood prone areas of the country

WATER RESOURCES

Reprint 2025-26

system and were built inside the main house
or the courtyard. They were connected to the
sloping roofs of the houses through a pipe.
Rain falling on the rooftops would travel
down the pipe and was stored in these
underground tankas . The first spell of rain
was usually not collected as this would clean
the roofs and the pipes. The rainwater from
the subsequent showers was then collected.

Cen

(a) Recharge through Hand Pump

(b) Recharge through Abandoned Dugwell

 Rooftop rainwater is collected using a PVC pipe

e Filtered using sand and bricks

 Underground pipe takes water to sump for
immediate usage

e Excess water from the sump is taken to the well

Water from the well recharges the underground

e Take water from the well (later)

Fig 3.3: Rooftop Rainwater Harvesting

: \26- CONTEMPORARY INDIA II

Are you

a water harvester?

This monsoon, join us in counting the raindrops

Fig. 3.4

The rainwater can be stored in the
tankas till the next rainfall making it an
extremely reliable source of drinking water
when all other sources are dried up,
particularly in the summers. Rainwater, or
palar pani, as commonly referred to in these
parts, is considered the purest form of
natural water. Many houses constructed
underground rooms adjoining the tanka to
beat the summer heat as it would keep the

A kul leads to a circular village tank, as the above
in the Kaza village, from which water is released

as and when required.

Fig 3.5: Traditional method of rainwater
harvesting

Reprint 2025-26

e .
Interesting Fact

Rooftop rainwater harvesting is the
most common practice in Shillong,
Meghalaya. It is interesting because
Cherapunjee and Mawsynram situated
at a distance of 55 km. from Shillong
receive the highest rainfall in the world,
yet the state capital Shillong faces acute
shortage of water. Nearly every
household in the city has a rooftop
rainwater harvesting structure. Nearly
15-25 per cent of the total water
requirement of the household comes
from rooftop water harvesting.

Activity
Find out other rainwater harvesting systems
existing in and around your locality.

room cool.

Today, in western Rajasthan, sadly the
practice of rooftop rainwater harvesting is on
the decline as plenty of water is available due
to the perennial Indira Gandhi Canal, though
some houses still maintain the tankas since
they do not like the taste of tap water.
Fortunately, in many parts ofrural and urban
India, rooftop rainwater harvesting is being
successfully adapted to store and conserve
water. In Gendathur, a remote backward
village in Mysuru, Karnataka, villagers have
installed, in their household s rooftop,
rainwater harvesting system to meet their
water needs. Nearly 200 households have
installed this system and the village has earned
the rare distinction of being rich in rainwater.
See Fig. 3.6 for a better understanding of the
rooftop rainwater harvesting system which is

adapted here. Gendathur receives an annual
precipitation of 1,000 mm, and with 80 per
cent of collection efficiency and of about 10
fillings, every house can collect and use about
50,000 litres of water annually. From the 200
houses, the net amount of rainwater harvested
annually amounts to 1,00,000 litres.

Rooftop harvesting was common across the towns
and villages of the Thar. Rainwater that falls on
the sloping roofs of houses is taken through a
pipe into an underground tanka (circular holes in
the ground). built in the main house or in the
courtyard. The picture above shows water being

taken from a neighbour s roof through a long pipe.

Here the neighbour s rooftop has been used for
collection of rainwater. The picture shows a hole
through which rainwater flows down into an
underground tanka.

Fig. 3.6

@

Interesting Fact

Tamil Nadu is the first state in India
which has made rooftop rainwater
harvesting structure compulsory to all
the houses across the state. There are
legal provisions to punish the defaulters.

WATER RESOURCES

Reprint 2025-26

ix

BaMsBoo Drip IRRIGATION SYSTEM

In Meghalaya, a 200-year-old system of tapping stream
and spring water by using bamboo pipes, is prevalent.
About 18-20 litres of water enters the bamboo pipe system,
gets transported over hundreds of metres, and finally
reduces to 20-80 drops per minute at the site of the plant.

Picture 1: Bamboo pipes are used to divert perennial springs
on the hilltops to the lower reaches by gravity.

Picture 2 and 3: The channel sections, made of bamboo, divert
water to the plant site where it is distributed into branches, again
made and laid out with different forms of bamboo pipes. The flow of
water into the pipes is controlled by manipulating the pipe positions.

Fig 3.7
Activity

Picture 4: Ifthe pipes pass a road,
they are taken high above the land.

Picture 5 and 6

Reduced channel sections
and diversion units are
used at the last stage of
water application. The last
channel section enables
water to be dropped near
the roots of the plant.

1. Collect information on how industries are polluting our water resources.
2. Enact with your classmates a scene of water dispute in your locality.

CONTEMPORARY INDIA II

Reprint 2025-26

EXERCISES

1. Multiple choice questions.

(i) Based on the information given below classify each of the situations as
 suffering from water scarcity or not suffering from water scarcity .

(a) Region with high annual rainfall.
(b) Region having high annual rainfall and large population.
(c) Region having high annual rainfall but water is highly polluted.
(d) Region having low rainfall and low population.
(ii) Which one of the following statements is not an argument in favour of multipurpose river projects?

(a) Multi-purpose projects bring water to those areas which suffer from
water scarcity.

(b) Multi-purpose projects by regulating water flow helps to control floods.

(c) Multi-purpose projects lead to large scale displacements and loss of
livelihood.

(d) Multi-purpose projects generate electricity for our industries and our
homes.
(iii) Here are some false statements. Identify the mistakes and rewrite them
correctly.

(a) Multiplying urban centres with large and dense populations and urban
lifestyles have helped in proper utilisation of water resources.

(b) Regulating and damming of rivers does not affect the river s natural
flow and its sediment flow.

(c) Today in Rajasthan, the practice of rooftop rainwater water harvesting
has gained popularity despite high water availability due to the Indira
Gandhi Canal.

2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) Explain how water becomes a renewable resource.
(ii) What is water scarcity and what are its main causes?

(iii) Compare the advantages and disadvantages of multi-purpose river projects.

3. Answer the following questions in about 120 words.
(i) Discuss how rainwater harvesting in semi-arid regions of Rajasthan is
carried out.
(ii) Describe how modern adaptations of traditional rainwater harvesting
methods are being carried out to conserve and store water.

Water RESOURCES Pk

Reprint 2025-26