he hated taking showers. The mahout laughed. . << a 7 = Zip Reprint 2025-26 Unit 2.indd 41 \ at A1 FRIENDSHIP munching: chewing wagged: moved from side to side convey: communicate crumbs: small pieces of food accompanied: went with someone plunging: jumping in trunk: long nose splashed: threw yelped: cried ON a i y i\) el. 09-Dec-24 3:50:01 PM | SS sy Poorvi GRabDE 6 On their way home, the elephant picked up the dog with his trunk and placed him on his back. The dog was delighted to get a ride. delighted: A farmer passing by saw the dog. Buntee, happy he yelled. The dog ran to him. The farmer hugged the dog and told the mahout that he was hugged: held looking for his dog ever since he disappeared _qjosely from his house. He was glad he found him now. eae The mahout had no objection to the farmer was not =) taking the dog home. The farmer tossed a g, rope round the neck of the dog, saying, Come Buntee, let s go home. WN Let us discuss 1. Talk about the things that Gajaraj and Buntee did together. Now, write in the shapes given below. One has been done for you. Buntee and Gajaraj 2. Why did the farmer hug Buntee? 3. Do you think Buntee will leave Gajaraj and go home with the farmer? Reprint 2025-26 Unit 2.indd 42 09-Dec-24 3:50:01 PM Il Only when the farmer pulled the rope did the dog realise that he was being taken away from his friend. He yelped, the elephant winced, but neither the farmer nor the mahout noticed that the two friends were in tears. The next day at lunch time the mahout served Gajaraj his favourite food. When the mahout came back after finishing his other chores, he was surprised to see that the food had remained untouched. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 2.indd 43 FRIENDSHIP realise: understand winced: shrunk back in pain or distress chores: daily duties Poorvi GRabDE 6 Why Gajaraj, aren t you hungry? he asked concerned. The elephant did not react. He may have slight indigestion. Let me not force _ slight: a little him to eat, thought the mahout. indigestion: That night too, Gajaraj did not touch his Upset stomach food nor the next day. Now, the mahout was worried. He ran his hand on Gajaraj s tummy and felt there was nothing wrong. Why was he not eating then? Is he missing his friend, that dog? the mahout wondered. Meanwhile at the farmer s house, the dog had also not touched his food ever since he was brought home. Are you missing your friend? asked the farmer remembering the happy look on Buntee s face while sitting on the elephant s back. I cannot see you go hungry, said the farmer, If you miss your friend so much, go to him. tummy: stomach The farmer removed the rope with which he had tied the dog. The dog, though weak, te Reprint