be, And make no judgements from afar, But love my friends the way they are. (i) The speaker says that feelings are important to understand friendship. Which line tells us this? (ii) Complete the sentence with the most suitable option. These lines tell us that the speaker is___ . A. helpful BB. thoughtful C. cheerful D. hopeful (ii) Fill in the blank with one word. The speaker does not wish to make any . She cares for them just as they are. IV Give one reason why we can say that this poem is a prayer. V Why does the speaker want to do more for her friend? VI Do you think that the speaker knows about the wishes of her friend? How can we say so? VII Do you also pray for your friend? What do you wish for? Discuss. Unit 2.indd 55 loyal he__f_1l, k___d, c___ing, ho t . Let us learn I The poet says, With special friends I feel I m blessed . Select the words that are similar to the meaning of being blessed, from those given below. II Good friends have a lot of qualities. Let us list some. Reprint 2025-26 Yi 09-Dec-24 3:50:07 PM | Poorvi GRabDE 6 Now, fill in the blanks with the words you just listed above. 1. My friend is always to me even when I make a mistake. 2. My friend shares things with me. She is very 3. My friend is because he always supports me. 4, My friend never lies. She is an person. 5. My friend and I believe in for each other. III Think of any three of your friends. Write three sentences on why you like each one of them. Let us listen I You will listen to a talk about some outdoor activities that two friends spend their time doing. As you listen, answer the given question in one or two word(s) only. (refer to page 72 for transcript) 1. What do the two friends purchase and use on the park bench? II You will once again listen to the talk about some outdoor activities of the two friends. As you listen, circle the pictures that show these activities. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 2.indd 56 09-Dec-24 3:50:09 PM FRIENDSHIP 1. In pairs, act the role of friends speaking to each other. Speak about the following situations: Awa e pa 2. Sharing tiffins at school You can use the following- You can use the following * Greet each ot Oo * Greet each other. Ask if y fay wishes to go/ Tell your friends what food items with yo Sar park. you have brought in your tiffin. * If yes, Ga)some activities. Ask them what they have brought. inno as what your friend would * Tell them you wish to share tiffins! like to do. Listen and share what Next, share with your friends, how you would also like to do together. it makes you feel. Reprint 2025-26 i Unit 2.indd 57 09-Dec-24 3:50:15