the farmer s house, the dog had also not touched his food ever since he was brought home. Are you missing your friend? asked the farmer remembering the happy look on Buntee s face while sitting on the elephant s back. I cannot see you go hungry, said the farmer, If you miss your friend so much, go to him. tummy: stomach The farmer removed the rope with which he had tied the dog. The dog, though weak, te Reprint 2025-26 Unit 2.indd 44 09-Dec-24 3:50:03 PM FRIENDSHIP sprang to his feet. He licked the farmer s hand sprang: once and then ran. He stopped only when he jumped arrived at the stable. The elephant picked up the dog with his trunk and gave him a joyous swing. The oe ; . , swing: move side mahout was relieved. He quickly brought the 4, ciqe or back food. Both of you eat first, he said. smaval feral By then the farmer who had followed the relieved: dog, joined him. The two of them watched _ thankful with satisfaction the two friends eating food. _ satisfaction: It s not only Gajaraj who has found a friend, happiness said the mahout hugging the farmer, I ve also found one. joyous: happy SuBBA Rao KATHAKIDS.COM Let us discuss 1. Why did Gajaraj not eat his food? 2. Who were friends at the end of the story? Let us think and reflect I Read the following lines and answer the questions that follow. 1. In spite of royal comforts, Gajaraj was sad because he had no friends. The mahout, or elephant trainer, was the only one he ever interacted with. The mahout was a kind man who served Gajaraj food, and gave him a bath in the elephant pond daily. He was a good caretaker, but not a friend. (i) Complete with one word: mahout : kind : : Gajaraj : Reprint 2025-26 Yi Unit 2.indd 45 09-Dec-24 3:50:03 PM| Poorvi GRabDE 6 (ii) The mahout was a good caretaker because he gave _ to Gajaraj anda in the pond. (iii) What do you think is the difference between a friend and a caretaker? 2. Are you missing your friend? asked the farmer remembering the happy look on Buntee s face while sitting on the elephant s back. I cannot see you go hungry, said the farmer, If you miss your friend so much, go to him. The farmer removed the rope with which he had tied the dog. (i) The farmer uses the word to refer to the elephant. (ii) How did the farmer know that Buntee was hungry? (iii) Why did the farmer remove the rope with which he had tied Buntee? (iv) Complete with one word: Gajaraj : Buntee :: : farmer II Give two examples to show that Gajaraj was very happy to have a friend. III How did the mahout come to know that Gajaraj was sad? IV Why do you think Buntee licked the farmer s hand? V