FRIENDSHIP THe UNLIKELY BEstT FRIENDS Let us do these activities before we read. qQ I Friends are an important part of our lives. Why do you think so? Share your ideas with your friend. What do you do when you are with your friends and how do you feel? Now, complete the following sentences by writing in the shapes given below. Share your completed sentences with your classmates and teacher. One has been done for you. play happy With my friend I feel II The title of the chapter is The Unlikely Best Friends . 1. What can be the meaning of unlikely ? Discuss in groups, and then discuss with your teacher. 2. Can you think of some unlikely friends? Share your answer with your teacher. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 2.indd 39 09-Dec-24 3:49:59 PM Poorvi GRabDE 6 I Gajaraj, the elephant, lived in the best booth of the royal stables. The king was fond of Gajaraj, and he had ordered that the elephant should be well looked after. In spite of royal comforts, Gajaraj was sad because he had no friends. The mahout, or elephant trainer, was the only one he ever interacted with. The mahout was a kind man who served Gajaraj food, and gave him a bath in the elephant pond daily. He was a good caretaker, but not a friend. IT wish I had a friend I can play with, thought Gajaraj. One late evening, a dog strayed into the stable. Gajaraj could see that the visitor was tired and hungry. He pushed Reprint 2025-26 Unit 2.indd 40 booth: rectangular space stables: living spaces for animals interacted with: communicated with strayed: came by mistake 09-Dec-24 3:50:00 PM some of the food he was munching towards the dog. The visitor wagged his tail, looked up at the elephant to convey his thanks, and then turned his full attention to the food in front of him. As soon as he finished eating, he fell asleep. The next morning, the mahout found the stray dog in the stable. He did not mind the dog. He also noticed that Gajaraj seemed to like the company. So, he threw some crumbs to the dog, which the animal accepted wagging his tail. When the elephant went out for a bath, the dog accompanied his friend. Plunging into the water, the elephant gave himself a shower using his long trunk, as the dog watched. The elephant took a trunkful of water and playfully splashed the water on his friend. The dog yelped for he hated taking showers. The mahout laughed. . << a 7 = Zip Reprint 2025-26 Unit 2.indd 41 \ at A1 FRIENDSHIP munching: chewing wagged: moved from side to side convey: communicate crumbs: small pieces of food accompanied: went with someone plunging: jumping in trunk: long nose splashed: threw yelped: cried ON a i y i\) el. 09-Dec-24 3:50:01 PM | SS sy Poorvi GRabDE 6 On their way home, the elephant picked up the dog with his trunk and