Ask if y fay wishes to go/ Tell your friends what food items with yo Sar park. you have brought in your tiffin. * If yes, Ga)some activities. Ask them what they have brought. inno as what your friend would * Tell them you wish to share tiffins! like to do. Listen and share what Next, share with your friends, how you would also like to do together. it makes you feel. Reprint 2025-26 i Unit 2.indd 57 09-Dec-24 3:50:15 PM| Poorvi GRabDE 6 Tell your friend that you like|* Appreciate your friends food and spending time with each other. ask what other food items they like. Thank your friends for sharing. 2. Create a new situation and have another conversation. OS Let us write Describe how your friendship with your friend started. First list the answers for When? Where? How? e Then, use your sentences to write a short paragraph of about 80 words. * Give a title to your paragraph. s---e I There are many quotations about friendship. Read the ones given below. A friend in need is a friend indeed. My best friend is the one who brings out the best in me. 1. What do you think is the meaning of these quotations? Share it with your teacher. 2. Think of an experience in your life with your friend that suits this quotation. Share it with your friends. II Look for some famous quotations on friendship; these can be in your own language too. Read and share them with your teacher and classmates. Write one quotation on paper, colour and decorate it. Put it up on the class board. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 2.indd 58 09-Dec-24 3:50:15 PM FRIENDSHIP THE CHAIR Let us do these activities before we read. I Write two words that come to your mind when you think of friendship. 1. Now, find some more words that are related to friendship from the grid given below. You can search horizontally or vertically. There are eight words. One word has been marked as an example. The first letter of each word has been given in bold. 2. Fillin the blanks to complete the words, which mean the same as friend or friends with the help of the meanings. Word (i) a person with whom you do activities together Gi) an informal word for friends b d Ss Reprint 2025-26 Unit 2.indd 59 18-Mar-25 2:12:02 PM | Poorvi GRabDE 6 (iii) a person who you spend a lot of time with (iv) children who are in the same class as you at school 3. There are so many words for a friend. What do you call a friend in your own language? wee Pas, Let us read I There was a boy called Mario who loved to have lots of friends. He showed off a lot, always talking about how many friends he had at school, and how he was so friendly with everyone. One day his grandfather said to him, Mario, I bet you a