God to have you as a (lucky/real) friend for life. When everyone was ____ (laughing at/talking to) me, Deepa, Asma and you showed me that you _ (will save/care for) me. You are indeed a __ (blessing/loving) in my life. Best wishes, Mario 2. Now, write your own message to your best friend. You may take ideas from the story, The Unlikely Best Friends and the poem, A Friend s Prayer . Reprint 2025-26 Yi Unit 2.indd 69 09-Dec-24 3:50:21 PM| Poorvi GRabDE 6 1. Find out more stories about Friendship . It could be from your state, other states or other countries too. You can share them with your class. 2. Describe your friends by filling in the blanks with suitable words. This is known as an acrostic poem. F yams hw S 3. Complete the following task by talking to different people of different age groups as mentioned in the table. You may divide the class into groups to do the following: Question Response 50+ 31 to 49 20 to 30 12 to 19 After gathering responses: v Discuss: similarities and differences across age groups. Y Reflect: how viewpoints on friendship may change with age and life experiences. v Present: a summary of the group s responses, emphasising key themes or unique insights. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 2.indd 70 09-Dec-24 3:50:21 PM Transcript & Let us listen (refer to page 49) . THe UNLIKELY BEST FRIENDS Let me tell youa story of a cow and a leopard from Vadodara in Gujarat who became friends. As you know, a leopard is a wild animal and a cow is a domestic animal. Some people say that the cow took care of the leopard cub like a mother. When the cub became older, it went away from the village. It returned to meet the cow at night. The villagers were worried but they never stopped the leopard. They saw that the leopard just sat beside the cow quietly. The cow and leopard spent time by relaxing and playing with each other. The leopard did not like the villagers and stopped coming regularly. The villagers were surprised that the leopard never attacked the cow but became its friend. You will listen to the audio or narration once again. As you listen, check your answers. Reprint 2025-26 i o Unit 2.indd 71 09-Dec-24 3:50:21 PM Transcript Let us listen (refer to page 56) A FRIEND S PRAYER Hello! Let me tell you what outdoor activities Ajay and Dhiraj enjoy doing. Some days they like playing at the swings in the park. Ajay enjoys slides the most. Dhiraj likes nature, so both take walks in the nearby park, listen to birds and look at the trees. On Saturdays, both go cycling around the neighbourhood. What both truly enjoy is eating ice-cream together. Sometimes they also purchase a comic book, sit on a park bench and read together. They are truly best friends. You will listen to the audio or narration once again. As you listen,