So let me give my very best. I want to do much more than share The hopes and plans of friends who care; Pll try all that a friend can do To make their wishes come true. Let me use my heart to see, To realise what friends can be, And make no judgements from afar, But love my friends the way they are. Jit WoLF Let us discuss 1. Read the poem silently. As you read, underline the parts of the poem that you agree with. 2. Now, share the details of your underlined parts of the poem in groups and explain why you liked those lines. 3. Which line was underlined by most people in your group? Share it with your teacher. Reprint 2025-26 a Unit 2.indd 53 09-Dec-24 3:50:06 PM| Poorvi GRabDE 6 Unit 2.indd 54 Let us think and reflect I Complete the summary of the poem by circling the correct highlighted words. The poet says a prayer for/speech on friendship and friends. She wants that friendship should always be an important part of her complete life/ school days. She says that her friendship makes her feel brave/special. She wishes to do the best she can, for her friends. She wants to clap for/ listen to the wishes of her friends. As a good friend, she prays/imagines that she is able to make her friends wishes come true. She wants her heart/mind to understand what a true friend is. She prays that she loves her friends as they are/when they are happy. She tells us that true/correct friends accept their friends for all their qualities. II Answer in one word only. 1. How does the poet feel about special friends? 2. What does the poet use to realise what friends can be? III Read the following lines from the poem and answer the questions given below. 1. Iwant to do much more than share The hopes and plans of friends who care; I'll try all that a friend can do To make their wishes come true. (i) Complete the sentence with the most suitable option. These lines tell us that the speaker is __ A. clever B. caring C. curious D. calm (ii) How will the speaker make her friends wishes come true? (by trying hard/by working a lot) (iii) Fill in the blank with a suitable word. My friends will feel if their wishes come true. Reprint 2025-26 09-Dec-24 3:50:06 PM FRIENDSHIP 2. Let me use my heart to see, To realise what friends can be, And make no judgements from afar, But love my friends the way they are. (i) The speaker says that feelings are important to understand friendship. Which line tells us this? (ii) Complete the sentence with the most suitable option. These lines tell us that the speaker is___ . A. helpful BB. thoughtful C. cheerful D. hopeful (ii) Fill in the blank with one word. The speaker does not wish to make any . She cares for them just as