below. old book magicaladventures happyboy amazing stories | fantastic adventures colourful creatures old castles Once upon a time in a little village, a/an 1. named Abhishek found a/an 2. in the attic. He read 3. about fairy lands, 4. and 5. . Abhishek s eyes got big as he imagined these 6. . He told his friends about the stories, and they started to have their own 7. when they played together. Reprint 2025-26 Yi Unit 2.indd 67 09-Dec-24 3:50:20 PM| Poorvi GRabDE 6 Let us listen You will listen to Manu talk about her friend, Monika. As you listen, fill in the blanks with words that you hear. (refer to page 73 for transcript) 1. Manu found it when she took admission in the school. 2. Manu met and helped by her in many ways. 3. So, it was not so for the new girl to adjust in the school. 4. Both friends experienced difficult and _moments together. 5. Manu is ___ to Monika for making her life easy and finding a friend. You will listen to the girl once again. Let us speak Work in pairs. Read the following qualities of a friend. loving honest kind caring loyal polite respectful team-worker understanding Discuss in pairs. Choose any four positive qualities that you would like your friend to have. Give a reason for your choice. Use the hints given below when you speak. I feel my friend should be ... because ... I think the quality I want in my friend is being .... The reason for this is ... I believe my friend should be ... This is in order to ... If my friend is ... then ... Reprint 2025-26 Unit 2.indd 68 18-Mar-25 2:20:09 PM FRIENDSHIP Let us write Read the messages that Mario has written to his friends Deepa, Guneet and Asma. Dear Deepa, I feel so special that you are my friend. I know you will always be there for me. Before going to bed, I said a little prayer for Guneet, Asma and you. You made me realise the value of having good friends. Best wishes, Mario Dear Asma, I feel blessed to know that you are my true friend. I would have fallen again today, if it wasn t for Guneet, Deepa and you. I know I can always depend on the three of you, no matter what. Best wishes, Mario 1. Now, choose the correct word given in brackets to complete Mario s message to Guneet. Dear Guneet, Iam (thankful to/requesting) God to have you as a (lucky/real) friend for life. When everyone was ____ (laughing at/talking to) me, Deepa, Asma and you showed me that you _ (will save/care for) me. You are indeed a __ (blessing/loving) in my life. Best wishes, Mario 2. Now, write your own message to your best friend. You may take ideas from the story, The Unlikely Best Friends and the poem, A Friend s Prayer . Reprint 2025-26 Yi Unit 2.indd 69 09-Dec-24 3:50:21