the ground until, suddenly, he tried again and didn t fall. This time he sat, hanging in mid-air. Then he finally experienced the magic perienced: that his grandfather had been talking about. ! Looking around, Mario saw Guneet, Asma, and Deepa-three of his buddies holding him up, so he wouldn t fall. Meanwhile, many others Reprint 2025-26 Unit 2.indd 62 09-Dec-24 3:50:18 PM FRIENDSHIP he d thought of as friends had done nothing but made fun of him, enjoying each and every fall. Leaving with his three friends, he explained to them how his grandfather had so cleverly thought of a way to show him that true friends are those who care for us. A friend wouldn t be someone who takes joy in our bad luck. That evening the four children went to see Mario s grandpa as he had won the bet. They had a great time listening to stories and eating a lot of fruit chaat. From then on, they used the magic chair test on many occasions and whoever passed became friends for life. Reprint 2025-26 1 o Unit 2.indd 63 09-Dec-24 3:50:20 PM| Poorvi GRabDE 6 Let us discuss 1. Mario successfully sat on the invisible chair on his first attempt. State whether True or False. 2. Fillin the blank with a suitable word. Mario s grandfather challenged him to a bet of 3. Match the following characters with their action. (i) held Mario up, so he wouldn't fall Guneet, Asma and Deepa (ii) made fun of Mario s attempts Let us think and reflect I Read the following lines and answer the questions that follow. 1. Take it. It s a very special chair. As it s invisible, it s rather tricky to sit on. But if you take it to school and manage to sit on it, then the magic will work and you'll be able to tell who your real friends are. (i) Fill in the blanks with two words that describe the chair. The chair is and (ii) Why was it tricky to sit on the chair? (iii) Why does Mario s grandfather call the chair special ? 2. Wait, wait, just a slight technical problem, he said, trying again. But again, he missed the seat, causing more surprised looks and laughter. Mario wouldn t give up. (i) Fill in the blank with a suitable reason. Mario says there was a technical problem because (ii) Mario s friends were very caring and helpful. State whether True or False. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 2.indd 64 09-Dec-24 3:50:20 PM Unit 2.indd 65 FRIENDSHIP (iii) Choose the correct option to complete the sentence. Mario wouldn t give up. This shows he is A. strong-willed C. loving B. supportive D. hard-working II Answer the following questions. What was the bet about? What happened when Mario sat on the chair for the first time? How was Mario able to find his real friends? Do you think the magic chair test was good? Why do you say so?