the same class as you at school 3. There are so many words for a friend. What do you call a friend in your own language? wee Pas, Let us read I There was a boy called Mario who loved to have lots of friends. He showed off a lot, always talking about how many friends he had at school, and how he was so friendly with everyone. One day his grandfather said to him, Mario, I bet you a fruit chaat. You don t have as many friends as you think you have. I m sure many of them are nothing more than companions or partners. Mario accepted the bet readily. However, he wasn t sure how he could test whether his schoolmates were real friends or not. So, he asked his grandpa for help. He suggested, I have exactly what you need. It s in the attic. Wait here a minute. Grandpa left, soon returning as though carrying something in his hand, but Mario could see nothing there. Take it. It s a very special chair. As it s invisible, it s rather tricky to sit on it. But if you take it to school and manage to sit on it, then Reprint 2025-26 Unit 2.indd 60 showed off: boasted accepted: agreed to readily: without any problem attic: a storage space in a house just under the roof invisible: impossible to see 09-Dec-24 3:50:16 PM the magic will work and you'll be able to tell who your real friends are. Let us discuss 1. Mario was very proud of having so many friends. State whether True or False. 2. What did the grandfather take from the attic? 3. Will Mario face any challenges? 4. Will Mario be able to use the magic? I Mario, brave and determined, took the strange invisible chair and set off for school. At break time, he asked everyone to form a circle. He put himself in the middle, with his chair. Nobody move. You're about to see something amazing. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 2.indd 61 qv determined: firm in decision amazing: very surprising OX ban r cue ise Mario tried sitting on the chair. Having difficulty seeing it, he missed and fell straight onto his backside. His classmates had a pretty good laugh. Wait, wait, just a slight technical problem, he said, trying again. But again, he missed the seat, causing more surprised looks and laughter. Mario wouldn t give up. He kept trying to sit on the magic chair and kept falling to the ground until, suddenly, he tried again and didn t fall. This time he sat, hanging in mid-air. Then he finally experienced the magic perienced: that his grandfather had been talking about. ! Looking around, Mario saw Guneet, Asma, and Deepa-three of his buddies holding him up, so he wouldn t fall. Meanwhile, many others Reprint 2025-26 Unit 2.indd 62 09-Dec-24 3:50:18 PM FRIENDSHIP he d thought of as friends had done nothing but made fun of him, enjoying each