Both of us like: \ My friend likes: e \ 1 oe \e / e \ vi, e N , 4 Now, tell your classmates about your friend. You may take help of the cues given below. My friend and I like to play. Both of us want [like to but my friend likes to Weare different as she/heis __ and I am Reprint 2025-26 Unit 2.indd 50 09-Dec-24 3:50:05 PM FRIENDSHIP Let us write Write six sentences about your friend with the help of the facts collected inthe above task. Mention how you are not only similar but also different. You may take help of the words given below. same different and but both still like unlike neither nor either or . Let us explore 1. The story, The Elephant and the Dog is found in the Jataka tales. These stories are ancient Buddhist stories of life values and wisdom. These stories have been told from one generation to the next for over two thousand years. Find and read another Jataka story. 2. Elephants have historically held significant roles in Indian culture, spanning history, warfare, religion, festivals and more. However, contemporary ecological challenges have strained the relationship between humans and elephants. Have a discussion in the class. 3. Given below is a news report from an Elephant Sanctuary in the United States about a real-life friendship between an elephant and a dog. The elephant s name is Tarra and the dog s name is Bella. Bella came inside a forest for elephants and became Tarra s friend. Tarra spent most of her time with Bella. One day, Bella had an injury so she could not walk. She was kept inside a building for three weeks. Tarra stood outside for three weeks. Finally, they met and were very happy. Reprint 2025-26 Yi Unit 2.indd 51 09-Dec-24 3:50:05 PM| Poorvi GRabDE 6 A FRIEND sS PRAYER Let us do these activities before we read. I Read the following sentences. 1. Iwish my friend brings idli in her tiffin tomorrow. 2. [hope my friend and I win the race tomorrow. 3. May my friend get well soon. Which of the three sentences 1-3 is closest to a prayer? Explain to your teacher and classmates. II What would you pray for your friend? First speak about it and then write it down. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 2.indd 52 09-Dec-24 3:50:06 PM FRIENDSHIP Let us read May my friendships always be The most important thing to me. With special friends I feel I m blessed, So let me give my very best. I want to do much more than share The hopes and plans of friends who care; Pll try all that a friend can do To make their wishes come true. Let me use my heart to see, To realise what friends can be, And make no judgements from afar, But love my friends the way they are. Jit WoLF Let us discuss 1. Read the poem silently. As you read, underline the parts