a mistake? : Oh, no, sir; no, sir. We'll keep listening. : Please excuse me, your Brilliance, but a cloudy piece of information is twirling around in my head. : Well, twirl it out, Noodle, and I will clarify it for you. : I'seem to recall that the Earthlings did not listen to the sandwiches; they opened them and watched them. : Yes, that is quite correct, I will clarify that for you, Captain Omega. Those sandwiches are not for ear communication, they are for eye communication. Now, Captain Omega, take that large, colourful sandwich over there. It appears to be important. Tell me what you observe. (Omega picks up a very large volume of Mother Goose, holding it so that the audience can see the title. Iota looks over her left shoulder, and Oop peers over her right shoulder.) 62 Footprints wibhout Feat Reprint 2025-26 OMEGA IoTA THINK-TANK Oop THINK-TANK NOODLE THINK-TANK OMEGA : It appears to contain pictures of Earthlings. : There seems to be some sort of code. : (sharply interested) Code? I told you this was : It s little lines and squiggles and dots thousands : Perhaps the Earthlings are not as primitive as we : Forgive me, your Cleverness, but did not the chemical : Stop! A thought of magnificent brilliance has come to : It shall be done, sir. Remove vitamins. (Crew takes important. Describe the code. of them alongside the pictures. have thought. We must break the code. department give our space people vitamins to increase their intelligence? me. Space people, our chemical department has given you vitamins to increase your intelligence. Take them immediately and then watch the sandwich. The meaning of the code will slowly unfold before you. vitamins from boxes on their belts.) Present vitamins. (They hold vitamins out in front of them, stiffly.) Swallow The Book That Gaved the Earth 63 Reprint 2025-26 vitamins. (They pop the vitamins into their mouths and gulp simultaneously. They open their eyes wide, their heads shake, and they put their hands to their foreheads.) THINK-TANK : Excellent. Now, decipher that code. ALL : It shall be done, sir. (They frown over the book, turning pages.) OMEGA : (brightly) Aha! Iota : (brightly) Oho! Oop : (bursting into laughter) Ha, ha, ha. THINK-TANK : What does it say? Tell me this instant. Transcribe, Omega. OMEGA : Yes, sir. (She reads with great seriousness.) Mistress Mary, quite contrary, How does your garden grow? With cockle shells and silver bells And pretty maids all in a row. Oop : Ha, ha, ha. Imagine that. Pretty maids growing in a garden. THINK-TANK : (alarmed) Stop! This is no time for levity. Don t you realise the seriousness of this discovery? The Earthlings have discovered how to combine agriculture and mining. They can actually grow crops of rare metals such as silver. And cockle shells. They can grow high explosives, too. Noodle, contact our invasion fleet. NOODLE : They are ready to go down and take over