(dubiously) Eat it? Oh, Captain! It s a very great honour to be the first Martian to eat a sandwich, I m sure, but but how can I be so impolite as to eat before my Sergeant? (handing Oop the book and saying brightly) Sergeant Oop, I order you to eat the sandwich immediately. : (making a face) Who, Lieutenant? Me, Lieutenant? (saluting) For the glory of Mars, Oop! : Yes, of course! (unhappily) Immediately. (He opens his mouth wide. Omega and Iota watch him breathlessly. He bites down ona corner of the book, and pantomimes chewing and swallowing, while making terrible faces.) : Well, Oop? : Well, Oop? (Oop coughs. Omega and Iota pound him on the back.) : Was it not delicious, Sergeant Oop? : (saluting) That is correct, sir. It was not delicious. I don t know how the Earthlings can get those sandwiches down without water. They re dry as Martian dust. : Sir, sir. Great and Mighty Think-Tank. I beg your pardon, but an insignificant bit of data floated into my mind about those sandwiches. : It can t be worth much, but go ahead. Give us your trifling bit of data. : Well, sir, I have seen surveyor films of those sandwiches. I noticed that the Earthlings did not eat them. They used them as some sort of communication device. : (haughtily) Naturally. That was my next point. These are actually communication sandwiches. Think-Tank is never wrong. Who is never wrong? The Book That Gaved the Farth 61 Reprint 2025-26 OMEGA IoTA AND Oop THINK-TANK OMEGA Iota OMEGA Oop OMEGA AND IOTA TuHink-Tank OMEGA IoTA Oop THINK-TANK OMEGA NOODLE THINK-TANK NOODLE THINK-TANK : Listen to them? : (to each other, puzzled) Listen to them? : Do you have marbles in your ears? I said, listen to them. (Martians bow very low.) : It shall be done, sir. (They each take two books from the case, and hold them to their ears, listening intently.) : (Whispering to Omega) Do you hear anything? : (whispering back) Nothing. Do you hear anything, Oop? : (loudly) Not a thing! (Omega and Iota jump in fright.) : Sh-h-h! (They listen intently again.) : Well? Well? Report to me. What do you hear? : Nothing, sir. Perhaps we are not on the correct frequency. : Nothing, sir. Perhaps the Earthlings have sharper ears than we do. : I don t hear a thing. Maybe these sandwiches don t make sounds. : What? Does somebody suggest the Mighty Think-Tank has made a mistake? : Oh, no, sir; no, sir. We'll keep listening. : Please excuse me, your Brilliance, but a cloudy piece of information is twirling around in my head. : Well, twirl it out, Noodle, and I will clarify it for you. : I'seem to recall that the Earthlings did not listen to the sandwiches; they opened them and watched them. : Yes, that is quite correct, I will clarify that for you, Captain Omega. Those sandwiches are not for