a The Book That Gaved the Farth Mother Goose is a well-known book of F nursery rhymes in English. Do you think such a book can save Planet Earth from lo a Martian invasion? Read this play, =e | set four centuries in the future, and find out. TO6OCHIO Characters HISTORIAN LIEUTENANT IOTA GREAT AND MIGHTY THINK-TANK SERGEANT Oop APPRENTICE NOODLE OFFSTAGE VOICE CapraINn OMEGA SCENE 1 READ AND FIND OvuT e Why was the twentieth century called the Era of the Book ? Who tried to invade the earth in thetwenty-first century? TmeE : The twenty-fifth century Piace : The Museum of Ancient History: Department of the Twentieth Century onthe Planet Earth BeroreE RisE : Spotlight shines on Historian, who is sitting at a table down right, on which is a movie projector. A sign on an easel beside her reads: Museum of Ancient History: Department of the Twentieth Century. She stands and bows to audience. : Good afternoon. Welcome to our Museum of Ancient History, and to my department curiosities of the good old, far-off twentieth century. The twentieth century was often called the Era of the Book. In those days, there were books about everything, from ant eaters to Zulus. Books taught people how to, and when to, and where to, and why to. They illustrated, educated, punctuated, and even decorated. But the Reprint 2025-26 NOODLE THINK-TANK NOODLE THINK-TANK NOODLE THINK-TANK strangest thing a book ever did was to save the Earth. You haven t heard about the Martian invasion of 2040? Tsk, tsk. What do they teach children nowadays? Well, you know, the invasion never really happened, because a single book stopped it. What was the book, you ask? A noble encyclopedia? A tome about rockets and missiles? A secret file from outer space? No, it was none of those. It was but here, let me turn on the historiscope and show you what happened many centuries ago, in 2040. (She turns on projector, and points it left. Spotlight on Historian goes out, and comes up down left on Think-Tank, who is seated on a raised box, arms folded. He has a huge, egg-shaped head, and he wears a long robe decorated with stars and circles. Apprentice Noodle stands beside him at an elaborate switchboard. A sign on an easel reads: MARS SPACE CONTROL GREAT AND MIGHTY THINK-TANK, COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF (Bow low before entering) : (bowing) O Great and Mighty Think-Tank, most powerful and intelligent creature in the whole universe, what are your orders? : (peevishly) You left out part of my salutation, Apprentice Noodle. Go over the whole thing again. : It shall be done, sir. (in a singsong) O Great and Mighty Think-Tank, Ruler of Mars and her two moons, most powerful and intelligent creature in the whole universe (out of breath) what-are-your-orders? : That s better, Noodle. I wish to be placed in communication with our manned space probe to that ridiculous little planet we are going to put under our generous rulership. What