a row. Oop : Ha, ha, ha. Imagine that. Pretty maids growing in a garden. THINK-TANK : (alarmed) Stop! This is no time for levity. Don t you realise the seriousness of this discovery? The Earthlings have discovered how to combine agriculture and mining. They can actually grow crops of rare metals such as silver. And cockle shells. They can grow high explosives, too. Noodle, contact our invasion fleet. NOODLE : They are ready to go down and take over Earth, sir. THINK-TANK : Tell them to hold. Tell them new information has come to us about Earth. Iota, transcribe. Iota : Yes, sir. (She reads very gravely.) Hey diddle diddle! The cat and the fiddle, The cow jumped over the moon, The little dog laughed to see such sport, And the dish ran away with the spoon. : (laughing) The dish ran away with the spoon! 64 Footprints wibhout Feat Reprint 2025-26 THINK-TANK : Cease laughter. Desist. This is more and more alarming. The Earthlings have reached a high level of civilisation. Didn t you hear? They have taught their domesticated animals musical culture and space techniques. Even their dogs have a sense of humour. Why, at this very moment, they may be launching an interplanetary attack of millions of cows! Notify the invasion fleet. No invasion today Oop, transcribe the next code. Oop : Yes, sir. (reading) Humpty Dumpty sat on the wall, Humpty Dumpty had a great fall; All the King s horses and all the King s men, Cannot put Humpty Dumpty together again. Oh, look, sir. Here s a picture of Humpty Dumpty. Why, sir, he looks like he looks like (turns large picture of Humpty Dumpty towards Think-Tank and the audience) THINK-TANK : (screaming and holding his head) It s me! It s my Great and Mighty Balloon Brain. The Earthlings have seen me, and they re after me. Had a great fall! That means they plan to capture Mars Central Control and me! It s an invasion of Mars! Noodle, prepare a space capsule for me. I must escape without delay. Space people, you must leave Earth at once, but be sure to remove all traces of your visit. The Earthlings must not know that I know. (Omega, Iota, and Oop rush about, putting books back on shelves.) NooDLE : Where shall we go, sir? THINK-TANK : A hundred million miles away from Mars. Order the invasion fleet to evacuate the entire planet of Mars. We are heading for Alpha Centauri, a hundred million miles away. (Omega, Iota, and Oop run off right as Noodle helps Think-Tank off left and the curtain closes. Spotlight shines on Historian down right.) The Book That Gaved the Earth 65 Reprint 2025-26 HISTORIAN : (chuckling) And that s how one dusty old book of nursery rhymes saved the world from a Martian invasion. As you all know, in the twenty-fifth century, five hundred years after all this happened, we Earthlings resumed contact with Mars, and we even