million miles away. (Omega, Iota, and Oop run off right as Noodle helps Think-Tank off left and the curtain closes. Spotlight shines on Historian down right.) The Book That Gaved the Earth 65 Reprint 2025-26 HISTORIAN : (chuckling) And that s how one dusty old book of nursery rhymes saved the world from a Martian invasion. As you all know, in the twenty-fifth century, five hundred years after all this happened, we Earthlings resumed contact with Mars, and we even became very friendly with the Martians. By that time, Great and Mighty Think-Tank had been replaced by a very clever Martian the wise and wonderful Noodle! Oh, yes, we taught the Martians the difference between sandwiches and books. We taught them how to read, too, and we established a model library in their capital city of Marsopolis. But as you might expect, there is still one book that the Martians can never bring themselves to read. You ve guessed it Mother Goose! (She bows and exits right.) CuRTAIN CLAIRE BoIko GLOSSARY easel: wooden frame to support a blackboard or a picture Zulus: an African ethnic group belonging to South Africa apprentice: learner of a trade who has agreed to work for a certain period of time in return for being taught peevishly: irritably riffling: quickly turning over the pages of a book barn: covered building for storing hay haberdashery: shop which sells clothing, small articles of dress, pins, cotton, etc. squiggles: scrawls; illegible writing or markings decipher: find the meaning of something which is puzzling or difficult to understand transcribe: write in full form from short-hand levity: tendency to treat serious matters without respect; lack of seriousness 66 Footprints wibhout Feat s fi Reprint 2025-26 Think about iL 1. Noodle avoids offending Think-Tank but at the same time he corrects his mistakes. How does he manage to do that? 2. If you were in Noodle s place, how would you handle Think-Tank s mistakes? 3. Do you think books are being replaced by the electronic media? Can we do away with books altogether? 4. Why are books referred to as a man s best companion? Which is your favourite book and why? Write a paragraph about that book. Talk Aboil iL 1. In what ways does Think-Tank misinterpret innocent nursery rhymes as threats to the Martians? Can you think of any incidents where you misinterpreted a word or an action? How did you resolve the misunderstanding? 2. The aliens in this play speak English. Do you think this is their language? What could be the language of the aliens? Cogaed ad ridding e Diamond Cuts Diamond by J.H. Parker e The Cindrella Story by Kenneth Lillington e The Fun They Had by Isaac Asimov r\ The Book That Gaved the Farth 67 Reprint 2025-26 Answers given by Professor Yash Pal and Dr Rahul Pal (see questions on page 38) (i) DNA exists as strands of bases that carry genetic information specific to each living thing. The sequence of bases of