calling the crew of Probe One. Mars Space Control calling the crew of Probe One. Come in, Captain Omega, and give us your location. OMEGA : (speaking into a disk which is on a chain around her neck) Captain Omega to Mars Space Control. Lieutenant Iota, Sergeant Oop, and I have arrived on Earth without incident. We have taken shelter in this (indicates room) this square place. Have you any idea where we are, Lieutenant Iota? Iora : I can t figure it out, Captain. (holding up a book) I ve counted two thousand of these peculiar items. This place must be some sort of storage barn. What do you think, Sergeant Oop? Oop : I haven t a clue. I ve been to seven galaxies, but I ve never seen anything like this. Maybe they re hats. (He opens a book and puts it on his head.) Say, maybe this is a haberdashery! OMEGA : (bowing low) Perhaps the Great and Mighty ThinkTank will give us the benefit of his thought on the matter. The Book That Gaved the Earth 59 Reprint 2025-26 THINK-TANK OMEGA Oop THINK-TANK OMEGA Iora Oop THINK-TANK OMEGA THINK-TANK OMEGA THINK-TANK : Elementary, my dear Omega. Hold one of the items up so that I may view it closely. (Omega holds a book on the palm of her hand.) Yes, yes, I understand now. Since Earth creatures are always eating, the place in which you find yourselves is undoubtedly a crude refreshment stand. : (to Iota and Oop) He says we're in a refreshment stand. : Well, the Earthlings certainly have a strange diet. : That item in your hand is called a sandwich. : (nodding) A sandwich. : (nodding) A sandwich. : (taking book from his head) A sandwich? : Sandwiches are the main staple of Earth diet. Look at it closely.(Omega squints at book.) There are two slices of what is called bread, and between them is some sort of filling. : That is correct, sir. : To confirm my opinion, I order you to eat it. : (gulping) Eat it? : Do you doubt the Mighty Think-Tank? 60 Footprints without Feat Reprint 2025-26 OMEGA IoTA Oop Iora and OmEGa : Oop OMEGA IoTA THINK-TANK Oop NOODLE THINK-TANK NOODLE THINK-TANK THINK-TANK : (saluting) Great and Mighty Think-Tank is never wrong. : Therefore, I order you to listen to them. : Oh, no, no. But poor Lieutenant Iota has not had her breakfast. Lieutenant Iota, I order you to eat this this sandwich. : (dubiously) Eat it? Oh, Captain! It s a very great honour to be the first Martian to eat a sandwich, I m sure, but but how can I be so impolite as to eat before my Sergeant? (handing Oop the book and saying brightly) Sergeant Oop, I order you to eat the sandwich immediately. : (making a face) Who, Lieutenant? Me, Lieutenant? (saluting) For the glory of Mars, Oop! : Yes, of course! (unhappily) Immediately. (He opens his mouth wide.