left out part of my salutation, Apprentice Noodle. Go over the whole thing again. : It shall be done, sir. (in a singsong) O Great and Mighty Think-Tank, Ruler of Mars and her two moons, most powerful and intelligent creature in the whole universe (out of breath) what-are-your-orders? : That s better, Noodle. I wish to be placed in communication with our manned space probe to that ridiculous little planet we are going to put under our generous rulership. What do they call it, again? : Earth, your Intelligence. : Earth of course. You see how insignificant the place is? But first, something important. My mirror. I wish to consult my mirror. The Book That Gaved the Farth 57 Reprint 2025-26 NOODLE THINK-TANK OFFSTAGE VOICE THINK-TANK NOODLE THINK-TANK NOODLE TIME PLACE At RISE NOODLE : It shall be done, sir. (He hands Think-Tank a mirror.) : Mirror, mirror, in my hand. Who is the most fantastically intellectually gifted being in the land? : (after a pause) You, sir. : (smacking mirror) Quicker. Answer quicker next time. I hate a slow mirror. (He admires himself in the mirror.) Ah, there I am. Are we Martians not a handsome race? So much more attractive than those ugly Earthlings with their tiny heads. Noodle, you keep on exercising your mind, and someday you'll have a balloon brain just like mine. : Oh, I hope so, Mighty Think-Tank. I hope so. : Now, contact the space probe. I want to invade that primitive ball of mud called Earth before lunch. : It shall be done, sir. (He adjusts levers on switchboard. Electronic buzzes and beeps are heard as the curtains open.) SCENE 2 READ AND FIND OUT What guesses are made by Think=Tank about the books found on earth? : A few seconds later : Mars Space Control and the Centerville Public Library : Captain Omega stands at centre, opening and closing card catalogue drawers in a confused fashion. Lieutenant Iota is up left, counting books in a bookcase. Sergeant Oop is at right, opening and closing a book, turning it upside down, shaking it and then riffling the pages and shaking his head. : (adjusting knobs) I have a close sighting of the space crew, Sirf. (Think-Tank puts on a pair of enormous goggles and turns towards the stage to watch.) They seem to have entered some sort of Earth structure. : Excellent. Make voice contact. 52 Footprints without Fea Reprint 2025-26 mae | NooDLeE : (speaking into a microphone) Mars Space Control calling the crew of Probe One. Mars Space Control calling the crew of Probe One. Come in, Captain Omega, and give us your location. OMEGA : (speaking into a disk which is on a chain around her neck) Captain Omega to Mars Space Control. Lieutenant Iota, Sergeant Oop, and I have arrived on Earth without incident. We have taken shelter in this (indicates room) this square place. Have you any idea where we are, Lieutenant Iota? Iora : I can