man If you can make one heap of all your winnings And risk it on one turn of pitch-and-toss, And lose, and start again at your beginnings And never breathe a word about your loss; If you can force your heart and nerve and sinew To serve your turn long after they are gone, And so hold on when there is nothing in you Except the Will which says to them: Hold on ; If you can talk with crowds and keep your virtue, Or walk with kings nor lose the common touch; If neither foes nor loving friends can hurt you; If all men count with you, but none too much; If you can fill the unforgiving minute With sixty seconds worth of distance run Yours is the Earth and everything that s in it, And which is more you'll be a Man, my son! Rudyard Kipling Which lines in the poem tell us to have self control, a clear head and not to become bitter when people speak against us? Stanza 1 G o> One must be just as graceful in losing as he is in S winning. S) oe Ot Unir 4 SG Fey oO Nee Me MaMa Mata ta VaMa ata Watatiatiatiatiahtatatatl: | Unit 4.indd 59 31-05-2018 16:06:01 | Notes | What are the two words in the poem that can replace the underlined ones? Stanza 2 3. In the third stanza what does the poet mean by And lose, and start again ? 4. There is a necessity to treat all people equal and amidst people we should not lose our self who we are ? How has the poet expressed this in the fourth stanza? 5. List two things from each stanza that we can do to make the Earth ours, as given in the poem. av = \ Ck) Ny Fun fact ff VocaBULARY Different usages of Regret 1. Read the paragraphs mentioned against each explanation I regret to inform you that the and find out the words in that paragraph which best musical concert is cancelled. match the explanation given. Refer to the chapter I regret missing the study A Truly Beautiful Mind given in your textbook, Beehive. tour. (a) A word used disapprovingly to talk about a Maya left her job with no . ; . u J person who is unusual and doesn t behave like regrets. th hl Do you regret declining the ohare nrg ) offer to be the class monitor? (b) Taking part in an activity for pleasure, not as a job. (paragraph 3) (c) Respecting and allowing many different types of beliefs or behaviour. (paragraph 5) (a (d) A person who is lacking in or hostile or smugly . indifferent to cultural values, intellectual pursuits, = etc. (paragraph 7) Ss (e) Relating to work that needs special training or i @ education. (paragraph 8) 9g, ic J WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1 QO ome 515054505 05050505 05054505 054054S05450545u5o5 TUMTMMATTMMT TAT NATTA ere MTOM TTT MMT OTTO TT