it is possible to succeed without violence with all irrespective of whether they have continued or discarded the method of violence. 2. Where did Gandhi wish to meet Einstein? [tick (v) the right answer] (a) his residence in London (b) his Ashram in India (c) his Ashram in London (d) during his tour to London Unit 4 Gl o> S om CY) os S __ ACM) (OTTHN) Nee Me MaMa Mata ta VaMa ata Watatiatiatiatiahtatatatl: | Unit 4.indd 57 30-05-2018 11:50:58 | 3. Why does Einstein want Gandhi s example to go beyond India? 4. You have read the chapter and the exchange of letters between A. Einstein and M. K. Gandhi. What similarities do you find in the ideas of both the personalities? PNT 4 = Fun fact Conjunctions to remember oat eontrary to Find the opposites of the words given below from Einstein s letter. if before then besides (a) impossible when even though (b) fail as well as also (c) peace although despite while . however (d) alagptice after nevertheless (e) enemy. in addition to so 6. In the context of Gandhi s response to Einstein s letter, finds favour in your sight means: (a) satisfied you (b) delighted you (c) appreciated by you (d) not accepted by you If fa} If you can keep your head when all about you 4) Are losing theirs and blaming it on you; @ If you can trust yourself when all men doubt you, 2) But make allowance for their doubting too; (> If you can wait and not be tired by waiting, i Or, being lied about, don t deal in lies, eile =) ) s@= WoRrDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1 QO ome SME MS MS MEMS MSM SMS OEM Se MSM SMS MSHS HS MSHS MS 416M et | Unit 4.indd 58 30-05-2018 11:50:58 | Or, being hated, don t give way to hating, And yet don t look too good, nor talk too wise; If you can dream and not make dreams your master; If you can think and not make thoughts your aim; If you can meet with triumph and disaster impostor: a person who And treat those two impostors just the same; assumes a false identity in If you can bear to hear the truth you ve spoken order to deceive or defraud Twisted by knaves to make a trap for fools, Or watch the things you gave your life to broken, knave: a dishonest or And stoop and build em up with wornout tools; unscrupulous man If you can make one heap of all your winnings And risk it on one turn of pitch-and-toss, And lose, and start again at your beginnings And never breathe a word about your loss; If you can force your heart and nerve and sinew To serve your turn long after they are gone, And so hold on when there is nothing in you Except the Will which says to them: Hold on ; If you can talk with crowds