of degradation (b) warning signs of depravity BSG (c) signs of prosperity i) | Fun fact | (d) diagnosis of indifference Did You Know? The sentence the quick 5. The phrase crying necessity in the opening paragraph brown fox jumps over the means: lazy dog uses all the letters t d of the alphabet in the English (a) urgent nee language. (b) weeping need (c) sad need (d) average need 6. Circle the odd one out (a) presence, distance, existence, being, alive (b) possible, feasible, probable, unthinkable, obtainable (c) violence, assault, roughness, passivity, fierceness (d) conflict, contest, contention, rivalry, accord (e) consolation, compassion, annoyance, sympathy, support Read the following text and answer the questions. WHEN EINSTEIN WROTE TO GANDHI In 1931, Albert Einstein wrote the following short letter fa) of admiration to another of the world s greatest minds, 4) Mohandas Gandhi. Despite their intentions, the pair never iO) met in person. 2) Respected Mr. Gandhi, (>) I use the presence of your friend in our home to send y) you these lines. You have shown through your words, that it eile =) ) s@9= WoRrDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1 QO ome SME MS MS MEMS MSM SMS OEM Se MSM SMS MSHS HS MSHS MS 416M et | Unit 4.indd 56 30-05-2018 11:60:58 | is possible to succeed without violence even with those who have not discarded the method of violence. We may hope that your example will spread beyond the borders of the country, and will help to establish an international authority, respected by all, that will take decisions and replace war conflicts. With sincere admiration Yours (Signed, A. Einstein ) I hope that I will be able to meet you face to face someday. Gandhi s response LONDON, October 18, 1931 DEAR FRIEND, I was delighted to have your beautiful letter sent through Sundaram. It is great consolation to me that the work Iam doing finds favour in your sight. I do indeed wish that we could meet face to face and that too in India at my Ashram. Yours Sincerely (Signed, M.K Gandhi ) (Source: Letters of Note, Volume 2, by Shaun Usher) 1. Albert Einstein admired M.K. Gandhi because: [tick (v) the right answer] (a) Gandhi discarded the method of violence. (b) Gandhi showed that it is possible to succeed without violence with those who have discarded the method of violence. (c) Gandhi showed that it is possible to succeed without violence only with those who have discarded the method of violence. (d) Gandhi showed that it is possible to succeed without violence with all irrespective of whether they have continued or discarded the method of violence. 2. Where did Gandhi wish to meet Einstein? [tick (v) the right answer] (a) his residence in London (b) his Ashram in India (c) his Ashram in London (d) during his tour to London Unit 4 Gl o> S om CY) os S __ ACM) (OTTHN) Nee Me MaMa Mata ta VaMa ata Watatiatiatiatiahtatatatl: | Unit 4.indd 57 30-05-2018