the people of Kosala did not affect him. He made his way into the jungle. Angulimala got enraged at this boldness. He was Unit 4 Fun fact | If something cannot be counted, use LESS . e less sorrow less time less air less pain plunder: to steal things from a place or people using force Gl o> S om ag, : __ AK) (OTTHN) Nee Me MaMa Mata ta VaMa ata Watatiatiatiatiahtatatatl: | Unit 4.indd 63 30-05-2018 11:50:58 | fy @ Ni ) Fun fact self- possessed: calm, confident and in control of one s feelings PST 4 Words with prefixes En and Un En Enlist Endangered Enable Enrich Entrust Un Unable Unachievable Unprepared Unaware Uncertain La) @ 1S: e cit Gaye SME MS MS MEMS MSM SMS OEM Se MSM SMS MSHS HS MSHS MS 416M et | Unit 4.indd 64 determined to kill the intruder. But when he saw the Buddha, calm and self-possessed, and heard his words of kindness, the robber hesitated. His arm, which had been uplifted to kill, fell helpless by his side. His wrath cooled, and he knelt down before the Buddha. He confessed all his sins and declared his faith in the Buddha. When the people saw the new disciple following his Master, they were amazed and could not believe that this was the ferocious man who had been a terror for so long. Angulimala became a monk. His past was forgotten, and he was widely respected for his holiness. 1. Why did the people of Kosala warn the Buddha not to go into the jungle? Why was Angulimala considered to bea terror? What enraged Angulimala when he saw the Buddha? Why did the robber hesitate to kill the Buddha? What kind of transformation took place in Angulimala? Why did people start respecting Angulimala? WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] 30-05-2018 11:50:58 | Q 9 SPEAKING A debate competition is being organised in your school. Take a stand for or against this statement: Our happiness in life depends entirely on our mental attitude. Prepare an outline of the main points in the order in which you wish to present them (in about 100 words), giving reasons for your point of view. Debate is a contest between two speakers or two groups of speakers to show skill and ability in arguing. e A proposition, a question or a problem is required for this purpose, which can be spoken for or against. To participate in a debate, one must prepare for it. We So, one must prepare an outline of the main points in Fun fact | the order in which one is going to argue. There are the limitations of time (only 5 to 6 minutes Principle / Rincipal are allowed). ) Principal: head of the e The speaker addresses the audience. institution e Every topic/subject has its own vocabulary. These Principle: basic truth or law must be learnt. The speaker addresses the Chair (Mr President/ Incorrect: The principle Madam), submits an argument, appeals for