976CHO4 Look at the pictures and identify who they are. Write their names in the given spaces. The quotes against each picture may also help you recognise them. It is very simple to be happy, but it is very difficult to be simple. Weakness of attitude becomes. the weakness of character. The best and the most beautiful things in the world cannot be seen or even touched-they must be felt with the heart. One individual may die for an idea, but that idea will, after his death, incarnate itself in a thousand lives. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 4.indd 54 1/7/2019 10:05:19 AM @ @ e How do the quotes reflect the beautiful mind of the personalities mentioned? Discuss in pairs of four, jot down your points, and then present to the class. READING COMPREHENSION Read the passage below and answer the questions that follow. Tue Wor Lp as I SEE It In my opinion, the present symptoms of decadence are explained by the fact that the development of industry and machinery has made the struggle for existence very much more severe, greatly to the detriment of the free development of the individual. But the development of machinery means that less and less work is needed from the individual for the satisfaction of the community s needs. A planned division of labour is becoming more and more of a crying necessity and this division will lead to the material security of the individual. This security and the spare time and energy which the individual will have at his command can be made to further his development. In this way the community may regain its health, and we will hope that future historians will explain the morbid symptoms of present-day society as the childhood ailments of an aspiring humanity, due entirely to the excessive speed at which civilisation was advancing. (An extract from The World As I See It by A. Einstein) 1. What is responsible for the present degradation of individual development? 2. What is the meaning of development in relation to individuals? Unit 4 decadence: moral or cultural decline as characterised by excessive indulgence in pleasure or luxury detriment: the state of being harmed or damaged Gl o> S om ool eS 55) __ ACM) (OTTHN) Naa Me MaMa Mata ta WaMaMataWatahiatiahatiahtatatatt: | Unit 4.indd 55 30-05-2018 11:50:58 | 3. What is the planned division of labour ? How will it be helpful in human development? 4. What does the phrase symptoms of decadence mean in the opening line? (a) diagnosis of degradation (b) warning signs of depravity BSG (c) signs of prosperity i) | Fun fact | (d) diagnosis of indifference Did You Know? The sentence the quick 5. The phrase crying necessity in the opening paragraph brown fox jumps over the means: lazy dog uses all the letters t d of the alphabet in the English (a) urgent nee language. (b) weeping need (c) sad need (d) average need 6. Circle the odd one out (a) presence, distance, existence,