prepare an outline of the main points in Fun fact | the order in which one is going to argue. There are the limitations of time (only 5 to 6 minutes Principle / Rincipal are allowed). ) Principal: head of the e The speaker addresses the audience. institution e Every topic/subject has its own vocabulary. These Principle: basic truth or law must be learnt. The speaker addresses the Chair (Mr President/ Incorrect: The principle Madam), submits an argument, appeals for Mcourages the children to . . ( . , participate in sports. sympathetic understanding and support, questions th t s vi d< ludes t Correct: The Principal opponents views anda conciudes an argument. encourages the children to Write the outline of the main points, then make a participate in sports. presentation in the class. Incorrect: Two principals of Topic happiness are kindness and love. Correct: Two principles of Introduce the topic with a quotation. happiness are kindness and love. Highlight the main points. e Ol (5) &), ye Unir 4 G 5 oe OO Nee Me MaMa Mata ta VaMa ata Watatiatiatiatiahtatatatl: | Unit 4.indd 65 30-05-2018 11:60:58 | Elaborate the points by arguing logically and convincingly. Give your opinion in the concluding paragraph. Ck] @ WritIne In groups of four, discuss in favour of or against the topic: New technology is common, New thinking is rare. e Each group presents their points and the whole class brainstorms on the topic. Jot down all the points discussed. e Write an argumentative article giving logical and relevant reasons along with your points of view. ) 3 PROJECT You have read about Stephen Hawking in Class VIII. Go through the text once again and gather information about his genius. You can also search web resources. Follow the steps given below and then write what made Hawking a genius. (i) Who is a genius? (ii) What are the attributes that make a person a genius? (iii) How is Stephen Hawking a genius? (iv) What is he famous for? 0) (v) What books has he written? 4) (vi) Refer to the obituaries written by people on him and Ko) find out his inspiring qualities. @) Ni ) eile I) ) >) =(66 WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] % (TES) SME MS MS MEMS MSM SMS OEM Se MSM SMS MSHS HS MSHS MS 416M et | Unit 4.indd 66 30-05-2018 11:60:58 |