Gaye 2. (b) in the jungle, George had to find the way out on his own. [having lost, lost, losing] (c) our pottery will last for generations. [treating with care/you treat with care/treated with care] (d) a holiday, all the banks were closed. [having been/been/ being] (e) for so long, he had lost all hope. [being unemployed/unemployed/ having been unemployed] Join the following sentences using\a present-participle as given in the example. Example: We walked along the footpath. We saw an accident. Walking along the footpath, we saw an accident. (Note: Out of the two actions, the one which takes place first is changed into present participle.) (a) He stood by the side of a temple. He asked people to go in. (b) She came out of the room. She greeted the visitors. (c) He heard the news. He started crying. (d) He found the lock broken. He rang up the Police. WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] SME MS MS MEMS MSM SMS OEM Se MSM SMS MSHS HS MSHS MS 416M et | Unit 4.indd 62 31-05-2018 16:08:24 | 9 (e) He felt sleepy. He went to bed. EDITING There is an error in each line. Underline the incorrect word and write the correct word in the blank given. The first one has been done for you as an example. I entred the manager s office and sat down. entered I have just lost five hundred rupees and I felt very upset. (a) I leave the money in my desk, I said, (b) and it is not there now . The manger was very sympathetic but he can do nothing. (c) Everyone loses money theses days, (d) he said. He start to complain about this wicked world, (e) but is interrupted by a knock at the door. (f) LISTENING Listen to the story given below. The teacher or your classmate will read the story aloud. Listen to it carefully and then answer the questions that follow. Gautama Buddha was journeying through the Kosala region. He was warned not to pass through the deep jungle, as it was the den of a famous robber chief, Angulimala. He was the terror of the whole countryside. He lived by plundering travellers and feared no one. He had committed many murders. All attempts to capture the inhuman Angulimala had failed. So he continued his crimes unpunished. The people of Kosala pleaded with the Buddha not to expose himself to the dangers of the robber s territory. But Gautama Buddha knew no fear. The warnings of the people of Kosala did not affect him. He made his way into the jungle. Angulimala got enraged at this boldness. He was Unit 4 Fun fact | If something cannot be counted, use LESS . e less sorrow less time less air less pain plunder: to steal things from a place or people using force Gl o> S om ag, : __ AK) (OTTHN) Nee Me MaMa Mata ta VaMa ata Watatiatiatiatiahtatatatl: | Unit 4.indd 63 30-05-2018 11:50:58 |