Prakash | Grade 8 Here we find a puzzling phenomenon. Why was their third landmark number 360 rather than 400? Some scholars feel that this might have something to do with their calendars. They used a dot @ for 1, and a bar for 5. These were used to denote numbers from 1 to 19. The symbols associated with different landmark numbers were written one below the other with the lowermost set of symbols corresponding to the number of 1s, the set above corresponding to the number of 20s, the set above to the number of 360s and so on. 2 Represent the following numbers using the Mayan system: (i) 77 (ii) 100 (iii) 361 (iv) 721 Because the Mayan system is not an actual base-20 system, it lacks the advantages that a system with a base has for computations. Nevertheless, their place value notation and their use of a placeholder symbol for zero is considered an important advance in the history of number systems. A curious fact is that we can still find the use of base-20 in the number names of some European languages. III. The Chinese Number System The Chinese used two number systems a written system for recording quantities, and asystem making use ofrods for performing computations. The numerals in the rod-based number system are called rod numerals. Here we discuss the rod numerals, which are more efficient in writing and computing with numbers than the written system of the Chinese. The rod numerals developed in China by at least by 3rd century AD and were used till the 17th century. It was a decimal system (base-10). The symbols for 1 to 9 were as follows: INESE NUMBER SYSTEM Base-10 or Decimal | ere RAR eed ule TT Ee Note: The zongs represent units, hundreds, tens of thousands, etc., and the hengs tens, thousands, hundreds of thousands, etc. A numeral 7 | | | | 2 (Heng) 6 (Zong) 3 (Heng) 7 4 (Zong) | i Mow is'thisto be rea os a | | | | jee sy Landmark number positions Like the Mesopotamians, the rod numerals used a blank space to indicate the skipping of a place value. However, because of the slightly more uniform sizes of the symbols for one through nine, the blank spaces were easier to locate than in the Mesopotamian system. ~ Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 Notice how similar the rod numerals are to the Hindu system. The Chinese system, with a symbol for zero, would be a fully developed place value system. IV. The Hindu Number System 2?) Where does the Hindu/Indian number system figure in the evolution of ideas of number representation? What are its landmark numbers? And does it use a place value system? a Rhee or Seah Hindu Number Sys em i) Eine *, eas Base- 10 or Decimal Pe | if & x ay. Fegan aes ee 22 ee How! is this t to be Sead? 3 Landmark number positions te cs" ; SEB 10?