our numbers today using the digits 0 through 9 also originated and were developed in India, around 2000 years ago. The first known instance of numbers being written using ten digits, including the digit 0 (which was then notated as a dot), occurs in the Bakhshali manuscript (c. 3rd century CE). Aryabhata (c. 499 CE) was the first mathematician to fully explain, and do elaborate scientific computations with the 2 70 in the Bakhshali manuscript Indian system of 10 symbols. The Indian number system was transmitted to the Arab world by around 800 CE. It was popularised in the Arab world by the great Persian mathematician Al-Khwarizmi (after whom the word algorithm is named) through his book On the Calculation with Hindu Numerals (c.825) and by the noted philosopher Al-Kindi through his work On the Use of the Hindu Numerals (c. 830). From the Arab world, the Hindu numerals were transmitted to Europe and to parts of Africa by around 1100 CE. Though Al-Khwarizmi s work on calculation with Hindu numerals was translated into Latin, it was the Italian mathematician Fibonacci who around the year 1200 really made the case to Europe to adopt the Indian numerals. However, the Roman numerals were so ingrained in European thinking and writing at the time that the Indian numerals did not gain widespread use for several more centuries. But eventually, during the European Renaissance and by the 17th century, not adopting them became impossible or it would impede scientific progress. eS A Story of Numbers Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 The ingenious method of expressing every possible number using a set of ten symbols (each symbol having a place value and an absolute value) emerged in India. The idea seems so simple nowadays that its significance and profound importance is no longer appreciated. Its simplicity lies in the way it facilitated calculations and placed arithmetic foremost among useful inventions. Pierre-Simon Laplace (1749-1827) Their use then spread to every continent, and are now used in every corner of the world. Because European scholars learned the Indian numerals from the Arab world, they called them Arabic numerals to reflect their European perspective. On the other hand, as noted above, Arab scholars, such as Al-Khwarizmi and Al-Kindi, called them Hindu numerals . During the period of European colonisation, the European term Arabic numbers became widely used. However, in recent years, this mistake is being corrected in many textbooks and documents around the world, including in Europe. The most commonly used terminologies for the numbers we use today are Hindu numerals , Indian numerals , and the transitional Hindu-Arabic numerals . It is worth noting that the word Hindu here does not refer to a religion, but rather a geography/people from whom these numbers came. The shape of the digits 0, 1, 2, ....9 used to write numbers in the Indian number system today evolved over a period of time, as shown below: Brahmi ' YrZeYlLrTra Hindu (Gwalior) (IS 8 YEO Te Sanskrit-Devanagari larzss|6 789 IRR RO|YVA?: