idea here. Counting in 2s is more efficient for representing numbers than, for example, a tally system. A general form which this idea has taken in different number systems is as follows: count in groups of a certain number (like 2 in the case of Gumulgal s system), and use the word or symbol associated with this group size to represent bigger numbers. Some of the commonly used group sizes in different number systems have been 2, 5, 10 and 20. You can find the idea of counting by 5s in the Roman system (Table 1). This idea of counting in a certain group size and using it to represent numbers is an important idea in the history of the evolution of number systems. One of the phenomena that could have led people to this idea might be the human limit for immediately knowing the size of a collection at a glance. Let us try out the following activity. 2 Quickly count the number of objects in each of the following boxes: Up to what group size could you immediately see the number of objects without counting? Most humans find it difficult to count groups having 5 or more objects in a single glance. A Story of Numbers ~ ge, This limit of perception could have prompted people using tally Gi) marks to replace every group of, say, 5 marks, with a new symbol, \ 7alk as seen in the system shown in Table 1. " " Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 2 What could be the difficulties with using a number system that counts only in groups of a single particular size? How would you represent a number like 1345 in a system that counts only by 5s? Even though counting in groups of a particular size and using it for number representation is more efficient than the tally system, this method can still become cumbersome for larger numbers. The next system shows a refinement of this idea. IV. The Roman Numerals We have already seen the Roman number system till 20 (Table 1). We have seen that it uses I for 1, V for 5, X for 10. To get the Roman numeral for any number till 39, it is first grouped into as many 10s as possible, the remaining is grouped into as many 5s as possible, and finally the remaining is grouped into 1s. Example: Let us take the number 27. 27=10+10+5+1+1 So, 27 in Roman numerals is XXVII. Instead of representing 50 as XXXXX, a new symbol is given to it: L. Following the way the number 4 is represented as 1 less than 5 that is, as IV 40 is represented as 10 less than 50 that is, as XL. However, people using this system were not always consistent with this practice. Sometimes, 40 was also represented as XXXX. The Roman number system introduces newer symbols to represent certain bigger numbers. Let us call all these numbers that have a new basic symbol as