the greatest, most creative, and most influential inventions of all time appearing constantly in our daily lives and forming the basis of much of modern science, technology, computing, accounting, surveying, and more. The next time you are writing numbers, think about the incredible history behind them and all the deep ideas that went into their discovery! Evolution of Ideas in Number Representation . Count in groups of a single number. ukasar-ukasar-urapon . Group using landmark numbers. IVXLCM . Choosing powers of a number as landmark numbers the idea of a base. 1 10 10 10 10%... . Using positions to denote the landmarknumbers the , idea of place value system. tho 7) Dale) . The idea of 0 as a positional digit and as a number. \ A Story of Numbers " " Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 = Figure it Out 1. Why do you think the Chinese alternated between the Zong and gn, Math Y Heng symbols? If only the Zong symbols were to be used, how ( a would 41 be represented? Could this numeral be interpreted in any other way if there is no significant space between two successive positions? Form a base-2 place value system using ukasar and urapor as the digits. Compare this system with that of the Gumulgal s. Where in your daily lives, and in which professions, do the Hindu numerals, and 0, play an important role? How might our lives have been different if our number system and 0 hadn t been invented or conceived of? The ancient Indians likely used base 10 for the Hindu number Gai Talk system because humans have 10 fingers, and so we can use our fingers to count. But what if we had only 8 fingers? How would we be writing numbers then? What would the Hindu numerals look like if we were using base 8 instead? Base 5? Try writing the base-10 Hindu numeral 25 as base-8 and base-5 Hindu numerals, respectively. Can you write it in base-2? = cone SUMMARY }---------------------m Torepresent numbers, we need a standard sequence of objects, names, or written symbols that havea fixed order. This standard sequence is called a number system. m Thesymbols representing numbers in a written number system are called numerals. @ In a number system, landmark numbers are numbers that are easily recognisable and used as reference points for understanding and working with other numbers. They serve as anchors within the number system, helping people to orient themselves and make sense of quantities, particularly larger ones. m@ Anumber system whose landmark numbers are the powers of a number n is referred to as a base-n number system. Number systems having a base that make use of the position of a symbol in determining the landmark number that it is associated with are called positional number systems or place value systems. m Place value representations were used in the Mesopotamian (Babylonian), Mayan, Chinese and Indian civilisations. m Thesystem of numerals that we use throughout the world