to find the product ez of the following pairs of landmark numbers: V x L, L x D, V x D, yy, VII x IX. Multiply CCXXXI and MDCCCLII People using the Roman system made use of a calculating tool called the abacus to perform their arithmetic operations. We will see what it is ina later section. However, only specially trained people used this tool for calculation. While going through the number systems discussed above, it should not be understood that, historically, one system developed as an improvement over the previous system. This point should be kept in mind when studying the upcoming number systems too. The actual story of how each of the number systems developed is much more complex, and many times not clearly known, and so we will not try to trace this in the chapter. @ Figure it Out 1. A group of indigenous people in a Pacific island use different 4, 7s sequences of number names to count different objects. Why do you think they do this? 2. Consider the extension of the Gumulgal number system beyond 6 in the same way of counting by 2s. Come up with ways of performing the different arithmetic operations (+, -, x, +) for numbers occurring in this system, without using Hindu numerals. Use this to evaluate the following: = A Story of Numbers (i) (ukasar-ukasar-ukasar-ukasar-urapon) + (ukasar-ukasarukasar-urapon) (ii) (ukasar-ukasar-ukasar-ukasar-urapon) (ukasar-ukasarukasar) (iii) (ukasar-ukasar-ukasar-ukasar-urapon) x (ukasar-ukasar) (iv) (ukasar-ukasar-ukasar-ukasar-ukasar-ukasar-ukasar-ukasar) + (ukasar-ukasar) 3. Identify the features of the Hindu number system that make it (Math efficient when compared to the Roman number system. Talk 4. Using the ideas discussed in this section, try refining the number system you might have made earlier. y 3.3 The Idea of a Base jai | ime bt We are now going to see a written number system that the Egyptians developed around 3000 BCE. In this system, we see the use of landmark numbers to group and represent a given number. However, what makes this system special is its sequence of landmark numbers. Imagine making collections of pebbles. The first landmark number is 1. Group together 10 collections of the previous landmark number (1). Its size is the second landmark number which is 10. Group together 10 collections of the previous landmark number (10). Its size is the third landmark number which is 10 x 10 = 100, and so on. ie " " Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 Each landmark number is 10 times the previous one. Since 1 is the first landmark number, they are all powers of 10. The following are the symbols given to these numbers 1 10 10 10 104 10 10 10 XN 24 Tals Tn ae CS es oN As in the case of Roman numbers, a given number is counted in groups of the landmark numbers, starting from the largest landmark number less than the given number. This is then used to assign the numeral. For example 324 which equals 100 + 100 + 100 + 10