of using sticks to count (Method 1), except for the fact that a mark is made instead of adding a stick. Archaeologists have discovered bones dating back more than 20,000 years that seem to have tally marks. The oldest known such bones with markings that are thought to represent numbers are the Ishango bone and the Lebombo bone. The Ishango bone, dating back 20,000 to 35,000 years, was discovered in the Democratic Republic of Congo. It features notches arranged in columns, possibly indicating calendrical systems. The Lebombo bone, discovered in South Africa, is an even older tally stick with 29 notches, estimated to be around 44,000 years old. It is considered one of the oldest mathematical artefacts, and may have served as a tally stick or lunar calendar. Lebombo bone Ishango bone Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 Ill. Number Names Obtained by Counting in Twos A group of indigenous people in Australia called the Gumulgal had the following words for their numbers. Gumulgal (Australia) urapon ukasar ukasar-urapon ukasar-ukasar ukasar-ukasar-urapon ukasar-ukasar-ukasar AAS Wye 2 Can you see how their number names are formed? The number name for 3 is composed of number names of 2 and 1. The number name for 4 is composed of two occurrences of the number name for 2. 2 Can you see how the names of the other numbers are formed? The numbers are counted in 2s, using which the number names are formed: 3=2+1,4=2+2,5=2+2+1,6=2+2+2. Gumulgal called any number greater than 6 ras. There is a very interesting and puzzling historical phenomenon associated with this number system. Look at the following number systems of a group of indigenous people in South America, and the Bushmen of South Africa: ) - tokale 2- ahage Ay 3 - ahage tokale mn Feo g (or ahawao) Bakairi 1 - urapon 4- ahage ahage tokale : cul 2- ukasar S- ahage ahage ahage ~ xa .| |3 - ukasar-urapon 2- toa 4- ukasar-ukasar 3 - "quo 4- t oa-t'oa S- t'0a-t'oa-t'a 6 - t'0a-t'oa-t'oa 5 - ukasar-ukasar-urapon 6 - ukasar-ukasar-ukasar = Despite being so far apart geographically, and with no trace of contact between them, these three groups have developed equivalent number systems! Historians have wondered how this happened. One theory is that these three groups of people may have had common ancestors, who used this number system. In course of time, their descendants migrated to these places. Even though the number system of Gumulgal had number names for numbers only till 6, we can see the emergence of an idea here. Counting in 2s is more efficient for representing numbers than, for example, a tally system. A general form which this idea has taken in different number systems is as follows: count in groups of a certain number (like 2 in the case of Gumulgal s system), and use the word or symbol associated with this group size to represent bigger numbers. Some of the commonly used group sizes in different number systems have been 2, 5, 10 and