new symbol is given to it: L. Following the way the number 4 is represented as 1 less than 5 that is, as IV 40 is represented as 10 less than 50 that is, as XL. However, people using this system were not always consistent with this practice. Sometimes, 40 was also represented as XXXX. The Roman number system introduces newer symbols to represent certain bigger numbers. Let us call all these numbers that have a new basic symbol as landmark numbers. Here are some of the landmark numbers of the Roman system and their associated numerals. These symbols are used to denote other numbers as well. For example, consider the number 2367. Writing it as a sum of landmark numbers starting from 1000 such that we take as many 1000s as possible, 500s as possible, and so on, we get 2367 = 1000 + 1000 + 100 + 100 + 100 +50+10+5+1+1 So in Roman numerals, this number is MMCCCLXII. Figure it Out 1. Represent the following numbers in the Roman system. (i) 1222 (ii) 2999 (iii) 302 (iv) 715 We see how vastly efficient this system is compared to some of the previous number systems that we have seen. This system seems to have evolved out of the ancient Greek number system in around the 8th century BCE in Rome, and evolved over time. It spread throughout Europe with the expansion of the Roman empire. The efficiency of this system is due to the grouping of a given number by not just one group size, but a sequence of group sizes that we call landmark numbers, and then using these landmark numbers to represent the given number. This idea is the next important breakthrough in the history of the evolution of number systems. Despite the relative efficiency of the Roman system, it doesn t lend itself to an easy performance of arithmetic operations, particularly multiplication and division. 2 Example: Try adding the following numbers without converting them to Hindu numerals: (a) CCXXXII + CCCCXIII Let us find the total number of Is, Xs, and Cs, and group them starting from the largest landmark number. Apparently, it looks like the largest landmark number is C, but note that 5 Cs (100s) make a D (500). So the sum is } XXXII CXIII XL DC = DCXLV " " Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 Do it yourself now: (b) LXXXVII + LXXVIII 2 How will you multiply two numbers given in Roman numerals, without converting them to Hindu numerals? Try to find the product ez of the following pairs of landmark numbers: V x L, L x D, V x D, yy, VII x IX. Multiply CCXXXI and MDCCCLII People using the Roman system made use of a calculating tool called the abacus to perform their arithmetic operations. We will see what it is ina later section. However, only specially trained people used this tool for calculation. While going through the number systems discussed above, it should not be understood