place value system. IV. The Hindu Number System 2?) Where does the Hindu/Indian number system figure in the evolution of ideas of number representation? What are its landmark numbers? And does it use a place value system? a Rhee or Seah Hindu Number Sys em i) Eine *, eas Base- 10 or Decimal Pe | if & x ay. Fegan aes ee 22 ee How! is this t to be Sead? 3 Landmark number positions te cs" ; SEB 10? S10 oe 2 BE 375 As can be seen, the Hindu number system is a place value system. The Hindu number system has had a symbol for 0 at least as early as 200 BCE. Because of the use of 0 as a digit, and the use of a single digit in each position, this system does not lead to any kind of ambiguity when reading or writing numerals. It is for this reason that the Hindu number system is now used throughout the world. The use of 0 as a digit, and indeed as a number, was a breakthrough that truly changed the world of mathematics and science. In Indian mathematics, indeed, zero was not just used as a placeholder in the place value system, but was also given the status of a number in its own right, on par with other numbers. The arithmetic properties of the number 0 (e.g., that 0 plus any number is the same number, and that 0 times any number is zero) were explicitly used by Aryabhata in his Aryabhatiya in 499 CE to compute with and do elaborate scientific computations using Hindu numerals. The use of 0 as a number like any other number, on which one can perform the basic arithmetic operations, was codified by Brahmagupta in his work Brahmasphutasiddhanta in 628 CE, as we learned in an earlier grade. By introducing 0 as a number, along with the negative numbers, Brahmagupta created what in modern terms is called a ring, i.e., a set of numbers that is closed under addition, subtraction, and multiplication (i.e., any two numbers in the set can be added, subtracted, or multiplied to get another number in that set). These new ideas laid the foundations for modern mathematics, and particularly for the areas of algebra and analysis. Hopefully, this gives you a sense of all the ideas that went into writing and computing with numbers in the way that we do today. The discovery of 0 and the resulting Indian number system is truly one of the greatest, most creative, and most influential inventions of all time appearing constantly in our daily lives and forming the basis of much of modern science, technology, computing, accounting, surveying, and more. The next time you are writing numbers, think about the incredible history behind them and all the deep ideas that went into their discovery! Evolution of Ideas in Number Representation . Count in groups of a single number. ukasar-ukasar-urapon . Group using landmark numbers. IVXLCM . Choosing powers