today are Hindu numerals , Indian numerals , and the transitional Hindu-Arabic numerals . It is worth noting that the word Hindu here does not refer to a religion, but rather a geography/people from whom these numbers came. The shape of the digits 0, 1, 2, ....9 used to write numbers in the Indian number system today evolved over a period of time, as shown below: Brahmi ' YrZeYlLrTra Hindu (Gwalior) (IS 8 YEO Te Sanskrit-Devanagari larzss|6 789 IRR RO|YVA?: West Arabic (Gubar) East Arabic [io xped|b - 8 9 | 1th century (Apices) 12324/6r870 12345 67890 ISth century 16th century (Durer) Evolution of the digits used in the Indian number system Prior to the global adoption of the Indian system of numerals, different (50) groups of people used different methods of representing numbers. We Se s. 4 ple oti = shall take a glimpse of some of them. We will not be looking at different systems in a chronological order, but rather an order that shows us the main stages in the development of the idea of number representation. But first, let us explore some of the foundational ideas needed to count and to determine the number of objects in a given collection. The Mechanism of Counting Imagine that we are living in the Stone Age, say, around ten thousand years ago. Suppose we have a herd of cows. Here are some natural questions that we might ask about our herd Q1. How do we ensure that all cows have returned safely after grazing? ! 2 Q2. Do we have fewer cows than our neighbour? Talk 2 Q3. If there are fewer, how many more cows would we need so that we have the same number of cows as our neighbour? | | We need to tackle these questions without the use of the number names or written numbers of the Hindu number system. How do we do it? Here are some possible methods. Method 1: We could tackle the questions by using pebbles, sticks or any object that is available in abundance. Let us choose sticks. For every cow in the herd, we could keep a stick. The final collection of sticks tells us the number of cows, which can be used to check if any cows have gone missing. > A Story of Numbers ~ Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 This way of associating each cow witha stick, such that no two cows are associated or mapped to the same stick is called a one-to-one mapping. This mapping can then be used to come up with a way to represent numbers, as shown in the table. Its representation (using sticks) (?) How will you use such sticks to answer the other two questions (Q2 and Q3)? Method 2: Instead of objects, we could use a standard sequence of sounds or names. For example, we could use the sounds of the letters of any language. While counting, we could make a one-to-one mapping between the objects and the