system. It is called the Roman number system. It was widely used in Europe for centuries, and was convenient for many purposes, but had the similar drawback that one cannot write arbitrarily large numbers without introducing more and more symbols. We will learn more about this system of writing numbers later on. A Story of Numbers As illustrated by the three methods, history gives us examples of number systems formed using physical objects (such as sticks, pebbles, body parts, etc.), names, and written symbols. Some groups of people had numbers represented both by physical objects as well as by names, while others like the Chinese had all three forms of representation. The symbols occurring in a written number system are called numerals. For example, 0, 1, 5, 36, 193, etc., are some of the numerals occurring in the Hindu number system. Numerals representing smaller numbers always had names, and so a number system composed of written symbols always went hand in hand with a number system composed of names, as is the case with the modern-day Hindu system. @ Figure it Out 1. Suppose you are using the number system that uses sticks to I > represent numbers, as in Method 1. Without using either the ~ bal . Math number names or the numerals of the Hindu number system, | 75); give a method for adding, subtracting, multiplying and dividing two numbers or two collections of sticks. 2. One way of extending the number system in Method 2 is by ) using strings with more than one letter for example, wecould (math use aa for 27. How can you extend this system to represent all \ Talk the numbers? There are many ways of doing it! 3. Try making your own number system. 3.2 Some Early Number Systems I. Use of Body Parts Many groups of people across the world have used their hands and body parts for counting. Here is how a group of people in Papua New Guinea used and still use their body parts as the standard sequence/number system. = II. Tally Marks on Bones and Other Surfaces One of the oldest methods of number representation is by making notches marks cut on a surface such as a bone or a wall of a cave. These marks are also called tally marks. In this method, a mark is made for each object that is being counted. So the final collection of marks represents the total number of objects. This method is very similar to the method of using sticks to count (Method 1), except for the fact that a mark is made instead of adding a stick. Archaeologists have discovered bones dating back more than 20,000 years that seem to have tally marks. The oldest known such bones with markings that are thought to represent numbers are the Ishango bone and the Lebombo bone. The Ishango bone, dating back 20,000 to 35,000 years, was discovered in the Democratic Republic of Congo. It features notches arranged in