A STORY OF O874CHO3 i oa ee ee Wg) go) a) go) og) oh ohh aoho Oa a ret lhe ll Saar ae at aad deat dead dad dead det dt dt dd dd ad 3.1 Reema s Curiosity One lazy afternoon, Reema was flipping through an old book when whoosh! a piece of paper slipped out and floated to the floor. She picked it up and stared at the strange symbols all over it. What is this? she wondered. She ran to her father, holding the paper as if it were a secret treasure. He looked at it and smiled. Around 4000 years ago, there flourished a civilisation in a region called Mesopotamia, in the western part of Asia, containing a major part of the present-day Iraq and a few other neighbouring countries. This is one of the ways they wrote their numbers! THATS eRe Reema s eyes lit up, Seriously? These strange symbols were numbers? Her curiosity was sparked, and questions started swirling in her head. What was their > Since when have need for counting? humans been \_ What were they counting? Since when have people been writing numbers in the modern have written 20? 50? 100? Chapter 3.indd 48 10-07-2025 17:44:17 Sensing her curiosity, her father started telling her how the idea of number and number representation evolved over the course of time, across geographies, to finally reach its modern efficient form. Get ready to travel back in time with them! Humans had the need to count even as early as the Stone Age. They were counting to determine the quantity of food they had, the number of animals in their livestock, details regarding trades of goods, the number of offerings given in rituals, etc. They also wanted to keep track of the passing days, e.g., to know and predict when important events such as the new moon, full moon, or onset of a season would occur. However, when they said or wrote down such numbers, they didn t make use of the numbers that we use today. The structure of the modern oral and written numbers that we use today had its origin thousands of years ago in India. Ancient Indian texts, such as the Yajurveda Samhita, mentioned names of numbers based on powers of 10, almost as we say them orally today. For example, they listed names for the numbers one (eka), ten (dasha), hundred (shata), thousand (sahasra), ten thousand (Gyuta), etc., all the way up to 10 and beyond. The way we write our numbers today using the digits 0 through 9 also originated and were developed in India, around 2000 years ago. The first known instance of numbers being written using ten digits, including the digit 0 (which was then notated as a dot), occurs in the Bakhshali manuscript (c. 3rd century CE). Aryabhata (c. 499 CE) was the first mathematician to fully explain, and do elaborate scientific computations with the 2 70 in the Bakhshali manuscript Indian system of 10 symbols.