Der Gott des Juden ift das Geld. Und umm Gelb gu verdienen, begebt er die grigten Rerbreden, Ex ruht nicht eber, bis er auf einem groken Geldjad figen tann, bis er gumt Konig des Geldes geworden iit. VU + ae i Vv n [a4 Vv = ~ ao) = os] E N & Zz Caption above reads: Money is the God of Jews. /In order to earn money he commits the greatest crimes. He does not rest, until he can sit on a big sack of money, until he has become the king of money. What do you think this poster is trying to depict F 69 Reprint 2025-26 GERMAN FARMER YOU BELONG TO HITLER! WHY? The German farmer stands in between two great dangers today: The one danger American economic system Big Capitalism! The other is the Marxist economic system of Bolshevism. Big Capitalism and Bolshevism work hand in hand: they are born of Jewish thought and serve the master plan of world Jewery. Who alone can rescue the farmer from these dangers? NATIONAL SOCIALISM. Prom: a Nazi leaflet, 1932. Fig.30 A Nazi party poster of the 1920s. It Fig.29 The leaflet shows how the Nazis appealed to the peasants. asks workers to vote for Hitler, the frontline soldier. August 1, 1914 Look at Figs. 29 and 30 and answer the following: First World War begins. November 9, 1918 What do they tell us about Nazi propaganda? How are the Nazis Germany capitulates, ending the war. trying to mobilise different sections of the population? November 9, 1918 Proclamation of the Weimar Republic. June 28, 1919 Treaty of Versailles. January 30, 1933 Hitler becomes Chancellor of Germany. September 1, 1939 Germany invades Poland. Beginning of the Second World War. June 22, 1941 Germany invades the USSR. June 23,1941 Mass murder of the Jews begins. December 8 1941 The United States joins Second World War. January 27,1945 Soviet troops liberate Auschwitz. May 8, 1945 Allied victory in Europe. India and the Contemporary World 70 Reprint 2025-26 wy Ordinary People and the Crimes Against Humanity How did the common people react to Nazism? Many saw the world through Nazi eyes, and spoke their mind in Nazi language. They felt hatred and anger surge inside them when they saw someone who looked like a Jew. They marked the houses of Jews and reported suspicious neighbours. They genuinely believed Nazism would bring prosperity and improve general well-being. But not every German was a Nazi. Many organised active resistance to Nazism, braving police repression and death. The large majority of Germans, however, were passive onlookers and apathetic witnesses. They were too scared to act, to differ, to protest. They preferred to look away. Pastor Niemoeller, a resistance fighter, observed an absence of protest, an uncanny silence, amongst ordinary Germans in the face of brutal and organised crimes committed against people in the Nazi empire. He wrote movingly about this silence: First they came for the Communists, Well, | was not a Communist So | said