the the spirit of National Socialism . Ten-year-olds had to enter Jungvolk. At 14, all boys had to join the Nazi youth organisation Hitler Youth where they learnt to worship war, glorify aggression and violence, condemn democracy, and hate Jews, communists, Gypsies and all those categorised as undesirable . After a period of rigorous ideological and physical training they joined the Labour Service, usually at the age of 18. Then they had to serve in the armed forces and enter one of the Nazi organisations. The Youth League of the Nazis was founded in 1922. Four years later it was renamed Hitler Youth. To unify the youth movement under Nazi control, all other youth organisations were systematically dissolved and finally banned. Reprint 2025-26 Fig.23 Classroom scene depicting a lesson on racial anti-Semitism. From Der Giftpilz (The Poison Mushroom) by Ernst Hiemer (Nuremberg: der Sturmer, 1938), p.7. Caption reads: The Jewish nose is bent at its point. It looks like the number six. Fig.24 Jewish teacher and Jewish pupils expelled from school under the jeers of classmates. From Trau keinem jud auf gruner Heid: Ein Bilderbuch fur Gross und Keom (Trust No Jew on the Green Heath: a Picture Book for Big and Little), By E/vira Bauer (Nuremberg: Der Sturmer, 1936). If you were a student sitting in one of these classes, how would you have felt towards Jews? Have you ever thought of the stereotypes of other communities that people around you believe in? How have they acquired them? Source: C All boys between the ages of six and ten went through a preliminary training in Nazi ideology. At the end of the training they had to take the following oath of loyalty to Hitler: In the presence of this blood banner which represents our Fuhrer I swear to devote all my energies and my strength to the saviour of our country, Adolf Hitler. I am willing and ready to give up my life for him, so help me God. From W. Shirer, The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich Source: D Robert Lay, head of the German Labour Front, said: We start when the child is three years old. As soon as he even starts to think, he is given a little flag to wave. Then comes school, the Hitler Youth, military service. But when all this is over, we don t let go of anyone. The labour front takes hold of them, and keeps hold until they go to the grave, whether they like it or not. Z Fig.25 Desirable children that Fig.26 A German-blooded Hitler wanted to see multiplied. infant with his mother being brought from occupied Europe to Annexed Poland for settlement. 4.1 The Nazi Cult of MotherhOOd la Children in Nazi Germany were repeatedly told that women were radically different from men. The fight for equal rights for men and women that had become part of democratic struggles everywhere was wrong and it would destroy society. While boys were taught to be aggressive, masculine