B In an era when the earth is gradually being divided up among states, some of which embrace almost entire continents, we cannot speak of a world power in connection with a formation whose political mother country is limited to the absurd area of five hundred kilometers. Hitler, Mein Kampf, p. 644. Read Sources A and B > What do they tell you about Hitler's imperial ambition? > What do you think Mahatma Gandhi would have said to Hitler about these ideas? ro vu = ae Ga >) vu n [a4 Vv = ~~ Tc i= ae] = n N oJ Za India and the Contemporary World extended empire. Nazis wanted only a society of pure and healthy Nordic Aryans . They alone were considered desirable . Only they were seen as worthy of prospering and multiplying against all others who were classed as undesirable . This meant that even those Germans who were seen as impure or abnormal had no right to exist. Under the Euthanasia Programme, Helmuth s father along with other Nazi officials had condemned to death many Germans who were considered mentally or physically unfit. Jews were not the only community classified as undesirable . There were others. Many Gypsies and blacks living in Nazi Germany were considered as racial inferiors who threatened the biological purity of the superior Aryan race. They were widely persecuted. Even Russians and Poles were considered subhuman, and hence undeserving of any humanity. When Germany occupied Poland and parts of Russia, captured civilians were forced to work as slave labour. Many of them died simply through hard work and starvation. Jews remained the worst sufferers in Nazi Germany. Nazi hatred of Jews had a precursor in the traditional Christian hostility towards Jews. They had been stereotyped as killers of Christ and usurers.Until medieval times Jews were barred from owning land. They survived mainly through trade and moneylending. They lived in separately marked areas called ghettos. They were often persecuted through periodic organised violence, and expulsion from the land. However, Hitler s hatred of Jews was based on pseudoscientific theories of race, which held that conversion was no solution to the Jewish problem . It could be solved only through their total elimination. From 1933 to 1938 the Nazis terrorised, pauperised and segregated the Jews, compelling them to leave the country. The next phase, 1939-1945, aimed at concentrating them in certain areas and eventually killing them in gas chambers in Poland. 3.2 The Racial Utopia mms Under the shadow of war, the Nazis proceeded to realise their murderous, racial ideal. Genocide and war became two sides of the same coin. Occupied Poland was divided up. Much of north-western Poland was annexed to Germany. Poles were forced to leave their homes and properties behind to be occupied by ethnic Germans brought in from occupied Europe. Poles were then herded like 62 F Reprint 2025-26 Fig.73 Police escorting gypsies who are being deported to Auschwitz, 1943-1944. cattle in the other part called the General