death. The large majority of Germans, however, were passive onlookers and apathetic witnesses. They were too scared to act, to differ, to protest. They preferred to look away. Pastor Niemoeller, a resistance fighter, observed an absence of protest, an uncanny silence, amongst ordinary Germans in the face of brutal and organised crimes committed against people in the Nazi empire. He wrote movingly about this silence: First they came for the Communists, Well, | was not a Communist So | said nothing. Then they came for the Social Democrats, Well, | was not a Social Democrat So | did nothing, Then they came for the trade unionists, But | was not a trade unionist. And then they came for the Jews, But | was not a Jew so | did little. Then when they came for me, There was no one left who could stand up for me: Why does Erna Kranz say, I could only say for myself ? How do you view her opinion? Reprint 2025-26 Box1 Was the lack of concern for Nazi victims only because of the Terror? No, says Lawrence Rees who interviewed people from diverse backgrounds for his recent documentary, The Nazis: A Warning from History . Erna Kranz, an ordinary German teenager in the1930s and a grandmother now, said to Rees: 1930s offered a glimmer of hope, not just for the unemployed but for everybody for we all felt downtrodden. From my own experience | could say salaries increased and Germany seemed to have regained its sense of purpose. | could only say for myself, | thought it was a good time. | liked it. = VU =) = a Vv n [a4 Vv = ~ ao) = os] E N & = India and the Contemporary World What Jews felt in Nazi Germany is a different story altogether. Charlotte Beradt secretly recorded people s dreams in her diary and later published them in a highly disconcerting book called the Third Reich of Dreams. She describes how Jews themselves began believing in the Nazi stereotypes about them. They dreamt of their hooked noses, black hair and eyes, Jewish looks and body movements. The stereotypical images publicised in the Nazi press haunted the Jews. They troubled them even in their dreams. Jews died many deaths even before they reached the gas chamber. 5.1 Knowledge about the HolOCaUSt SEI Information about Nazi practices had trickled out of Germany during the last years of the regime. But it was only after the war ended and Germany was defeated that the world came to realise the horrors of what had happened. While the Germans were preoccupied with their own plight as a defeated nation emerging out of the rubble, the Jews wanted the world to remember the atrocities and sufferings they had endured during the Nazi killing operations also called the Holocaust. At its height, a ghetto inhabitant had said to another that he wanted to outlive the war just for half an hour. Presumably he meant that