for people of Jewish faith Men and women were left with nothing to survive in the ghettos. From September 1941, all Jews had to wear a yellow Star of David on their breasts. This identity mark was stamped on their passport, all legal documents and houses. They were kept in Jewish houses in Germany, and in ghettos like Lodz and Warsaw in the east. These became sites of extreme misery and poverty. Jews had to surrender all their wealth before they entered a ghetto. Soon the ghettos were brimming with hunger, starvation and disease due to deprivation and poor hygiene. Reprint 2025-26 Stage 3: Annihilation 1941 onwards: YOU HAVE NO RIGHT TO LIVE i Sa PNK Fig.18 Killed while trying to escape. The Fig. 719 Piles of clothes outside the-gas.chamber. concentration camps were enclosed with live wires. Jews from Jewish houses, concentration camps and ghettos from different parts of Europe were brought to death factories by goods trains. In Poland and elsewhere in the east, most notably Belzek, Auschwitz, Sobibor, Treblinka, Chelmno and Majdanek, they were charred in gas chambers. Mass killings took place within minutes with scientific precision. Fig.27 A concentration camp. Fig.22 Shoes taken away from prisoners before A camera can make a death the Final Solution . camp look beautiful. Reprint 2025-26 India and the Contemporary World a Youth in Nazi Germany Hitler was fanatically interested in the youth of the country. He felt that a strong Nazi society could be established only by teaching children Nazi ideology. This required a control over the child both inside and outside school. What happened in schools under Nazism? All schools were cleansed and purified . This meant that teachers who were Jews or seen as politically unreliable were dismissed. Children were first segregated: Germans and Jews could not sit together or play together. Subsequently, undesirable children Jews, the physically handicapped, Gypsies were thrown out of schools. And finally in the 1940s, they were taken to the gas chambers. Good German children were subjected to a process of Nazi schooling, a prolonged period of ideological training. School textbooks were rewritten. Racial science was introduced to justify Nazi ideas of race. Stereotypes about Jews were popularised even through maths classes. Children were taught to be loyal and submissive, hate Jews, and worship Hitler. Even the function of sports was to nurture a spirit of violence and aggression among children. Hitler believed that boxing could make children iron hearted, strong and masculine. Youth organisations were made responsible for educating German youth in the the spirit of National Socialism . Ten-year-olds had to enter Jungvolk. At 14, all boys had to join the Nazi youth organisation Hitler Youth where they learnt to worship war, glorify aggression and violence, condemn democracy, and hate Jews, communists, Gypsies and all those categorised as undesirable . After a period of rigorous ideological and physical training they joined the Labour Service, usually at the age of 18. Then they had to serve in the armed forces and enter