moved to achieve his long-term aim of conquering Eastern Europe. He wanted to ensure food supplies and living space for Germans. He attacked the Soviet Union in June 1941. In this historic blunder Hitler exposed the German western front to British aerial bombing and the eastern front to the powerful Soviet armies. The Soviet Red Army inflicted a crushing and humiliating defeat on Germany at Stalingrad. After this the Soviet Red Army hounded out the retreating German soldiers until they reached the heart of Berlin, establishing Soviet hegemony over the entire Eastern Europe for half a century thereafter. Meanwhile, the USA had resisted involvement in the war. It was unwilling to once again face all the economic problems that the First World War had caused. But it could not stay out of the war for long. Japan was expanding its power in the east. It had occupied French Indo-China and was planning attacks on US naval bases in the Pacific. When Japan extended its support to Hitler and bombed the US base at Pearl Harbor, the US entered the Second World War. The war ended in May 1945 with Hitler s defeat and the US dropping of the atom bomb on Hiroshima in Japan. From this brief account of what happened in the Second World War, we now return to Helmuth and his father s story, a story of Nazi criminality during the war. Ooh STATES pi hTA te | Hi) ING Fr, 3 THa~ UT ay 4 i ACHING aerne fF OMeInMag EER oie ee a) J Moy) ) 4 ity TaRGan Ten ANEAN tpn htPORT: S0dberis Was AnTeng De we dg. ee, CCK A Ths RD tes! TAS rap L? or TO Rep} BRGUNCOR TS Rea C DERN PRT OF i PREPARED 7 z Ming f zu ul ~ me Dy A'oy | Man PF OP ry hY BRIG. OF nr ED Wit ED Deveneee |Fimy oe ropas | D Wore, DEP, ro, MAEM Titty CyENO ba 8 OPrrcratd {Be Ls ANN al IT 1g) | Neder 1 28 eat Sch erep, India and the Contemporary World Fig. 72 Newspapers in India track the . oft yet | developments in Germany. = if 2 eam ae a2 thee -) 4 Tat pe 60 = we Sat 3st Cs Reprint ne ee The Nazi Worldview The crimes that Nazis committed were linked to a system of belief and a set of practices. Nazi ideology was synonymous with Hitler s worldview. According to this there was no equality between people, but only a racial hierarchy. In this view blond, blue-eyed, Nordic German Aryans were at the top, while Jews were located at the lowest rung. They came to be regarded as an anti-race, the arch-enemies of the Aryans. All other coloured people were placed in between depending upon their external features. Hitler s racism borrowed from thinkers like Charles Darwin and Herbert Spencer. Darwin was a natural scientist who tried to explain the creation of plants and animals through the