of Article 48. Yet the crisis could not be managed. People lost confidence in the democratic parliamentary system, which seemed to offer no solutions. Reprint 2025-26 ro vu = ae Ga vu n [a4 Vu = ~~ Tc i= oO = n N oO Za India and the Contemporary World m Hitler's Rise to Power This crisis in the economy, polity and society formed the background to Hitler s rise to power. Born in 1889 in Austria, Hitler spent his youth in poverty. When the First World War broke out, he enrolled for the army, acted as a messenger in the front, became a corporal, and earned medals for bravery. The German defeat horrified him and the Versailles Treaty made him furious. In 1919, he joined a small group called the German Workers Party. He subsequently took over the organisation and renamed it the National Socialist German Workers Party. This party came to be known as the Nazi Party. In 1923, Hitler planned to seize control of Bavaria, march to Berlin and capture power. He failed, was arrested, tried for treason, and later released. The Nazis could not effectively mobilise popular support till the early 1930s. It was during the Great Depression that Nazism became a mass movement. As we have seen, after 1929, banks collapsed and businesses shut down, workers lost theit jobs and the middle classes were threatened with destitution. In such a situation Nazi propaganda stirred hopes of a better future. In 1928, the Nazi Party got no more than 2. 6 per cent votes in the Reichstag the German parliament. By 1932, it had become the largest party with 37 per cent votes. Fig.7 Hitler being greeted at the Party Congress in Nuremberg in 1938. $6 Reprint 2025-26 New words Propaganda Specific type of message directly aimed at influencing the opinion of people (through the use of posters, films, speeches, etc.) Fig.8 Nuremberg Rally, 1936. Rallies like this were held every year. An important aspect of these was the demonstration of Nazi power as various organisations paraded past Hitler, swore loyalty and listened to his speeches. Hitler was a powerful speaker. His passion and his words moved people. He promised to build a strong nation, undo the injustice of the Versailles Treaty and restore the dignity of the German people. He promised employment for those looking for work, and a secure future for the youth. He promised to weed out all foreign influences and resist all foreign conspiracies against Germany. Hitler devised a new style of politics. He understood the significance of rituals and spectacle in mass mobilisation. Nazis held massive rallies we ereteeiitilini POV te TTT mart a sabe bnb ath be bas Fe ae 19454 veer yA Neree wh t AS AWag Fig.9 Hitler addressing SA and SS columns. Notice the sweeping and straight columns of people. Such photographs were intended to Show the grandeur and power of the Nazi movement and public meetings to demonstrate the support for Hitler and instil vu S