treatment, final solution (for the Jews), euthanasia (for the disabled), se/ection and disinfections. Evacuation meant deporting people to gas chambers. Do you know what the gas chambers were called? They were labelled disinfection-areas , and looked like bathrooms equipped with fake showerheads. Media was carefully used to win support for the regime and popularise its worldview. Nazi ideas were spread through visual images, films, radio, posters, catchy slogans and leaflets. In posters, groups identified as the enemies of Germans were stereotyped, mocked, abused and described as evil. Socialists and liberals were represented as weak and degenerate. They were attacked as malicious foreign agents. Propaganda films were made to create hatred for Jews. The most infamous film was The Evernal Jew. Orthodox Jews were stereotyped and marked. They were shown 68 Reprint 2025-26 Source E In an address to women at the Nuremberg Party Rally, 8 September 1934, Hitler said: We do not consider it correct for the woman to interfere in the world of the man, in his main sphere. We consider it natural that these two worlds remain distinct...What the man gives in courage on the battlefield, the woman gives in eternal self-sacrifice, in eternal pain and suffering. Every child that women bring to the world is a battle, a battle waged for the existence of her people. Source F Hitler at the Nuremberg Party Rally, 8 September 1934, also said: The woman is the most stable element in the preservation of a folk...she has the most unerring sense of everything that is important to not let a race disappear because it is her children who would be affected by all this suffering in the first place...That is why we have integrated the woman in the struggle of the racial community just as nature and providence have determined so. with flowing beards wearing kaftans, whereas in reality it was difficult to distinguish German Jews by their outward appearance because they were a highly assimilated community. They were referred to as vermin, rats and pests. Their movements were compared to those of rodents. Nazism worked on the minds of the people, Activity tapped their emotions, and turned their hatred and anger at those Yow would you have reacted to Hilter s ideas matked as undesirable . if you were: The Nazis made equal efforts to appeal to all the different sections of | > A Jewish woman the population. They sought to win their support by suggesting that > A non-Jewish German woman Nazis alone could solve all their problems. Der Gott des Juden ift das Geld. Und umm Gelb gu verdienen, begebt er die grigten Rerbreden, Ex ruht nicht eber, bis er auf einem groken Geldjad figen tann, bis er gumt Konig des Geldes geworden iit. VU + ae i Vv n [a4 Vv = ~ ao) = os] E N & Zz Caption above reads: Money is the God of Jews. /In order to earn money he commits the greatest crimes. He does not rest, until he can