Z Fig.25 Desirable children that Fig.26 A German-blooded Hitler wanted to see multiplied. infant with his mother being brought from occupied Europe to Annexed Poland for settlement. 4.1 The Nazi Cult of MotherhOOd la Children in Nazi Germany were repeatedly told that women were radically different from men. The fight for equal rights for men and women that had become part of democratic struggles everywhere was wrong and it would destroy society. While boys were taught to be aggressive, masculine and steel hearted, girls were told that they had to become good mothers and rear pure-blooded Aryan children. Girls had to maintain the purity of the race, distance Reprint 2025-26 Fig.27 Jewish children arriving at a death factory to be gassed Look at Figs. 23, 24, and 27. Imagine yourself to be a Jew or a Pole in Nazi Germany. It is September 1941, and the law forcing Jews to wear the Star of David has just been declared. Write an account of one day in your life. Nazism and the Rise of Hitler India and the Contemporary World themselves from Jews, look after the home, and teach their children Nazi values. They had to be the bearers of the Aryan culture and race. In 1933 Hitler said: In my state the mother is the most important citizen. But in Nazi Germany all mothers were not treated equally. Women who bore racially undesirable children were punished and those who produced racially desirable children were awarded. They were given favoured treatment in hospitals and were also entitled to concessions in shops and on theatre tickets and railway fares. To encourage women to produce many children, Honour Crosses were awarded. A bronze cross was given for four children, silver for six and gold for eight or more. All Aryan women who deviated from the prescribed code of conduct were publicly condemned, and severely punished. Those who maintained contact with Jews, Poles and Russians were paraded through the town with shaved heads, blackened faces and placards hanging around their necks announcing I have sullied the honour of the nation . Many received jail sentences and lost civic honour as well as their husbands and families for this criminal offence . 4.2. The Art Of PropaG@C2 Ramm The Nazi regime used language and media with care, and often to great effect. The terms they coined to describe their various practices are not only deceptive. They are chilling. Nazis never used the words kill or murder in their official communications. Mass killings were termed special treatment, final solution (for the Jews), euthanasia (for the disabled), se/ection and disinfections. Evacuation meant deporting people to gas chambers. Do you know what the gas chambers were called? They were labelled disinfection-areas , and looked like bathrooms equipped with fake showerheads. Media was carefully used to win support for the regime and popularise its worldview. Nazi ideas were spread through visual images, films, radio, posters, catchy slogans and leaflets. In posters, groups identified as the enemies of Germans were