Nazis proceeded to realise their murderous, racial ideal. Genocide and war became two sides of the same coin. Occupied Poland was divided up. Much of north-western Poland was annexed to Germany. Poles were forced to leave their homes and properties behind to be occupied by ethnic Germans brought in from occupied Europe. Poles were then herded like 62 F Reprint 2025-26 Fig.73 Police escorting gypsies who are being deported to Auschwitz, 1943-1944. cattle in the other part called the General Government, the destination of all undesirables of the empire. Members of the Polish intelligentsia were murdered in large numbers in order to keep the entire people intellectually and spiritually servile. Polish children who looked like Aryans were forcibly snatched from their mothers and examined by race experts . If they passed the race tests they were raised in German families and if not, they were deposited in orphanages where most perished. With some of the largest ghettos and gas chambers, the General Government also served as the killing fields for the Jews. Activity See the next two pages and write briefly: > What does citizenship mean to you? Look at Chapters | and 3 and write 200 words on how the French Revolution and Nazism defined citizenship. > What did the Nuremberg Laws mean to the undesirables in Nazi Germany? What other legal measures were taken against them to make them feel unwanted? Fig. 14 This is one of the freight cars used to deport Jews to the death chambers. Reprint 2025-26 Nazism and the Rise of Hitler STEPS TO DEATH Stage 1: Exclusion 1933-1939 YOU HAVE NO RIGHT TO LIVE AMONG US AS CITIZENS The Nuremberg Laws of citizenship of September 1935: 1. Only Persons of German or related blood would henceforth be German citizens enjoying the protection of the German empire. 2. Marriages between Jews and Germans were forbidden. 3. Extramarital relations between Jews and Germans became a crime. 4. Jews were forbidden to fly the national flag. Other legal measures included: m@ Boycott of Jewish businesses m@ Expulsion from government services @ Forced selling and confiscation of their properties Besides, Jewish properties were vandalised and looted, houses attacked, synagogues burnt and men arrested in a pogrom in November. 1938, remembered as the night of broken glass Fig.75 The sign declares that this North Sea bathing resort is free of Jews. Stage 2: Ghettoisation 1940 - 1944 YOU HAVE NO RIGHT TO LIVE AMONG US <x Fig. 16 Park bench announces: FORARYANS ONLY words ynagogues Place of worship for people of Jewish faith Men and women were left with nothing to survive in the ghettos. From September 1941, all Jews had to wear a yellow Star of David on their breasts. This identity mark was stamped on their passport, all legal documents and houses. They were kept in Jewish houses in Germany, and in ghettos like Lodz and Warsaw in the east. These became sites of extreme misery and poverty. Jews had to surrender all their wealth before