M. K. GANDHI THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI VOL. 76. LETTER TOADOLF HITLER WARDHA, December 24, 1940 We have found in non-violence a force which, if organised, can without doubt match itself against a combination of all the most violent forces in the world. In non-violent technique, as | have said, there is no such thing as defeat. It is all do or die without killing or hurting. It can be used practically without money and obviously without the aid of science of destruction which you have brought to such perfection. It is a marvel to me that you do not see that it is nobody s monopoly. If not the British, some other power will certainly improve upon your method and beat you with your own weapon. You are leaving no legacy to your people of which they would feel proud. They cannot take pride in a recital of cruel deed, however skilfully planned. I, therefore, appeal to you in the name of humanity to stop the war.... lam, Your sincere friend, M. K. GANDHI THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI VOL. 79. F 73 Reprint 2025-26 ro vu = ae Ga >) vu n [a4 Vv = ~~ Tc i= ae] = n N oJ Za India and the Contemporary World Activities 1. Write a one page history of Germany > asaschoolchild in Nazi Germany > asa Jewish survivor of a concentration camp > asapolitical opponent of the Nazi regime 2. Imagine that you are Helmuth. You have had many Jewish friends in school and do not believe that Jews are bad. Write a paragraph on what you would say to your father. Questions . Describe the problems faced by the Weimar Republic. . Discuss why Nazism became popular in Germany by 1930. . What are the peculiar features of Nazi thinking? . Explain why Nazi propaganda was effective in creating a hatred for Jews. ar WD = . Explain what role women had in Nazi society. Return to Chapter 1 on the French Revolution. Write a paragraph comparing and contrasting the role of women in the two periods. 6. In what ways did the Nazi state seek to establish total control over its people ? Reprint 2025-26