defeated that the world came to realise the horrors of what had happened. While the Germans were preoccupied with their own plight as a defeated nation emerging out of the rubble, the Jews wanted the world to remember the atrocities and sufferings they had endured during the Nazi killing operations also called the Holocaust. At its height, a ghetto inhabitant had said to another that he wanted to outlive the war just for half an hour. Presumably he meant that he wanted to be able to tell the world about what had happened in Nazi Germany. This indomitable spirit to bear witness and to preserve the documents can be seen in many ghetto and camp inhabitants who wrote diaries, kept notebooks, and created archives. On the other hand when the war seemed lost, the Nazi leadership distributed petrol to its functionaries to destroy all incriminating evidence available in offices. Yet the history and the memory of the Holocaust live on in memoirs, fiction, documentaries, poetry, memorials and museums in many parts of the world today. These are a tribute to those who resisted it, an embarrassing reminder to those who collaborated, and a warning to those who watched in silence. Reprint 2025-26 Fig.371 Inhabitants of the Warsaw ghetto collected documents and placed them in three milk cans along with other containers. As destruction seemed imminent, these containers were buried in the cellars of buildings in 1943. This can was discovered in 1950. Fig.32 Denmark secretly rescued their Jews from Germany. This is one of the boats used for the purpose. Box2 Mahatma Gandhi writes to Hitler LETTER TOADOLF HITLER AS AT WARDHA, C. P., INDIA, July 23, 1939 HERR HITLER BERLIN GERMANY DEAR FRIEND, Friends have been urging me to write to you for the sake of humanity. But | have resisted their request, because of the feeling that any letter from me would be an impertinence. Something tells me that | must not calculate and that | must make my appeal for whatever it may be worth. It is quite clear that you are today the one person in the world who can prevent a war which may reduce humanity to the savage state. Must you pay that price for an object however worthy it may appear to you to be? Will you listen to the appeal of one who has deliberately shunned the method of war not without considerable success? Anyway | anticipate your forgiveness, if | have erred in writing to you. | remain, Your sincere friend, M. K. GANDHI THE COLLECTED WORKS OF MAHATMA GANDHI VOL. 76. LETTER TOADOLF HITLER WARDHA, December 24, 1940 We have found in non-violence a force which, if organised, can without doubt match itself against a combination of all the most violent forces in the world. In non-violent technique, as | have said, there is no such thing as defeat. It is all do or die without killing or hurting. It can be used practically without money and obviously without the