tells you that an adult male gharial is advertising his presence. Itisthe height of the breeding season. The place seems trapped in a time in early history when man wes still clad in animal skins. It is only as the sun rises higher and burns the mist off the water that the world comes into focus with appalling clarity. The five-km stretch of the Girwa River in Katerniaghat Wildlife Sanctuary is one of the only hatched by FAO consultant Bob Bus- abilitytosupportlargernumbersofthe Dhruva Basu compile 2 Peay ped an haimed thet three wild breeding sites left in the tard. When they reached a metre in animal. world for the most unique of all the length, thev were released in the wild. During the dry summer months, the to respective governments [= * oe a | saying that more such deaths cannot be ruled out CRITICALLY ENDANGERED: Captive gharial at the Madras a wal New Delhi: It is official a now. The recent bird deaths di cause 4% wildlife departments of UP and Delhi have sent reports the polluted water in bere is aoe ry birds vr ere found dead in Okhla bird sanctuary earli a deren month. Later UP authree Can you find out the reasons for the above mentioned problems? eastern states and parts of Gujarat have a very high percentage of their forests as unclassed forests managed by local communities. Community and Conservation Conservation strategies are not new in our country. We often ignore that in India, forests are also home to some of the traditional communities. In some areas of India, local communities are struggling to conserve these habitats along with government officials, recognising that only this will secure their own long-term livelihood. In Sariska Tiger Reserve, Rajasthan, villagers have fought against mining by citing the Wildlife Protection Act. In many areas, villagers themselves are protecting habitats and explicitly rejecting government involvement. The inhabitants of five villages in the Alwar district of Rajasthan vw, have declared 1,200 hectares of forest as the _Bhairodev Dakav Sonchuri , declaring their CONTEMPORARY INDIA II own set of rules and regulations which do not allow hunting, and are protecting the wildlife against any outside encroachments. The famous Chipko movement in the Himalayas has not only successfully resisted deforestation in several areas but has also shown that community afforestation with indigenous species can be enormously successful. Attempts to revive the traditional conservation methods or developing new methods of ecological farming are now widespread. Farmers and citizen s groups like the Beej Bachao Andolan in Tehri and Navdanya have shown that adequate levels of diversified crop production without the use of synthetic chemicals are possible and economically viable. In India joint forest management (JFM) programme furnishes a good example for involving local communities in the management and restoration of degraded Sacred groves - a wealth of diverse and rare species Nature worship is an age old tribal belief based on the premise that all creations of nature have to be protected. Such beliefs