conservation projects are now focusing on biodiversity rather than on a few of its components. There is now a more intensive search for different conservation measures. Increasingly, even insects are beginning to find a place in conservation planning. In the notification under Wildlife Act of 1980 and 1986, several hundred butterflies, moths, beetles, and one dragonfly have been added to the list of protected species. In 1991, for the first time plants were also added to the list, starting with six species. Activity Collect more information on the wildlife sanctuaries and national parks of India and cite their locations on the map of India. Types and Distribution of Forest and Wildlife Resources Even if we want to conserve our vast forest and wildlife resources, it is rather difficult to manage, control and regulate them. In India, much of its forest and wildlife resources are either owned or managed by the government through the Forest Department or other government departments. These are classified under the following categories. (j) Reserved Forests: More than half of the total forest land has been declared reserved forests. Reserved forests are regarded as the most valuable as far as the conservation of forest and wildlife resources are concerned. (ii) Protected Forests: Almost one-third of the total forest area is protected forest, as declared by the Forest Department. This forest land are protected from any further depletion. (iii) Unclassed Forests: These are other forests and wastelands belonging to both government and private individuals and communities. Reserved and protected forests are also referred to as permanent forest estates maintained for the purpose of producing timber and other forest produce, and for protective reasons. Madhya Pradesh has the largest area under permanent forests, constituting 75 per cent of its total forest area. Jammu and Kashmir, Andhra Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal, and Maharashtra have large percentages of reserved forests of its total forest area whereas Bihar, Haryana, Punjab, | Himachal Pradesh, Odisha and Rajasthan have a bulk of it under protected forests. All North-y Forest AND WILDLIFE RESOURCES Gharial on the brink The gharial population has been at its lowest since the 1970s. What went wrong and what can we do? ROMULUS WHITAKER and JANAKI LENIN ISPY tendrils of mist rise delicately from the water surface, tinged gold by the dawn, Your breath hangs as little clouds of vapour as you gaze upon the Girwa River ona cold winter morning. A trio of hollow clapping sounds from the other side of the river, half a kilometre away tells you that an adult male gharial is advertising his presence. Itisthe height of the breeding season. The place seems trapped in a time in early history when man wes still clad in animal skins. It is only as the sun rises higher and burns the mist off the water that the world comes into focus with appalling clarity. The five-km stretch of the Girwa River in Katerniaghat Wildlife Sanctuary is one of the only hatched by FAO consultant Bob