two interior opposite angles or the two remote interior angles of ZACD. Now cut out (or make trace copies of) ZA and ZB and place them adjacent to each other as shown in Fig 6.8. Do these two pieces together entirely cover ZACD? Can you say that m ZACD=m ZA +m ZB? As done earlier, draw a triangle ABC and form an exterior angle ACD. Now take a protractor and measure ZACD, ZA and ZB. Find the sum ZA + ZB and compare it with the measure of ZACD. Do you observe that ZACD is A equal (or nearly equal, if there is an error in B measurement) to ZA + 7B? 2024-25 EE a emarics You may repeat the two activities as mentioned by drawing some more triangles along with their exterior angles. Every time, you will find that the exterior angle of a triangle is equal to the sum of its two interior opposite angles. A logical step-by-step argument can further confirm this fact. An exterior angle of a triangle is equal to the sum of its interior opposite angles. : . A E Given: Consider AABC. ZACD is an exterior angle. To Show: mZACD = mZA+mZB Af y Through C draw CE, parallelto BA. B C D Fig 6.9 Justification Steps Reasons (a) Z1= 2x BA||CE and AC isa transversal. Therefore, alternate angles should be equal. (b) 22= Zy BA||CE and BD isa transversal. Therefore, corresponding angles should be equal. (c) Z1+22=24+4+Zy (d) Now, 2x + Zy=m ZACD From Fig 6.9 Hence, 71 + 22 = ZACD The above relation between an exterior angle and its two interior opposite angles is referred to as the Exterior Angle Property of a triangle. Tuink, Discuss AND WRITE 1. Exterior angles can be formed for a triangle in many ways. Three of them are shown here (Fig 6.10) Fig 6.10 There are three more ways of getting exterior angles. Try to produce those rough sketches. 2. Are the exterior angles formed at each vertex of a triangle equal? 3. What can you say about the sum of an exterior angle of a triangle and its adjacent interior angle? 2024-25 THE TRIANGLE AND ITS PROPERTIES iI TT EXAMPLE 1 Find angle xin Fig 6.11. . SOLUTION Sum of interior opposite angles = Exterior angle or 50 +x = 110 110 . or x = 60 Fig 6.11 Tuink, Discuss AND WRITE 1. Whatcan you say about each of the interior opposite angles, when the exterior angle is (i) aright angle? (ii) an obtuse angle? (ii) anacute angle? 2. Can the exterior angle of a triangle be a straight angle? Try THESE 1. Anexterior angle of a triangle is of measure 70 and one of its interior opposite angles is of measure 25 . Find the measure of the other interior opposite angle. 2. The two interior opposite angles of an exterior angle of a triangle are 60 and 80 . Find the measure of the exterior angle. 3. Is something wrong