. Write the six elements (i.e., the 3 sides and the 3 angles) of AABC. 2. Write the: (ui) Angle opposite to the side LM of ALMN (ii) Vertex opposite to the side RT of ARST . Lookat Fig 6.2 and classify each of the triangles according to its Chapter 6 0756CHO6 A triangle, you have seen, is a simple closed curve made of three line A segments. It has three vertices, three sides and three angles. Here is AABC (Fig 6.1). It has Sides: AB, BC, CA Angles: ZBAC, ZABC, ZBCA Vertices: A,B,C The side opposite to the vertex Ais BC. Can you name the angle opposite to the side AB? Fig 6.1 You know how to classify triangles based on the (1) sides (ii) angles. (i) Based on Sides: Scalene, Isosceles and Equilateral triangles. (ii) Based on Angles: Acute-angled, Obtuse-angled and Right-angled triangles. Make paper-cut models of the above triangular shapes. Compare your models with those of your friends and discuss about them. (i) Side opposite to the vertex Q of APQR (a) Sides (b) Angles 2024-25 THE TRIANGLE AND ITS PROPERTIES ii iii ii P ry O y | Zi Q 6om 7com (ii) (111) Se \ B 3cm Q 6cm (v) (vi) Fig 6.2 Now, let us try to explore something more about triangles. 6.2 MEDIANS oF A TRIANGLE Given a line segment, you know how to find its perpendicular bisector by paper folding. Cut out a triangle ABC from a piece of paper (Fig 6.3). Consider any one of its sides, say, BC. By paper-folding, locate the perpendicular bisector of BC . The folded crease meets BC at D, its mid-point. Join AD . a | A A l B C 'D B D C l v Fig 6.3 The line segment AD, joining the mid-point of BC toits opposite vertex A is called a median of the triangle. Consider the sides AB and CA and find two more medians of the triangle. A median connects a vertex of a triangle to the mid-point of the opposite side. Tuink, Discuss AND WRITE fr 1. How many medians can a triangle have? iS oe 2. Does a median lie wholly in the interior of the triangle? (If you think that this is not AW) true, draw a figure to show such a case). 2024-25 EE a i emarics 6.3 ALTITUDES OF A TRIANGLE Make a triangular shaped cardboard ABC. Place it upright on a table. How tall is the triangle? The height is the distance from vertex A (in the Fig 6.4) to the base BC . From A to BC, you can think of many line segments (see the next Fig 6.5). Which among them will represent its height? A The height is given by the line segment that starts from A, comes straight down to BC, andis perpendicular to BC. This line segment AL is an altitude of the triangle. B C An altitude has one end point at a vertex of the triangle