a right-angled triangle whose hypotenuse is a Cc units long and the legs are of lengths b units and c units (Fig 6.24). Fig 6.24 Draw two identical squares on a sheet with sides of lengths b +c. You are to place four triangles in one square and the remaining four triangles in the other square, as shown in the following diagram (Fig 6.25). c b c b Square A Fig 6.25 Square B 2024-25 THE TRIANGLE AND ITS PROPERTIES iii iii iit The squares are identical; the eight triangles inserted are also identical. Hence the uncovered area of square A= Uncovered area of square B. i.e., Area of inner square of square A = The total area of two uncovered squares in square B. C=h+c This is Pythagoras property. It may be stated as follows: In aright-angled triangle, the square on the hypotenuse = sum of the squares on the legs. Pythagoras property is a very useful tool in mathematics. It is formally proved as a theorem in later classes. You should be clear about its meaning. It says that for any right-angled triangle, the area of the square on the hypotenuse is b equal to the sum of the areas of the squares on the legs. Draw aright triangle, preferably on a square sheet, construct squares on its sides, compute the area of these squares and verify the theorem practically (Fig 6.26). If you have a right-angled triangle, the Pythagoras property holds. If the Pythagoras property holds for some triangle, will the triangle be rightangled? (Such problems are known as converse problems). We will try to answer this. Now, we will show that, if there is a triangle such that sum of the squares on two of its sides is equal to the square of the third side, it must be a right-angled triangle. 1. Have cut-outs of squares with sides 4 cm, 5 cm, 6 cm long. Arrange to get a triangular shape by placing the corners of the squares suitably as shown in the figure (Fig 6.27). 7m iw Trace out the triangle formed. Measure each angle of the triangle. You find that there is no right angle at all. In fact, in this case each angle will be acute! Note that 4 + 574 6 , 5 + 6? # 4 and 67+ 4 #5 . 2024-25 EE is emarics 2. Repeat the above activity with squares whose sides have lengths 4 cm, 5 cm and 7 cm. You get an obtuse-angled triangle! Note that V 4+5 47 etc. This shows that Pythagoras property holds if and only if the triangle is right-angled. Hence we get this fact: If the Pythagoras property holds, the triangle must be right-angled. EXAMPLE 5Determine whether the triangle whose lengths of sides are 3 cm, 4 cm, 5 cmis aright-angled triangle. SOLUTION 3?=3x3=9;4=4x4=16;5 7=5x5=25 We find 3? + 47 = 5 . Therefore, the triangle is right-angled. Note: In any right-angled triangle, the hypotenuse happens to be the longest side.