of the rectangle whose length is 40 cm and a diagonal is 41 cm. ~ The diagonals of a rhombus measure 16 cm and 30 cm. Find its perimeter. 2024-25 EE | i emarics 1. 2. 3. 4. Tuink, Discuss AND WRITE Which is the longest side in the triangle PQR, right-angled at P? Which is the longest side in the triangle ABC, right-angled at B? Which is the longest side of a right triangle? The diagonal of a rectangle produce by itself the same area as produced by its length and breadth This is Baudhayan Theorem. Compare it with the Pythagoras property. Enrichment activity There are many proofs for Pythagoras theorem, using dissection and rearrangement procedure. Try to collect a few of them and draw charts explaining them. WHAT HAVE WE DISCUSSED? 1. The six elements of a triangle are its three angles and the three sides. 2. The line segment joining a vertex of a triangle to the mid point of its opposite side is called a median of the triangle. A triangle has 3 medians. 3. The perpendicular line segment from a vertex of a triangle to its opposite side is called an altitude of the triangle. A triangle has 3 altitudes. 4. Anexterior angle of a triangle is formed, when a side of a triangle is produced. At each vertex, you have two ways of forming an exterior angle. 5. A property of exterior angles: The measure of any exterior angle of a triangle is equal to the sum of the measures of its interior opposite angles. 6. The angle sum property of a triangle: The total measure of the three angles of a triangle is 180 . 7. A triangle is said to be equilateral, if each one of its sides has the same length. In an equilateral triangle, each angle has measure 60 . 8. A triangle is said to be isosceles, if atleast any two of its sides are of same length. The non-equal side of an isosceles triangle is called its base; the base angles of an isosceles triangle have equal measure. 9. Property of the lengths of sides of a triangle: The sum of the lengths of any two sides of a triangle is greater than the length of the third side. The difference between the lengths of any two sides is smaller than the length of the third side. 2024-25 THE TRIANGLE AND ITS PROPERTIES This property is useful to know if it is possible to draw a triangle when the lengths of the three sides are known. 10. Inaright angled triangle, the side opposite to the right angle is called the hypotenuse and the other two sides are called its legs. 11. Pythagoras property: In aright-angled triangle, the square on the hypotenuse = the sum of the squares on its legs. If a triangle is not right-angled, this property does not hold good. This property is useful to decide whether a given triangle is right-angled or not. 2024-25