vertex A (in the Fig 6.4) to the base BC . From A to BC, you can think of many line segments (see the next Fig 6.5). Which among them will represent its height? A The height is given by the line segment that starts from A, comes straight down to BC, andis perpendicular to BC. This line segment AL is an altitude of the triangle. B C An altitude has one end point at a vertex of the triangle Fig 6.5 and the other on the line containing the opposite side. Through each vertex, an altitude can be drawn. Tuink, Discuss AND WRITE 1. How many altitudes can a triangle have? 2. Draw rough sketches of altitudes from A to BC for the following triangles (Fig 6.6): | A ON = | B C Acute-angled Right-angled Obtuse-angled (i) (ii) (iit) Fig 6.6 3. Willan altitude always lie in the interior of a triangle? If you think that this need not be true, draw a rough sketch to show such a case. 4. Can you think of a triangle in which two altitudes of the triangle are two of its sides? 5. Can the altitude and median be same for a triangle? (Hint: For Q.No. 4 and 5, investigate by drawing the altitudes for every type of triangle). Take several cut-outs of (i) anequilateral triangle (ii) anisosceles triangle and (ii) ascalene triangle. Find their altitudes and medians. Do you find anything special about them? Discuss it with your friends. 2024-25 1. 3. THE TRIANGLE AND ITS PROPERTIES i iit EXERCISE 6.1 In A PQR, Dis the mid-point of QR . Pp PM is . PD is . Is QM = MR? Qi D R Draw rough sketches for the following: (a) InAABC, BE is a median. (b) In APQR, PQ and PR are altitudes of the triangle. (c) In AXYZ, YLis an altitude in the exterior of the triangle. Verify by drawing a diagram if the median and altitude of an isosceles triangle can be same. 6.4 EXTERIOR ANGLE OF A TRIANGLE AND ITS. PROPERTY Draw a triangle ABC and produce one of its sides, x say BC as shown in Fig 6.7. Observe the angle ACD formed at the point C. This angle lies in the exterior of AABC. We call it an exterior angle of the AABC formed at vertex C. B C D Clearly ZBCA is an adjacent angle to ZACD. The Fig 6.7 remaining two angles of the triangle namely ZA and ZB are called the two interior opposite angles or the two remote interior angles of ZACD. Now cut out (or make trace copies of) ZA and ZB and place them adjacent to each other as shown in Fig 6.8. Do these two pieces together entirely cover ZACD? Can you say that m ZACD=m ZA +m ZB? As done earlier, draw a triangle ABC and form an exterior angle ACD. Now take a protractor and measure ZACD, ZA and ZB. Find the sum ZA +