SPECIAL TRIANGLES } EQUILATERAL AND ISOSCELES A triangle in which all the three sides are of equal lengths is called an equilateral triangle. Take two copies of an equilateral triangle ABC (Fig 6.19). Keep one of them fixed. Place the second triangle on it. It fits exactly into the first. Turn it round in any way and still they fit with one another exactly. Are you able to see that when the three sides of a triangle have equal lengths then A A the three angles are also of the same size? L\ We conclude that in an equilateral triangle: (i) all sides have same length. : Ao 60 (i) each angle has measure 60 . B C B F (i) (ii) Fig 6.19 2024-25 EE a i emarics A triangle in which two sides are of equal lengths is called an isosceles triangle. l xX IY : , Uo , (i) Gi. Fig 6.20 i From a piece of paper cut out an isosceles triangle XYZ, with XY=XZ (Fig 6.20). Fold it such that Z lies on Y. The line XM through X is now the axis of symmetry (which you will read in Chapter 14). You find that ZY and Z fit on each other exactly. XY and XZ are called equal sides; YZ is called the base; ZY and ZZ are called base angles and these are also equal. Thus, in an isosceles triangle: (i) two sides have same length. (ii) base angles opposite to the equal sides are equal. Try THESE 1. Find angle xin each figure: = a (i) (ii) (iv) (v) D (vi) 120 (vii) (viii) (ix) 2024-25 THE TRIANGLE AND ITS PROPERTIES EL ITT 2. Find angles x and y in each figure. y 120 y (i) (ii) (iii) 6.7 Sum OF THE LENGTHS oF Two SDES OF A TRIANGLE 1. Mark three non-collinear spots A, B and C in your playground. Using lime powder mark the paths AB, BC and AC. Ask your friend to start from A and reach C, walking along one or more a of these paths. She can, for example, walk first along 4B and then a \ along BC to reach C; or she can walk straight along AC. She will , Yo \ naturally prefer the direct path AC. If she takes the other path (AB and Be ------------% C then BC ), she will have to walk more. In other words, AB +BC>AC @ Similarly, if one were to start from B and go to A, he or she will not take the route BC and CA but will prefer BA This is because BC+CA> AB (it) By asimilar argument, you find that CA+AB > BC (iti) These observations suggest that the sum of the lengths of any two sides of a triangle is greater than the third side. Collect fifteen small sticks (or strips) of different lengths, say, 6 cm, 7 cm, 8 cm, 9cm,..., 20cm. Take any three of these sticks and try