BULLETIN BOARD Reduce oil in diet by 10% 11.4% of India s population is diabetic More than 100 million people in India are diabetic: ICMR report m= 7 Fa Ss: t f SU fog, diabe tind is one t) 7 f the leadin cau he Ses of Yoga for the mind, body and soul Air Pollution is one of the leading risk factors for health Arrival of monsoon leads to i i malaria and engue cases ineteasein L Ye oga reduces anxie | Diabetes & heart attack are more bese increase concentration nt in 1 prevalent people of South-east 28 %o Indians are 0 oo cases of water ye ae S * Fem, sate inking water reduce FIT INDIA Regular handwashing reduces Excessive and vector-horne diseases MOVEMENT i fecti 9 sc ; infection by 50% disease in children tine leads to dry eye g ~wee CS g a Pry - AMBP diet mantra: Reduce the amount aS Pollution is A . a ubli i time in children leads to of oil and su i ealth emergency c ae apeaty sleep disorders, and anxiety _ gar in diet Air h into social media 1S ersion int sia spurring rise in Joneline Health: The Ultimate Treasure Lom J Probe and ponder e How does your body respond to an infection such as common cold? e We rarely see cases of smallpox or polio these days, but diseases like diabetes and heart problems are more common. Why? e Could climate change lead to new types of diseases? e How do emotions like stress or worry affect us and make us sick? e Why do some groups of people get affected more than others during disease outbreaks? e Share your questions Chapter 3.indd 28 6/28/2025 5:56:27 PM | Pope eee crane 3 Health: The Ultimate Treasure 2 3.1 Health: Is It More Than Not Falling Sick? What do the news clippings on the notice board tell you about people s health in our country? Is being healthy just about not having diseases? Health also includes feeling good physically, staying positive, and having strong relationships. A healthy person takes care of their body, maintains a positive mindset, and enjoys social life. Let us now explore what it truly means to be healthy. | Activity 3.1: Let us read A Grade 8 student moved to a new school in another city. With no friends in his new environment and busy parents, he felt lonely. To cope, he spent more time on his phone and social media, but this made him feel worse. He stopped trying to make friends, had headaches, lost weight, and could not sleep well. A doctor advised less screen time and meeting a counsellor. The school counsellor arranged help to support him in making friends and improving his health. Think and Reflect: What was the cause ofthe boy s health problems? How did his habits and surroundings affect his well-being? As per the World Health Organization (WHO), health is defined as a state