While these systems can help with some conditions, and are useful for everyday well-being, they may not be effective for all diseases and at all stages. Therapies for non-communicable diseases focus on managing symptoms and improving quality of life through medication, lifestyle changes, and rehabilitation. Early diagnosis and continuous care are key to control the disease progression and prevent complications. Health means complete physical, mental, and social well-being not just the absence of disease. Being happy helps us stay active and healthy, and good health also improves our mood. Health and happiness are closely related. Adisease affects the normal working of the body or mind. Symptoms are what we feel (like pain or tiredness); signs are what can be seen or measured (like fever or rash). Non-communicable diseases like diabetes and heart disease are caused by lifestyle and environmental factors, not germs. They can often be prevented with healthy habits, lifestyle changes, and regular exercise. Infectious diseases are caused by pathogens like bacteria, viruses, or worms. Ourimmune system helps protect us from harmful pathogens. Vaccines train the immune system using dead, weakened, or harmless parts of a germ to prevent disease. Diagnosis and treatment are important for managing and curing diseases. Keep the curiosity alive 1. Group the diseases shown in the images as communicable or non-communicable. Cold and flu Typhoid Diabetes Asthma Chickenpox uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 | . | . . . | . | . Chapter 3.indd 42 6/28/2025 5:58:30 PM Chapter 3.indd 43 2. Diseases can be broadly grouped into communicable and non-communicable diseases. From the options given below, identify the non-communicable diseases. (i) Typhoid = (ii) Asthma (iii) Diabetes (iv) Measles (a) (i) and (ii) (b) (ii) and (iii) _(c) (i) and (iv) (d) (ii) and (iv) . There is a flu outbreak in your school. Several classmates are absent, while some are still coming to school coughing and sneezing. (i) What immediate actions should the school take to prevent further spread? (ii) If your classmate, who shares the bench with you, starts showing symptoms of the flu, how can you respond ina considerate way without being rude or hurtful? (iii) How can you protect yourself and others from getting infected in this situation? . Your family is planning to travel to another city where malaria is prevalent. (i) What precautions should you take before, during, and after the trip? (ii) How can you explain the importance of mosquito nets or repellents to your sibling? (iii) What could happen if travellers ignore health advisories in such areas? . Your uncle has started smoking just to fit in with his friends, even though it is well known that smoking can seriously harm health and even cause death. (i) What would you say to him to make him stop, without being rude? (ii) What would you do if your friend offers you a cigarette at a party? (iii) How can schools help prevent students from indulging in such harmful habits? 6. Saniya claims to