and boiled drinking water uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 | . | . . . | . | . 6/28/2025 5:57:12 PM Pope eee crane 3 Health: The Ultimate Treasure 3 Diseases transmitted by insects Malaria Protozoa Skin, blood High fever, Use of mosquito profuse nets and repellents, sweating, wearing long-sleeved periodic chills clothes, control of mosquito breeding in and around your home Dengue fever Virus Skin, blood Fever, headache, Use of mosquito (Break bone muscle and joint nets and repellents, fever) pain, nausea wearing long-sleeved clothes, control of mosquito breeding in and around your home, avoiding areas with still water By studying the Table 3.1, we can understand how infectious diseases spread and how to prevent them. Here are some simple but important precautions: e Keeping ourselves and our surroundings clean. e Practising basic hygiene every day. e Washing hands with soap and water to remove pathogens. e Covering our mouth and nose while coughing or sneezing. e Wearing a mask in crowded places provides protection. e Avoid sharing of personal items like towels and handkerchiefs. Are oibeases aways ; e Keeping our home, food, and water clean. caused by intections: e Staying at home and resting when we are unwell helps the body recover and minimises spreading the disease to others. Some infectious diseases are caused by worms that live inside our bodies, especially in the digestive system. They feed on nutrients and live as parasites organisms that live in or on another living being. These worms usually spread through contaminated food, water, soil, or contact with infected people or animals. 3.4.2 How are non-communicable diseases caused? You learnt that non-communicable diseases like cancer, diabetes, and asthma are linked to lifestyle, diet, and/or environment. They are the most common cause of death in India. In Grade 6, you also learnt about diseases like scurvy, anaemia, and goitre, Chapter 3.indd 35 6/28/2025 5:57:13 PM What will happen if I take excess amount of Iodine? which are caused by a lack of specific nutrients in the diet. These are called deficiency diseases and are also non-communicable. Diseases such as cancer, diabetes, and asthma may often persist for a long time (more than 3 months) and are referred to as chronic diseases. Diabetes is a common disease which is becoming more prevalent in adults as well as children. In fact, India now has one of the highest numbers of people with diabetes in the world. It often develops due to a combination of hormonal imbalances, unhealthy eating habits, lack of physicalactivity, being overweight or obese, and other reasons. Let us learn more about the causes of non-communicable diseases and their prevention. | Activity 3.5: Let us survey e Find out the three most common lifestyle-related diseases in your neighbourhood e Talk to a doctor, nurse, health worker or even a family member who knows about health and what kind of lifestyle changes can help prevent or manage these diseases. e You can also consult trusted health websites, books, teachers