diseases by training the immune system to recognise and attack harmful germs. providing what is known as acquired immunity protection developed after exposure to a pathogen or a vaccine. Vaccines can be made in different ways from weakened or dead pathogens (like viruses or bacteria), or from inactive or harmless parts of the pathogen. Some newer vaccines instruct our own body cells raise the risk of cancer, highlighting the importance . Pope eee crane 3 Health: The Ultimate Treasure 3 Be a scientist 6/28/2025 5:57:22 PM to make a harmless part of the germ, which our immune system then learns to fight. For example, a tetanus shot, often given after an injury protects against infection by the tetanus-causing bacteria. It contains an inactivated bacterial toxin that helps the immune system develop protection without causing the disease. Do you know when the first vaccine was discovered? Edward Jenner and the smallpox vaccine Smallpox was a deadly disease that caused blisters and killed millions. A milder disease called cowpox, seen in cows, could also infect humans. In the late 1700s, English doctor Edward Jenner discovered that people who had cowpox did not get smallpox. This led to the invention of the first vaccine and helped protect people from smallpox. Our scientific heritage Long before modern vaccines, India had a traditional method called variolation to protect against smallpox. It involved using material from a smallpox sore to scratch the skin and create a mild infection and build immunity. People who performed this practice were known as teekedaars. Think like a scientist Observations Jenner observed that milkmaids who had cowpox did not catch smallpox, likely because the two viruses are related. Hypothesis Content in the pus of cowpox blisters protected people from smallpox. Experimentation He tested this by injecting cowpox sap into a boy, who later showed no illness when exposed to smallpox. 90 Countries reporting smallpox (1950-1980) 70 : 1965: Vaccine 60 campaign Results He found that people who were infected with cowpox sap were now resistant to smallpox. 1979: Smallpox 30 Number of Countries Reporting Cases Application e N Mass vaccination eventually helped P - e > Se > eradicate smallpox worldwide. ti a uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 | . | . . . | . | . Chapter 3.indd 38 6/28/2025 5:57:37 PM Chapter 3.indd 39 Vaccines are one of the most effective ways to protect people of all ages from infants to the elderly against many serious diseases. They help prevent illnesses, reduce the spread of infections, and save millions of lives every year. It is important to remember that vaccines are preventive, not curative they can help minimise serious diseases before they happen, but do not treat them once someone is already sick. Some people may fear or doubt vaccines, but scientists and doctors carefully test them for safety. Getting vaccinated not only protects you but also the people around you. Ever heard of ... %v India s Role in Vaccine Production % MAKE IN India