like shaking hands, or indirectly by sharing uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 | . | . . . | . | . 6/28/2025 5:56:52 PM Chapter 3.indd 33 Pope eee crane 3 Health: The Ultimate Treasure 3 personal items of an infected person. Some of the communicable diseases spread through contaminated drinking water or food. Some pathogens are also spread by insects like mosquitoes and houseflies these insects are called vectors (Fig. 3.4). By understanding how diseases spread, we can take simple steps to protect ourselves and others. Let us find out how these communicable diseases spread and how we can prevent them. | Activity 3.4: Let us find out e Grade 8 students listed some common communicable diseases in Table 3.1 during a community campaign and a library survey. e Check the information listed by referring to books, trusted websites, or asking your science teacher. Add any missing details. e Study the table and think about what simple steps can help prevent each disease. Table 3.1: Some common communicable diseases affecting humans . Causal Site of Preventive Diseases : . Symptoms agent | infection measures Diseases spread through the air Common Virus Respiratory Nasal congestion Washing hands cold and tract and discharge, frequently, not influenza sore throat, sharing personal , fever, cough, items, covering the ss body ache mouth and nose Chickenpox Virus Respiratory Mild fever, itchy Complete isolation of tract, skin skin, rashes, the patient, covering blisters the mouth and nose, vaccination Measles Virus Skin, Fever, sore Isolation of the respiratory throat, and patient, covering tract reddish rashes the mouth and nose, on the neck, ears maintaining good and other parts hygiene, vaccination of the skin 6/28/2025 5:57:00 PM Tuberculosis Bacteria (TB) Lungs Cough, fever, fatigue, loss of appetite, night sweats Avoiding close contact with TB-infected people, covering the mouth and nose, maintaining good hygiene, getting vaccinated Diseases spread through contaminated water and food Hepatitis A Virus Liver Fatigue, fever, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, the upper right abdomen Diarrhoea and dehydration Cholera Bacteria Intestine Headache, abdominal discomfort, fever, and diarrhoea Typhoid Bacteria Intestine Worms in stool, loss of appetite, poor growth, diarrhoea, weight loss, anaemia Ascariasis Worms Intestine (roundworms) Chapter 3.indd 34 jaundice, pain in Drinking boiled water, vaccination Maintain personal hygiene and good sanitary habits, consumption of properly cooked food and boiled drinking water, vaccination Maintain personal hygiene and good sanitary habits, consumption of properly cooked food and boiled drinking water, vaccination Maintain personal hygiene and good sanitary habits, consumption of properly cooked food and boiled drinking water uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 | . | . . . | . | . 6/28/2025 5:57:12 PM Pope eee crane 3 Health: The Ultimate Treasure 3 Diseases transmitted by insects Malaria Protozoa Skin, blood High fever, Use of mosquito profuse nets and repellents, sweating, wearing long-sleeved periodic chills clothes, control of mosquito breeding in and around your home Dengue fever Virus Skin, blood Fever, headache, Use of mosquito (Break bone muscle and joint