but this made him feel worse. He stopped trying to make friends, had headaches, lost weight, and could not sleep well. A doctor advised less screen time and meeting a counsellor. The school counsellor arranged help to support him in making friends and improving his health. Think and Reflect: What was the cause ofthe boy s health problems? How did his habits and surroundings affect his well-being? As per the World Health Organization (WHO), health is defined as a state of complete physical, mental, and social well-being, and not merely the absence of disease (Fig. 3.1). A healthy person can perform various tasks more efficiently and cope well in different and difficult situations. A healthy person can adjust well with peer groups and other members of society. Let us understand more about health. Our scientific heritage Ayurveda teaches us that true health is a balance of body, mind, and surroundings. AYUS;, Following dinacharya (daily routine) and a (hi Y, ritucharya (seasonal routine) helps maintain this Mental Fig. 3.1: Aspects of health 2 x gq ) balance. Eating fresh, wholesome food suited to Ss ot one s prakriti (body constitution) is essential. Pr Regular exercise, cleanliness, restful sleep, and S L a calm mind support overall well-being. This can also be achieved through practices like yoga, meditation, and mindfulness. 3.2 How Can We Stay Healthy? Staying healthy means eating nutritious food, maintaining hygiene, staying in a clean place, exercising regularly, getting Chapter 3.indd 29 6/28/2025 5:56:36 PM proper sleep, spending time with family and friends, and having a positive attitude. What we should do and what should not do to keep ourselves healthy? | Activity 3.2: Let us list e List some good habits that your parents, teachers, or elders often encourage you to follow. How many of these are already a part of your daily routine? Which ones would you like to start following? Add to the list below: o Keep yourself clean and maintain personal hygiene. o Eat a healthy and balanced diet. o Exercise regularly. o Make time to relax or meditate every day. e Now, think about habits that are not good for your health. Add more to the list below: o Spending too much time on mobile phones or other digital screens. o Eating fast food and other junk food every day. o Sleeping very late or not getting enough sleep. o Skipping meals, especially breakfast. Taking care of our body and mind is important. Healthy habits support a healthy body as well as a healthy mind. Say no to smoking or Discuss your findings with your friends and teacher. From alcohol the activity you participated in and the discussions, you may have realised that our health depends on many factors. These factors include our lifestyle (how we live) and our environment (our surroundings). 3.2.1 Maintain a healthy lifestyle e Eat a balanced diet with plenty of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains. e Avoid processed, fatty, or sugary food and drinks. e Stay physically active by