of physicalactivity, being overweight or obese, and other reasons. Let us learn more about the causes of non-communicable diseases and their prevention. | Activity 3.5: Let us survey e Find out the three most common lifestyle-related diseases in your neighbourhood e Talk to a doctor, nurse, health worker or even a family member who knows about health and what kind of lifestyle changes can help prevent or manage these diseases. e You can also consult trusted health websites, books, teachers and doctors. e Fillin Table 3.2 and learn more about lifestyle-related diseases. Table 3.2: Non-communicable diseases Name of common Signs and Suggested lifestyle-related diseases symptoms lifestyle change(s) 1. Obesity Eating a balanced diet and exercising regularly 2. Diabetes e Frequent urination e Excessive thirst e Weight loss e Tiredness e Slow healing 3. High blood pressure uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 | . | . . . | . | . Chapter 3.indd 36 6/28/2025 5:57:14 PM Chapter 3.indd 37 Dr. Kamal Ranadive (1917-2001) was a pioneering biomedical researcher. She studied how hormones and certain viruses are linked to cancer, helping improve its treatment and prevention. Her work also showed how tobacco, diet, and pollution can of a healthy lifestyle. 3.5 How to Prevent and Control Diseases? You might have heard the phrase Prevention is better than cure. It is important to protect ourselves from both communicable and non-communicable diseases. | Activity 3.6: Let us read Odisha community-led sanitation campaign In Bhadrak district, Odisha, a community sanitation campaign helped more people build and use toilets. This reduced open defecation significantly, and improved child health, with fewer cases of diarrhoea and infections. What do you infer from this case study? Simple steps like good sanitation can greatly reduce the spread of communicable diseases. Find about such community campaigns held in your location. Share in your class and discuss with your peers about the impact of such initiatives. Ability of the body to fight diseases You would have noticed that some people get sick more frequently than others, although living in a similar environment. Do you know why? The natural ability of our body to fight diseases is known as immunity. Our body has a special system called the immune system that helps fight against diseases. You might have taken some drops or injections in your childhood to protect yourself from certain diseases, such as polio, measles, tetanus, and hepatitis. These are vaccines that help prevent serious infections caused by viruses and bacteria. A vaccine helps our body fight certain diseases by training the immune system to recognise and attack harmful germs. providing what is known as acquired immunity protection developed after exposure to a pathogen or a vaccine. Vaccines can be made in different ways from weakened or dead pathogens (like viruses or bacteria), or from inactive or harmless parts of the pathogen. Some newer vaccines instruct our own body cells raise the risk of cancer, highlighting the importance . Pope eee crane 3 Health: The Ultimate Treasure 3