and save millions of lives every year. It is important to remember that vaccines are preventive, not curative they can help minimise serious diseases before they happen, but do not treat them once someone is already sick. Some people may fear or doubt vaccines, but scientists and doctors carefully test them for safety. Getting vaccinated not only protects you but also the people around you. Ever heard of ... %v India s Role in Vaccine Production % MAKE IN India is one of the world s largest vaccine ( > vacen producers. It manufactures vaccines on a for The World massive scale and supplies them to many secordosessuppied COUNtries. Indian vaccine companies ro played a key role during the COVID-19 pandemic and continue to support global health efforts. 200 CROR VACCINATION om Dr. Maharaj Kishan Bhan was a well-known Indian doctor and scientist. As Secretary of the Department of Biotechnology, he helped promote science and innovation in India. He playeda keyrole in developing the Rotavirus vaccine, which protects children from diarrhoea. He believed in using research to create India s health and biotechnology sectors. 3.5.1 Treatment of diseases If our immune system fails to protect us against an infectious disease, we fall ill and need to visit a doctor. The doctor may give us medicines called antibiotics, which kill the bacteria that might have caused the disease. Antibiotics work only against bacterial infections because they target parts of bacterial cells that are different from human or other animal cells. They do not work against viruses or diseases caused by protozoa. affordable healthcare and made a big difference inj Pope eee crane 3 Health: The Ultimate Treasure 3 6/28/2025 5:57:49 PM Think like a scientist Discovery of the first antibiotic, Penicillin Penicillin was discovered in 1928 by Alexander Fleming, a bacteriologist from London. While studying harmful bacteria, he noticed that a mould on a discarded petri dish stopped the bacteria from growing. He realized the mould released a substance that killed the bacteria. This chance discovery led to the discovery of penicillin, the first antibiotic used to treat bacterial infections. Though antibiotics are effective in protecting us against bacterial infections and have saved millions of lives since their discovery, their indiscriminate use has led to a decline in their effectiveness (Fig. 3.5a). Nowadays, there are news headlines about antibiotic resistance, a phenomenon where bacteria that were earlier killed by a given antibiotic are found to survive and multiply despite treatment with that antibiotic. This makes HOW ANTIBIOTIC RESISTANCE SPREADS IN OM Taking antibiotics when they are not required Development of Development of resistance in the resistance in a human bacteria in animals body YS Antibiotics ~ Exposure a through animal Spread through food products =e soil in a crop field How resistant How resistant May h : : ; ty have manure/animal bacteria spread. bacteria spread a serious illness faeces through plants and through humans and gets care animal products at a hospital Spread resistant ie iv y bacteria to community