means something inside us may not be working as it should. We may have symptoms, such as pain, tiredness, or dizziness, and signs like fever, rash, high blood pressure, or swelling that indicate we are unwell. A symptom is what we feel (like pain), while a sign is something that can be seen or measured (like high body temperature when we have fever). These help doctors understand what might be making us unwell. Fig. 3.3: Two different playgrounds Chapter 3.indd 31 6/28/2025 5:56:44 PM Infected person 3.4 Diseases: What Are the Causes and Types? A disease is a condition that affects the normal working of the body or mind. It can happen when one or more organs or organ systems stop functioning properly. Some diseases are caused by germs like bacteria, viruses, fungi, worms, or even by protozoa (single-celled organisms). These disease-causing organisms are called pathogens. Other diseases may result from poor nutrition or an unhealthy lifestyle. Some diseases last for a short time, while others can continue for a long time and need regular treatment or care. Diseases can be grouped into two major types based on their causes and how they spread: Direct contact e Non-communicable diseases Some diseases, like A cancer, diabetes, or asthma, By air are not caused by pathogens and do not spread from one naire Gis -h contact i> person to another. They are usually linked to lifestyle, diet, = sr and/or environment. e Communicable diseases ee a Diseases caused by pathogens "realthy person are called communicable Mosquito A diseases. They can spread from one person to another. Some examples Rabid animal of communicable diseases are typhoid, dengue, flu, Fig. 3.4: Common methods of transmission of diseases chickenpox, and COVID-19. Chapter 3.indd 32 In recent years, non-communicable diseases (NCDs) like diabetes, heart disease, and cancer have become more common in India. This is happening because of changes in how people live such as eating more processed food, getting less exercise, and living longer lives. Today, most deaths in India are caused by NCDs. Understanding the difference between these two types helps us know how diseases spread and how to prevent them. 3.4.1 How are communicable diseases caused and spread? All communicable diseases are caused by pathogens. These pathogens can enter our body through the air we breathe or by consuming contaminated food or water and more. But how do these pathogens spread from one person to another? One common way is through air, when an infected person coughs or sneezes, or through direct contact like shaking hands, or indirectly by sharing uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 | . | . . . | . | . 6/28/2025 5:56:52 PM Chapter 3.indd 33 Pope eee crane 3 Health: The Ultimate Treasure 3 personal items of an infected person. Some of the communicable diseases spread through contaminated drinking water or food. Some pathogens are also spread by insects like mosquitoes and houseflies these insects are called vectors (Fig. 3.4). By understanding how diseases spread,