health advisories in such areas? . Your uncle has started smoking just to fit in with his friends, even though it is well known that smoking can seriously harm health and even cause death. (i) What would you say to him to make him stop, without being rude? (ii) What would you do if your friend offers you a cigarette at a party? (iii) How can schools help prevent students from indulging in such harmful habits? 6. Saniya claims to her friend Vinita that Antibiotics can cure any infection, so we don t need to worry about diseases. What question(s) can Vinita ask her to help Saniya understand that her statement is incorrect? Pope eee crane 3 Health: The Ultimate Treasure 43 6/28/2025 5:58:30 PM 7. The following table contains information about the number of dengue cases reported in a hospital over a period of one year: 1 2 3 4 5 6 January February March April May June 10 12 15 18 22 40 7 8 9 10 11 12 July August September October November December 65 65 65 30 30 20 Make a bar graph of the number of cases on the Y-axis and the month on the X-axis. Critically analyse your findings and answer the following: (i) In which three months were the dengue cases highest? (ii) In which month(s) were the cases lowest? (iii) What natural or environmental factors during the peak months might contribute to the increase in dengue cases? (iv) Suggest a few preventive steps that the community or government can take before the peak season to reduce the spread of dengue. 8. Imagine you are in charge of a school health campaign. What key messages would you use to reduce communicable and non-communicable diseases? 9. It is recommended that we should not take an antibiotic for a viral infection like a cold, a cough, or flu. Can you provide the possible reason for this recommendation? 10. Which disease(s) among the following may spread if drinking water gets contaminated by the excreta from an infected person? Hepatitis A, Tuberculosis, Poliomyelitis, Cholera, Chickenpox. Prepare some questions based on your learnings so far ... Chapter 3.indd 44 6/28/2025 5:58:36 PM Pope eee crane 3 Health: The Ultimate Treasure 4 11. When our body encounters a pathogen for the first time, the immune response is generally low but on exposure to the same pathogen again, the immune response by the body is much more compared to the first exposure. Why is it so? Discover, design, and debate e Students maintain a health diary for at least a month to track food, hygiene, exercise, sleep, screen time, and emotional state. Read about Indian scientists like Suniti Solomon, Asima Chatterjee, Dr. Yellapragada Subbarao, Dr. Mary Poonen Lukose for their contributions in the field of health and diseases. The deadly disease smallpox was eradicated by vaccination. Discover how this was done and why it worked. Debate whether everyone should be required to get vaccinated to protect others. According to current