mind. Say no to smoking or Discuss your findings with your friends and teacher. From alcohol the activity you participated in and the discussions, you may have realised that our health depends on many factors. These factors include our lifestyle (how we live) and our environment (our surroundings). 3.2.1 Maintain a healthy lifestyle e Eat a balanced diet with plenty of fruits, vegetables, and whole grains. e Avoid processed, fatty, or sugary food and drinks. e Stay physically active by playing outdoors, walking, running, cycling, or exercising. e Limit screen time and spend more time in nature. e Get enough sleep to help your body and mind rest and recover. e Practice yoga or simple breathing exercises like pranayama regularly. e Say NO to harmful substances things like tobacco, alcohol, and addictive drugs (Fig. 3.2). uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 | . | . . . | . | . Chapter 3.indd 30 6/28/2025 5:56:39 PM Get enough sleep Fig. 3.2: How to be healthy Pope eee crane 3 Health: The Ultimate Treasure + 3.2.2 Keep the environment clean | Activity 3.3: Let us compare e Lookat Fig. 3.3a and Fig. 3.3b. Which playground would you like to play in, and why? e Most of us would like to play in the playground shown in Fig. 3.3a as it is clean, well-maintained, and looks beautiful. The playground in Fig. 3.3b is polluted, dirty, unhygienic, and full of flies and mosquitoes. People living in such areas may fall sick more often. e In addition to inculcating good habits and adopting a healthy lifestyle, we must keep ourselves and our surroundings clean. e Have you ever found it hard to breathe in a place with a lot of smoke or dust? That is because clean air and water are important for our health. In cities, air pollution from vehicles and factories can cause problems like coughing or asthma. The Air Quality Index (AQD helps us know how clean the air is. A cleaner environment helps us stay healthy and feel better. e But health is not only about the body. Our feelings and relationships matter too. Even if we eat well and live ina clean place, we may not feel good if we are lonely or upset. Spending time with friends and family, talking, laughing, and having fun help keep our minds healthy too. 3.3 How Do We Know That We Are Unwell? Our body usually works in a certain way to keep us healthy. When we feel unwell, it means something inside us may not be working as it should. We may have symptoms, such as pain, tiredness, or dizziness, and signs like fever, rash, high blood pressure, or swelling that indicate we are unwell. A symptom is what we feel (like pain), while a sign is something that can be seen or measured (like high body temperature when we have fever). These help doctors understand what might be making us unwell. Fig. 3.3: Two different playgrounds Chapter 3.indd