Taking antibiotics when they are not required Development of Development of resistance in the resistance in a human bacteria in animals body YS Antibiotics ~ Exposure a through animal Spread through food products =e soil in a crop field How resistant How resistant May h : : ; ty have manure/animal bacteria spread. bacteria spread a serious illness faeces through plants and through humans and gets care animal products at a hospital Spread resistant ie iv y bacteria to community 1, Meal It reaches human digestive system through . S i Patients go pread in crop produce slain hospital through dirty surface Fig. 3.5 (a): Spread of antibiotic-resistant bacteria in community uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8 | . | . . . | . | . Chapter 3.indd 40 6/28/2025 5:58:09 PM Pope eee crane 3 Health: The Ultimate Treasure 4 common infections harder to treat and increases the risk of complications, prolonged illness, and even death. | Activity 3.7: Let us infer e Study the infographic given in Fig. 3.5b. How do you think the antibiotic resistance has been developed in bacterial pathogens? What precautions may be taken to reduce antibiotic resistance? e To tackle the problem of antibiotic resistance, we must use antibiotics wisely only when prescribed by a doctor, in the correct dose, and for the right duration. Avoiding unnecessary use helps prevent the rise of resistant bacteria and keeps antibiotics effective for future generations. Traditional medicine systems like Ayurveda, Siddha, and Unani have been used in India for many years to manage common health problems. They use natural substances like herbs, oils, HOW BACTERIA BECAME RESISTANT TO ANITBIOTICS? The antibiotic resistant bacteria A few microbes develop resistance to antibiotics. When antibiotics grow and take Some bacteria kill bacteria causing over. transfer antibiotic ad illness, they also resistance to other _- kill good bacteria a. PO sa / bacteria, causing = s _ protecting the body % & J more problems. from infection. ; . x% = = ay o Go No... No. do not give antibiotic injection to your cattle. throat and a fever. I need antibiotic for my == Are you giving antibiotics mother. She has a sore to your cattle? You must get a prescription from a No. Iam not using any antibiotics. It will develop antibiotic resistance otherwise. Fig. 3.5 (b): Development of antibiotic-resistant bacteria and preventive measures Chapter 3.indd 41 6/28/2025 5:58:18 PM and minerals for managing illnesses and promoting recovery, and focus on a healthy lifestyle and balanced diet. While these systems can help with some conditions, and are useful for everyday well-being, they may not be effective for all diseases and at all stages. Therapies for non-communicable diseases focus on managing symptoms and improving quality of life through medication, lifestyle changes, and rehabilitation. Early diagnosis and continuous care are key to control the disease progression and prevent complications. Health means complete physical, mental, and social well-being not just the absence of disease. Being happy helps us stay active