Past 08-04-2025 11:41:43 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 7.indd 158 Aryabhata: He lived in Kusumapura (near present- day Pa ma dest famous centre of learning, around 500 CE and authored sho rt treatise of mathematics and astronomy called Aryabhattya. He af gave formulas to calculate the motions of the Sun, the Moon and the planets, and proposed that the Earth spins on its axis, whic explains the alternation of day and night. He gave the lengt of a year as 365 days, 6 hours, 12 minutes, and 30 seconds, jee =e a few minutes off from the modern value (365 days, 5 hours, : 48 minutes, and 45 seconds). Aryabhata also provided a fair estimate of the size of the Earth and a correct explanation for solar and lunar eclipses. His work became the foundation for further scientific advances in India and beyond. In mathematics, Aryabhata described a number of techniques of calculation an equation-solving, some of which you learn at school without knowing that they were first formulated 1500 years ago! : \ Varahamihira: He was a mathematician, astronomer ~ and astrologer fromthesame period. He lived in Ujjayini, a city famous for its tradition of learning and scholarship. His encyclopedic work, Brihat Samhita, covered a wide range of subjects from astronomy and astrology to weather forecasting, architecture, town planning | =. and even farming. ability to observe the worl _ apply logical reasoni g, and combine it with traditio knowledge made fi ey pioneer in science. Mase 08-04-2025 11:41:44 Chapter 7.indd 159 LET'S EXPLORE Let s join Bhavisha and Dhruv with their time machine in the time of the Guptas. You are getting an opportunity to meet Aryabhata and Varahamihira what would you ask them? Divide the class into two groups and create a series of questions for an interview with them. Fig. 7.14. The yaksha s message to the clouds - a scene from Meghaditam. Kalidasa: Little is known about Kalidasa s life; legends suggest that he was once ridiculed by others, which motivated him to work hard and transform his life. He is renowned for his contributions to Sanskrit literature and exquisitely refined poetry. One of his celebrated compositions is Meghadutam, or The Cloud Messenger . It tells the story of a yaksha (minor deity), who, after being banished from his home by his master, sends a message to his beloved through a passing cloud. Apart from the many emotions of love, the poem describes in great detail the landscapes and weather of north India on its journey to the beloved. 7 - The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 11:41:45 4 DON'T MISS OUT Codified: Did you know that Ayurveda got codified during the Gupta Arranged a period? This Indian traditional system of medicine has much organised older roots, going back several centuries BCE. Texts like systematic the Charaka Samhita and Sushruta Samhita, which laid the Way. foundation for Ayurvedic practices still in use