some control over their regions. Thriving trade The primary source of revenue of the Gupta s was land tax. Other sources included fines, taxes on mines, irrigation, trade and crafts. This revenue was used for administration, maintaining the army, building temples and infrastructure, and supporting scholars and artists. As we see once again, for such an empire to sustain itself, it had to promote a vibrant internal and external trade. In the Gupta era, India traded with the Mediterranean world, Southeast Asia and China, exporting textiles, spices, ivory and gemstones. The Indian Ocean trade network connected Indian ports to distant markets. One significant stop on the way to the Mediterranean markets was Socotra Island, strategically located in the Arabian Sea. Archaeological evidence, such as pottery, inscriptions in the Brahmi script, and designs such as a Buddhist stupa, has established the presence of Indian traders there over several centuries, apart from traders from Egypt, Arabia, Rome and Greece. This small island carries evidence of the rich cultural exchanges that trade promoted in the Indian Ocean. New Ideas and Wonders: The Classical Age As we saw, Gupta rulers were devout followers of Vishnu; this is often reflected in their coins and inscriptions. However, they also supported other traditions and schools of thought. They patronised Buddhist institutions, including the renowned Nalanda university and several other Buddhist vihdras (monastery). Their approach was inclusive and open. We will explore these institutions further in higher grades. 08-04-2025 11:41:42 Chapter 7.indd 157 Fig. 7.11. Remains of Nalanda University Indeed, the prolonged period of peace and stability during the Gupta period promoted notable achievements in various fields, | leading some historians to label this period the classical age of India. It was also the time when knowledge from previous eras was consolidated and compiled into numerous texts. Sanskrit literature flourished, with Kalidasa s works and many major Puranas. Aryabhata and Varahamihira recorded major advancementsinmathematicsandastronomy, while medicaltexts compiled and refined medical theories and practices. Metallurgy also progressed, as we saw with the rust-resistant Iron Pillar. This stability strengthened the economy, allowing the state to support scholars, artists, and scientists, leading to cultural and intellectual growth. Chandragupta II kept himself surrounded by many learned men, poets and artists, and his patronage of such diverse talent enriched his court greatly. Let us take a look at some of the remarkable figures of this period. Fig. 7.12. Chandragupta II goes to war (an artist s imagination from the 1920s) 7 - The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 11:41:43 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 7.indd 158 Aryabhata: He lived in Kusumapura (near present- day Pa ma dest famous centre of learning, around 500 CE and authored sho rt treatise of mathematics and astronomy called Aryabhattya. He af gave formulas to calculate the motions of the Sun, the Moon and the planets, and proposed that the Earth spins on its axis, whic explains the alternation of day and night. He gave