and all the surrounding regions. But at its peak, the Gupta Empire covered a larger area than this most of present-day north and west India, along with parts of central and east India. LET'S EXPLORE In the Grade 6 chapter Timeline and Sources of History , we listed multiple sources that help us understand the past. Compile a list of the sources we have referred to so far in the chapter. What did we learn from each source? Imagine what it would have entailed to move a whole army of soldiers, elephants, horses, cooks, and other support staff, as well as the supplies to feed them all. Clearly, the tributary kings must have been asked to provide for these. LET'S EXPLORE Take a political map of India and locate the present-day states and Union territories where the Guptas ruled (see Fig. 7.8). Mark these states on the map and count how many you found. Then, compare your findings with your friends to see if everyone got the same number or discovered something different! 7 - The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity Tapestry of the Past @ 08-04-2025 11:41:40 30 N INDIAN DESERT Ujjayini A 20 N 10 N 70 E Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Nar 80 E Prayaga Kashi Pataliputra J aa PALLAVA\ 80 E s Magadha | r amralipti. Gupta Empire A_ Important Cities Rivers 90 E Fig. 7.8. The Gupta Empire s extent. Note that the Vakatakas were the allies of the Chapter 7.indd 152 Guptas. The Guptas claim to have conquered parts of the east coast, down to the Pallavas, whom they may have briefly subdued. N.O N.0Z@ N.OLb 08-04-2025 11:41:41 Chapter 7.indd 153 A Traveller s Account of Indian Society in the Gupta Age Chinese traveller Faxian (pronounced as Fa-Shi-Anne) visited India in the early 5th century CE. He set out on this long and difficult pilgrimage to visit sacred Buddhist sites, learn from renowned Indian scholars and collect manuscripts of Buddhist texts so he could take them back to China. Faxian travelled extensively across India, observing her culture, governance and society, and recorded his experiences and observations for the people of his homeland and for us too since his travelogue has survived to this day! Below is an excerpt from his travelogue, where he records his observations of the society in the Gupta era. The people are numerous and happy [...] they have no need to register households or attend to officials. [...] Those who farm royalland pay a portion of their grain. [...] The king s guards and attendants have salaries [...] The cities are the greatest in the Middle Kingdom [i.e. the Gangetic plains], and the inhabitants are rich, prosperous, and practice kindness and righteousness. Heads of Vaishya families [i.e. merchants or traders] establish houses for charity and medicines [...] the poor, orphans and the sick are cared for [...] doctors provide treatment, and the needy receive food and medicines. [...] The city has many