the Guptas ruled in the north, the Pallavas emerged as a powerful dynasty in the south, gradually consolidating their power in parts of presentday Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Telangana and Andhra Pradesh. Their origins are not clearly known, but they appear to have been a tributary power under the Satavahanas, whom we encountered in the previous chapter, and to have gained power as the Satavahanas declined. The Pallavas were also great patrons of art and architecture. Most of them were devotees of Shiva and are credited with constructing magnificent temples and rock-cut caves, some of which we will visit when we explore classical Indian architecture. The capital of the Pallavas, Kanchipuram (in present-day Tamil Nadu), often known as the city of a thousand temples , developed as one of the major centres of learning in the south. The establishment of ghatikas centres of learning that emerged during the reign of the Satavahanas fostered an environment for education and intellectual growth. In the northeastern region, the Kamartpa kingdom, ruled by the Varman dynasty, extended over the Brahmaputra valley (broadly, present-day Assam) and northern parts of present-day Bengal and Bangladesh. An ancient name for the Brahmaputra valley of Assam is Pragjyotisha, mentioned in the Ramayana and Mahabharata; the latter text mentions Bhagadatta, king of 7 - The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity Tapestry of the Past @ 08-04-2025 11:41:45 Fig. 7.15.1 to 7.15.3. In the 3rd image, these terracotta sculptures from the Gupta period (Ahichchhatra, western Uttar Pradesh) depict India s sacred rivers, Ganga and Yamuna. Their vahanas distinguish them: Ganga stands ona makara (a mythical creature akin to a crocodile), while Yamuna stands,on a tortoise. Water flows over their heads, and the pot is another reminder of their manifestation as rivers. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 (Left) Deogarh (Uttar Pradesh), (Right) Vishnu on Sheshnag from Dashavatara temple a ge, N bs D Chapter 7.indd 162 08-04-2025 11:41:46 Fig. 7.17. The renowned Ajanta Caves were carved out during this period with the support of the Guptas and Vakatakas. Left: An elaborate cave replicating a temple with a central stupa from which a seated Buddha emerges (note the arched roof imitating wooden beams). Right: A painting of Bodhisattva Padmap4ani. Ne, = oem = 7 - The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity Tapestry of the Past Fig. 7.18.1. to 7.18.3. Udayagiri Caves and a Gupta-era temple near Sanchi are both located in Madhya Pradesh. Arjuna and Karna in battle A sculpted depiction from the Mahabharata Chapter 7.indd 163 08-04-2025 11:41:49 Chandragupta II Samudragupta Aryabhata Varahamihira Prabhavati Gupta | Kalidasa <+ CE Vakatakas Kamarupa SE LC Guptas Pallavas Fig. 7.19 Pragjyotisha (modern-day Assam), as fighting on the side of the Kauravas in the Great War, and some historical rulers claimed him among their ancestors. Be that as it may, the Kamartpa kingdom was a prominent cultural and political centre; temples and monasteries flourished as hubs of learning. Both the Pallavas and Kamartpa are mentioned in the prayaga