7.indd 163 08-04-2025 11:41:49 Chandragupta II Samudragupta Aryabhata Varahamihira Prabhavati Gupta | Kalidasa <+ CE Vakatakas Kamarupa SE LC Guptas Pallavas Fig. 7.19 Pragjyotisha (modern-day Assam), as fighting on the side of the Kauravas in the Great War, and some historical rulers claimed him among their ancestors. Be that as it may, the Kamartpa kingdom was a prominent cultural and political centre; temples and monasteries flourished as hubs of learning. Both the Pallavas and Kamartpa are mentioned in the prayaga prashasti we saw earlier. During his southern campaigns, Samudragupta defeated a Pallava ruler but did not take over the region. Instead, he let the local kings, including the Pallavas, Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 | Chapter 7.indd 164 08-04-2025 11:41:50 keep their thrones as long as they accepted his rule and paid tribute. This helped maintain peaceful relations. Under similar conditions, in the northeast, Samudragupta defeated the ruler of Kamartpa but did not take direct control. By now, we have seen this pattern recur quite a few times. The Gupta period was atime of remarkable progress. Its influence stretched far beyond the empire, shaping art, science, literature, and governance for centuries. Advances in mathematics, astronomy, medicine and metallurgy, among other fields, laid the foundation for future scientific and technological growth, while beautiful temples and Sanskrit literature continue to inspire today. The Guptas created a stable and prosperous society, setting a model for future rulers. Their legacy is still alive in India s culture, traditions, and way of life, marking this era as one of the high points in Indian history. Before we move on... > The Gupta kings consolidated their power through military campaigns, land grants and matrimonial alliances to ensure stability in the empire. > The period saw remarkable contributions in the fields of art, literature, science and mathematics. > Other than the Guptas, dynasties like Vakatakas, Pallavas, and Varmans ruled in their respective regions, making this period full of cultural and intellectual vibrancy. Questions and activities 1. Imagine you receive a letter from someone living in the Gupta Empire. The letter starts like this: Greetings from Pataliputra! Life here is vibrant and full of excitement. Just yesterday, I witnessed ... Complete the letter with a short paragraph (250-300 words) describing life in the Gupta Empire. 7 - The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity Tapestry of the Past Chapter 7.indd 165 08-04-2025 11:41:50 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 7.indd 166 . Which Gupta ruler was also known as the Vikramaditya ? . Periods of peace support the development of various aspects of sociocultural life, literature, and the development of science and technology. Examine this statement in the light of the Gupta empire. . Recreate a scene from a Gupta ruler s court. Write a short script, assign roles like the king, ministers, and scholars, and enact a role play to bring the Gupta era to life! . Match the two columns: (1) Kanchipuram (a) Known for