weather of north India on its journey to the beloved. 7 - The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 11:41:45 4 DON'T MISS OUT Codified: Did you know that Ayurveda got codified during the Gupta Arranged a period? This Indian traditional system of medicine has much organised older roots, going back several centuries BCE. Texts like systematic the Charaka Samhita and Sushruta Samhita, which laid the Way. foundation for Ayurvedic practices still in use today, were compiled and given their final shape during the Gupta period. They deal with a wide range of topics the cataloguing and diagnosing of diseases, their treatments, the importance of diet in maintaining good health, the preparation of medicines, and surgical techniques advanced for their time. Importantly, Ayurveda emphasises holistic healing and a deep connection between the mind, body, and nature. The Quest for Beauty The Gupta rulers created a supportive environment where creativity and craftsmanship thrived; some of the iconic works of history were produced during this time. Many key centres of art emerged during these times, including Sarnath (near Varanasi in present-day Uttar Pradesh), known for its exquisite sculptures of the Buddha, and the awe-inspiring Ajanta caves (in present-day Maharashtra). The rock-cut caves and detailed carvings of deities at Udayagiri (Madhya Pradesh) are another example of this abundant artistic production. Gupta art , as it is sometimes called, set high standards of aesthetics and beauty that left a lasting impact. (See Figures 7.15 to 7.18) LET'S EXPLORE Take a close look at the samples of Gupta sculptures shown in Fig 7.15.1. and 7.15.2. By looking at the attributes, can you guess which deities are depicted here? Write your observations in the space provided and share your thoughts during the class discussion! Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 7.indd 160 08-04-2025 11:41:45 Chapter 7.indd 161 The Decline of the Guptas By the 6th century CE, the Gupta Empire began showing signs of decline as the later rulers faced challenges from external invasions. The fierce Htna tribe from central Asia repeatedly attacked the empire, weakening its control over north India. At the same time, the rise of powerful regional rulers led to internal conflicts. However, was this truly the end, or the beginning of a period that marked a turning point in Indian history? We will explore this question in the next part of this book. Meanwhile in the South and Northeast ... Let us go back to the map in Fig. 7.8. While the Guptas ruled in the north, the Pallavas emerged as a powerful dynasty in the south, gradually consolidating their power in parts of presentday Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Telangana and Andhra Pradesh. Their origins are not clearly known, but they appear to have been a tributary power under the Satavahanas, whom we encountered in the previous chapter, and to have gained power as the Satavahanas declined. The Pallavas were also great patrons of art and architecture. Most of them were devotees