by Gupta rulers, such as mahardajadhirdja , samrat , and chakravartin . These titles reflected their claim to supreme authority and emphasised their superiority over earlier rulers who used simpler titles like rajan and maharaja . The Gupta rulers used various strategies, including military conquests, diplomacy, and alliances, to expand and consolidate their vast empire. The last method included matrimonial alliances. A well-known example is that of Prabhavati Gupta, 08-04-2025 11:41:41 Chapter 7.indd 155 daughter of Chandragupta II, who was married to a prince of the Vakataka kingdom the Guptas neighbours to the south. Tragically, the Vakataka prince died early, making her the regent ruler of the kingdom. During her reign, she ensured that the ties between the Vakatakas and the Guptas remained strong. One of her inscriptions describes her as a mother of two kings , referring to her two sons who ascended the Vakataka throne. As a devotee of Vishnu like her father, Prabhavati is also associated with the construction of seven temples dedicated to this god and his avatars. Some of these temples are in Ramagiri (Ramtek hill) in present-day Maharashtra. Sane, a ae Se = = SES eee . Regent Ruler: A regent temporarily governs a kingdom fora monarch unable to do so until they can. Fig. 7.9. The Kevala Narasimha temple dedicated to Narasimha, one of the avatars of Vishnu; according to some historians, this temple was constructed by Prabhavati Gupta s daughter in her memory LET S EXPLORE Observe the painting of Prabhavati Gupta sitting in her court (Fig. 7.10). Take note of the details her attire, posture, the people around her, and the setting of the court. What do these elements tell you about her life, role, and the time she lived in? Discuss your observations in groups and share your insights with the class. Fig. 7.10. An artist s reimagination of Prabhavati Gupta sitting in her court Tapestry of the Past 7 - The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity 08-04-2025 11:41:42 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 7.indd 156 The Gupta Empire had a well-organised system of administration. Instead of controlling everything from a central authority, they divided the empire into provinces and granted land to local rulers, priests and chieftains. These land grants were carefully inscribed on copper plates to keep accurate records many of which have been discovered by archaeologists in recent times. This system helped ensure proper tax collection and allowed the Gupta rulers to govern efficiently while still giving local leaders some control over their regions. Thriving trade The primary source of revenue of the Gupta s was land tax. Other sources included fines, taxes on mines, irrigation, trade and crafts. This revenue was used for administration, maintaining the army, building temples and infrastructure, and supporting scholars and artists. As we see once again, for such an empire to sustain itself, it had to promote a vibrant internal and external trade. In the Gupta era, India traded with the Mediterranean world,