pay a portion of their grain. [...] The king s guards and attendants have salaries [...] The cities are the greatest in the Middle Kingdom [i.e. the Gangetic plains], and the inhabitants are rich, prosperous, and practice kindness and righteousness. Heads of Vaishya families [i.e. merchants or traders] establish houses for charity and medicines [...] the poor, orphans and the sick are cared for [...] doctors provide treatment, and the needy receive food and medicines. [...] The city has many wealthy Vaishya elders and foreign merchants, with beautiful homes [...] The lanes are kept in good order. A Record of Buddhistic Kingdoms (AD 399-414) (Translated by J. Legge) LET'S EXPLORE Read the excerpt from Faxian given above and identify the key features of the society he describes. Write down your observations and compare your notes with your friends you might be surprised to see how differently others interpret the same text! 7 - The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 11:41:41 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Outcastes: Someone who has been rejected from a social or cultural group; in this case, a category of people considered socially too low to be part of the varna system. Chapter 7.indd 154 Excerpts from historical accounts like Faxian s are valuable sources, but they reflect only the writer s perspective and focus at one point in time and for a limited portion of the society they describe. Let us not, however, forget that elsewhere in his travelogue, Faxian also describes the harsh treatment of the chanddlas, who were regarded as outcastes and lived outside the city limits. Just as you may have perceived the excerpt from Faxian s travelogue differently from your friends, a group of historians may examine the same source and draw varied interpretations from it. Historians then look at more sources to corroborate their understanding. This reminds us of the need to assess multiple sources, perspectives and interpretations before drawing conclusions. Glimpses of the Gupta Empire Governance and administration Let us observe the map in Fig. 7.8. You will notice that many kingdoms coexisted during the same period. Some of them may have been at war with each other in their ambition to expand their control. Recall what we saw earlier about Kautilya s ideas on ruling a kingdom. He advised rulers to form alliances (mitra) as one of the components of the saptanga. New kings ... new titles Inscriptions and coins provide valuable insights into the titles adopted by Gupta rulers, such as mahardajadhirdja , samrat , and chakravartin . These titles reflected their claim to supreme authority and emphasised their superiority over earlier rulers who used simpler titles like rajan and maharaja . The Gupta rulers used various strategies, including military conquests, diplomacy, and alliances, to expand and consolidate their vast empire. The last method included matrimonial alliances. A well-known example is that of Prabhavati Gupta, 08-04-2025 11:41:41 Chapter 7.indd 155 daughter of Chandragupta II, who was