go and see it. Bhavisha: Look! Is this the famous iron pillar ? Dhruv: Oh wow! There is something written on it, but I cannot read it. Bhavisha: I wonder who made this? And why? Let s hear what the guide uncle has to say about this. 7 - The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity Tapestry of the Past e 08-04-2025 11:41:38 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 SS Chapter 7.indd 148 Tour Guide: The 6-tonne pillar was erected during the reign of Chandragupta II, a ruler of the Gupta dynasty. It was probably erected first in front of the Udayagiri caves (Madhya Pradesh) and brought to Delhi a few centuries later. It was dedicated to Vishnu, and its inscriptions celebrate the king s achievements. Both: That is so fascinating! We would love to learn more about this king and his empire. Let us begin this exciting journey into the history of the Gupta Empire! DON'T MISS OUT Picture leaving a bicycle out in the rain for just one year it would soon show signs of rust. Yet this ancient pillar, standing under the open sky for centuries, remains unaltered. Scientists have tried to uncover its secret, and they believe it is because a unique thin layer, created by the special iron used and oxygen from the air, forms on the surface of the iron, protecting it from corrosion. A New Power Emerges By the 3rd century CE, the Kushana Empire, which spread over the north and northwest of the Subcontinent, started to weaken. New kingdoms emerged, setting the stage for a fresh period of consolidation, and the new actor on this stage was the Gupta dynasty. There are various theories on the origin of the Guptas. However, it is widely believed that they emerged in a region near presentday Uttar Pradesh as regional rulers. Over time, they rose to prominence and established a powerful empire. The Gupta period is considered remarkable in Indian history and is marked by significant developments in many areas. The fields of art, architecture, literature and science flourished, particularly during the time of Chandragupta II, and that legacy continues even today. 08-04-2025 11:41:38 Chapter 7.indd 149 The inscription on the iron pillar in Delhi speaks of a king named Chandra , who has been identified with Chandragupta II (not to be confused with Chandragupta Maurya from the Maurya dynasty, whom we met earlier). Chandragupta II, also known as Vikramaditya , was one of the renowned rulers of the Gupta dynasty. He was a devotee of Vishnu and his mount (vahana) Garuda often appears on many inscriptions. 9. DON'T MISS OUT Have you noticed the I in Chandragupta II s name? Historians added this number because there was another Chandragupta before him his grandfather! (This tradition of naming the first son after his grandfather is followed by some Indian families even today.) Chandragupta I, as he is referred to, played a crucial role in the early expansion of the Gupta