dynasty. He was a devotee of Vishnu and his mount (vahana) Garuda often appears on many inscriptions. 9. DON'T MISS OUT Have you noticed the I in Chandragupta II s name? Historians added this number because there was another Chandragupta before him his grandfather! (This tradition of naming the first son after his grandfather is followed by some Indian families even today.) Chandragupta I, as he is referred to, played a crucial role in the early expansion of the Gupta Empire; he is remembered for his coins and strategic alliances, which helped him consolidate his power and lay the foundation for a strong empire. Fig. 7.4. Gold coin featuring King Chandragupta I with his queen, Kumaradevt; on the reverse side, a seated goddess identified as Lakshmi The warrior king The prayaga prashasti, a pillar inscription in Prayagraj, praises the achievements of Samudragupta, Chandragupta II s father. According to the author of the inscription the court poet Harisena the king s ambition was to be dharani-bandha or to unify the Earth . To this end, he fought many wars, defeating 7 - The Gupta Era: An Age of Tireless Creativity Tapestry of the Past 08-04-2025 11:41:39 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 7.indd 150 kings, taking over their kingdoms and expanding his empire. Many defeated kings were reinstated and offered tribute to Samudragupta, while others, fearing his might, submitted without protest. Harisenaalso wroteabouthowthe king supported art, learning and trade, making his kingdom rich and successful. Samudragupta mi cciee Ts vein ee himself is portrayed as a veena player in one of the coins he Fig. 7.5. An inscription by Harisena j ; minted (Fig. 7.6). THINK ABOUT IT Why do you think kings chose to proclaim their achievements in the form of inscriptions? Fig. 7.6. A seated Samudragupta, playing the veena; on the reverse side, goddess Lakshmi LET'S REMEMBER | Ambitious kings sometimes performed the ashvamedha yajria to build mighty empires and leave a legacy for the future. Such a significant event was commemorated by minting special coins like the one shown in Fig 7.7. 08-04-2025 11:41:40 Chapter 7.indd 151 Fig. 7.7. This coin depicts the sacrificial horse of the ashvamedha yajria; the reverse depicts the queen holding a chauri (fly whisk). Some literary sources give us descriptive information about rulers, kingdoms and the people. The Vishnu Purana, for instance, specifies the key regions of the empire: The Gupta dynasty will rule over Anuganga (the middle-Gangetic basin), Prayaga (present-day Prayagraj), Saketa (Ayodhya), and Magadha (approximately Bihar) and all the surrounding regions. But at its peak, the Gupta Empire covered a larger area than this most of present-day north and west India, along with parts of central and east India. LET'S EXPLORE In the Grade 6 chapter Timeline and Sources of History , we listed multiple sources that help us understand the past. Compile a list of the sources we have referred to so far in the chapter. What did we learn from each source? Imagine what