said, the smile leaving her lips. I wonder what I have done to deserve this, Velu began. I have worked hard and honestly. am being punished. Without the rains I can t till the land. If I don t till the land no crop will grow. What will happen to me? How shall I feed my family? he asked, somewhat bitterly. He wasn t speaking to anyone in particular, but the old lady thought that he was opening his heart to her. Perhaps you have worked too hard, she said. What do you mean? Can anyone work too hard? I have only done what any hard-working farmer would do. I shall work and never rest until Iam too old. This is the first season in five, no, six years that I have not sown, nor ploughed.Oh, it is hard not to be able to work... said Velu a little angrily. But my son, that is what I am talking about. You have strength now. You can work without a break. But have you thought about the land? The earth works, too, when you plough, and sow, and plant. The earth has worked for years, centuries, in fact, thousands of years. The soil, the land, the earth... shouldn t someone let the land rest a bit? the old woman said, softly, smiling. ENVIRONMENT bitterly: hurtfully POORVI ceaseless: continuous ree? - Rest? Let the land rest? I don t understand, Velu looked at her, a little puzzled. Yes, my son, that is the difficulty. You don t realise that the earth is old... But Nature is a mother to all of us. To you and to me. And to the trees, the water and the soil. She takes care to give her children the rest they need... Velu began to understand. When the rains don t come, you are dejected. But in _ that way the land is left alone. The land lies undisturbed, staring at | the sky, resting... And when the rains come, it will spring back into _ activity, fresh and ready for your crop. Go home, my son, Nature knows a thing or two... go home, she said, and got up. She walked away. After a while Velu, too, got up and walked home-ward. He thought about the land, his beloved piece of land, which, if he were to believe the old woman, was perhaps (jp breathing peacefully, taking Suabkeak from the constant, ceaselessyear-round cultivation. - S ENVIRONMENT Perhaps she is right, he thought, as he approached the village. It was already evening. The sun was low in the sky. And... what was that? Velu felt a cool breeze on his back. Then he felt a tiny drop on his shoulder. He ~, looked up. Yes... the clouds were gathering ~ in the distance. It was growing dark. Soon there would be lightning. And thunder. And sweet, fragrant rain. Velu ran home, laughing and happy. AMAKSHI BALASUBRAMANIAN Let us discuss I Complete the following statements given below with