not be repaired. She did not try to avoid the tree: one sweep, and the cherry tree was cut in two. Punctuation refers to the symbols used in writing to clarify meaning and separate sentences and their components. Proper punctuation ensures the clarity and flow of a text, guiding readers through its structure. ee ee Here are some of the most common punctuation marks: Full stop (.) ends a declarative sentence For example: She went to the store. * Comma (,) separates components in a list, clauses, or phrases within a sentence For example: We bought apples, oranges, and bananas. * Question Mark (?) ends a direct question For example: Where are you going? Exclamation Mark (!) indicates strong emotion or emphasis For example: Watch out! 168 P ENVIRONMENT Colon (:) introduces a list, explanation or elaboration For example: He had one goal: win the race. % Semicolon (;) connects closely related independent clauses or Py separates complex list items For example: She likes reading; he prefers writing. Apostrophe ( ) Incontractions He s (He is), they ll (they will), I m (I am) v To show possession Jagan s book, the girls toys If the noun ends in -s, add only the apostrophe Manas car * Quotation Marks ( ) enclose direct speech or quotations For example: She said, I m happy. Dash (- or ) adds emphasis or separates related thoughts I] For example: He was late again. ey * Capitalisation Rules . + v Names of people and places Priya, India Y Days, months, festivals Monday, December, Diwali Titles with names Dr. Sneha, Mr. Patel v Deities and holy books God, the Quran, the Bhagawad Gita v First person pronoun I v Adjectives from proper nouns Indian, American v Geographical features, races, religions, languages the Himalayas, Hindu, French v Titles of books, poems, or plays Malgudi Days, The Road Not Taken, Good Heavens, etc. Now, punctuate the following paragraph appropriately. every sunday roshni would visit her grandparents house on their farm come sit grandpa would say patting the bench on their porch roshni loved these moments where the world slowed down and stories flowed like magic grandma would bring tea her eyes twinkling with joy im excited to hear about your younger days the adventures the lessons and the memories roshni said eagerly grandpa smiled softly his wrinkled hands resting on the cane ah the old days... when everything was simple and happiness was all we had roshni could feel the warmth of those memories he sat in silence bound not by words but by a timeless bond POORVI Let us listen I You will listen to a conversation between a son and his mother. As you listen, select four true statements from 1-7 given below. (Transcript for teacher on page 201) 1. The mother encouraged her son to deliver a presentation on the Chipko Movement. 2. The son was surprised to know about the Appiko Movement. 3. The son agreed that the Chipko Movement was about