uplifting wind currents. This helps them fly long distances easily and save their! energy too. =e ee = HARVEST HYMN Let us do these activities before we read. I I -_ III Work in pairs and share your responses with your classmates and teacher. 1. India celebrates many harvest festivals. When is the harvest festival celebrated in your region and how is it celebrated? 2. A hymn refers to a song of praise. (i) To whom do we offer a hymn? (ii) When and where do we sing a hymn? (iii) Why do we offer it? Some poets and authors use words that are no longer a part of common usage. Such words are called archaic words. Work in pairs. Read the sentences given below. Match the underlined archaic words in Column 1 with their meanings in Column 2. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. Thou art my friend, and I trust thee. Thy kindness is great, and everything that is mine is thine. Gi)_you (object) Gii)_you (subject Work in pairs. Read the paragraph and select the correct meaning for each underlined word from the options given below. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. Under the golden 1. radiance of the evening sun, the villagers gathered to pay 2. tribute to their 3. cherished elder, who had dedicated his life to their well-being. His wise 4. counsel had guided generations, steering them through challenges. Known for his 5. munificent spirit, he never hesitated to share his resources generously. 1. radiance : @ glow (ii) brilliance 2. tribute : @ respect (ii) gratitude 3. cherished : @ preserved (ii) loved 4. counsel : Wi advice (ii) decision 5. munificent : (i) rich (ii) generous POORVI Let us read aS Men s Voices: | \ Lord of the lotus, lord of the harvest, Bright and munificent lord of the morn! Ly Thine is the bounty that prospered our sowing, Thine is the bounty that nurtured our corn. We bring thee our songs and our garlands for tribute, The gold of our fields and the gold of our fruit; O giver of mellowing radiance, we hail thee, = We praise thee, O Surya, with cymbal and flute. i Lord of the rainbow, lord of the harvest, Great and beneficent lord of the main! Thine is the mercy that cherished our furrows, Nees Sj>-... Thine is the mercy that fostered our grain. We bring thee our thanks and our garlands for tribute, ss = The wealth of our valleys, new-garnered and ripe; O sender of rain and the dewfall, we hail thee, We praise thee, Varuna, with cymbal and pipe. we \ ENVIRONMENT = Women s Voices: > Queen of the gourd-flower, queen of the harvest, Sweet and omnipotent mother, O Earth! Thine-is the plentiful bosom that feeds us, -Fhine istthe womb where our riches have birth. 7 We bring thee our love and our garlands for tribute, With gifts of thy opulent giving we come; -O source of our