correct option from those given below. The old woman s advice Velu, at that moment. ) "yi A. failed to impress B. confused - C. scared D. made sense to >) on (iii) State one thing about the old woman when she referred to Velu ; as my son , while offering advice. Ve, 7 (iv) Complete the following sentence with a suitable explanation. The difficulty that the old woman mentions is due to the fact that ENVIRONMENT II Answer the following questions. 1. How does the old woman convey Nature s wisdom to Velu? 0, 2. The writer says, The fields lay untended... Why couldn t the farmers | tend to their fields in the absence of rain? 3. Support the old woman s perspective that the land needs rest just like people do. 4. What can be inferred about Velu s character based on his reaction to the drought? : 5. What does the story suggest about the life of farmers and their relationship with nature? 6. How might the rest and care of land contribute to a balanced and sustainable ecosystem? y : es . A . Let us learn + I Solve a crossword using picture and word clues. All clues are related to the words from the text that are connected to weather or agriculture. Across 5. collected crops { | | , 2? | Sa jd ! ' 9. prepare and use ! | . | | | | it land for crops | 10. turn up the field | soil 11. plant seed/s 3. rumbling sound: = --------------with rain 4, grains etc. grown ! in large quantity | in fields POORVI II The text uses words like piece, weather, son, and rain . These words are the same as other words that are spelt differently peace, whether, sun, and reign. Words that are pronounced the same as other words but differ in meaning or in spelling are called homophones. Now, complete the paragraph by filling in the correct option of homophones given in the brackets. The farmer looked at the sky and wondered 1. (weather/whether) the clouds would finally bring rain. He sat down on the ground, breaking a small 2. (piece/peace) of roti for his meal. The 3. (plain/plane) fields stretched endlessly before him, completely dry. He thought about how he could 4. (sell/cell) his last sack of grain to buy some essentials for his family. Without the rains, it didn t 5. (seam/seem) possible to grow another crop this season. Despite his worries, he smiled, knowing that every farmer hopes for the next 6. (rain/reign) by nature to bring life back to the land. III Choose the correct meanings from the given options for the underlined words or phrases in the following sentences. 1. Being annoyed, she muttered something which nobody heard. (i) spoke in a low voice (ii) spoke slowly (iii) spoke angrily 2. At the new work place, Riya felt forlorn for a week. (i) upset andirritated (ii) angryand