her/him to set up a rain water harvesting unit. Provide suggestions to address the issue. Remember to use formal language keep sentences short and to the point state the purpose clearly and concisely * give relevant details Format and Layout: Sender s address Date The Municipal Councillor (Receiver s designation and address) Subject: Request to Install a Rainwater Harvesting Unit in Ward No. 44 Dear Madam, Paragraph 1: Drawing attention to the problem Paragraph 2: Causes and Consequences Body of the letter Paragraph 3: Request and Suggestions Paragraph 4: Conclusion Yours sincerely, Signature of the sender (Sender s full name in brackets) Let us explore I Rest is very important for us to function in a proper manner. Even the Earth needs rest. This is known as fallowing. Read the facts given below related to fallowing: A fallow year refers to leaving the land without sowing for one, or several vegetative cycles. POORVI This is done to allow the land to recover its nutrients and retain moisture. It also helps to avoid spreading of diseases and controlling pests. The sustainable land management method has been applied for centuries, wherein a field is divided into two halves one is planted with crops while the other remains unplanted. Then, the process is reversed in the following year. II Find out from your Vocational Education teacher about Agriculture asa vocation and other related vocations, such as horticulture, etc. III India s rich tradition of meteorological knowledge includes indigenous forecasting systems, grounded in ancient wisdom. These provide sophisticated methods for predicting climate, calculating rainfall, and issuing early warnings. References to rain and weather are found in numerous ancient texts, including the Rigveda, Shrimad Bhagavad, Parashara Samhita, Panini s Ashtadhyayi, and Meghmala. These texts offer insights into rainfall patterns and seasonal changes. IV Meteorological Services for Agriculture in India The primary objective ofthe Agricultural Meteorology Division, India Meteorological Department (IMD) is to minimise the impact of adverse weather on crops and to leverage crop-weather relationships to boost agricultural production. In addition to forecasts and advisories, several other weather related services are also provided. For detailed information, please visit: https://mausam. A Z imd.gov.in/responsive/servicesMetEnvironment.php Nx ay L a TRANSCRIPTS THE CHERRY TREE Let us listen (refer to page 170) I You will listen to a conversation between a son and his mother. As you listen, select four true statements from 1-7 given below. SON MOTHER SON MOTHER SON MOTHER SON MOTHER SON MOTHER : Amma, could you help me with this project? : Why not? What s the project about? : Its about the Chipko Movement. I have to make a PowerPoint presentation and talk about it in class. : That s good! Chipko Movement was all about hugging trees to prevent them from being cut, isn t it? Such an inspiring movement it was! : Yes, it was the first time that common people came together for the noble cause of saving trees. It showed how people can also make a difference. Have you heard or