Don t drown it! said Grandfather. Rakesh gave it a sprinkling co) Wi y, and circled it with NN i (/; pebbles. TRE S {| Eee v7 ENVIRONMENT ry eer ye What are the pebbles for? asked Grandfather. For privacy, said Rakesh. y He looked at the tree every morning but it did not seem to be ~ growing very fast, so he stopped looking at it except quickly, out of the corner of his eye. And, after a week or two, when, he allowed himself to look at it properly, he found that it had grown at least an inch! That year the monsoon rains came early and Rakesh plodded: walked plodded to and from school in raincoat and chappals. slowly Ferns sprang from the trunks of trees, strange-looking w =e lilies came up in the long grass, and even when it ie! at Se wasn t raining the trees dripped and mist came curling up the valley. The cherry tree grew a J quickly in this season. It was about two feet high , os. " when a goat entered the garden Kick is a n ( and ate all the leaves. Only the ae ae es af main stem and two thin branches remained. Never mind, said Grandfather, seeing that Rakesh was upset. Tt will grow again, cherry trees are tough. Let us discuss I Arrange the events in order of occurrence in the story. Two have been done for you. Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher. 1. Rakesh discovered that the small, well-rooted twig, had grown into a cherry tree. 2. Rakesh was sent to live with his grandfather in Mussoorie. 3. Rakesh pressed the cherry seed into the soft soil with his thumb. (5) 4. The cherry tree grew quickly after the rains arrived early. POORVI scrambled: moved quickly and with difficulty cherry tree. pebbles. . Rakesh bought a bunch of cherries and ate most of them. . A goat entered the garden and ate all the leaves of the young . Rakesh s parents grew maize, rice, and barley in a village. (1) . Rakesh sprinkled water on the cherry tree and surrounded it with . Grandfather told Rakesh that cherry trees were tough. . Rakesh kept rolling the last cherry seed in his mouth. II Do you think the cherry tree would survive? Why do you think so? Il Towards the end of the rainy season new leaves appeared on the tree. Then a woman cutting grass scrambled down the hillside, her scythe swishing through the heavy monsoon foliage. She did not try to avoid the tree: one sweep, and the cherry tree was cut in two. When Grandfather saw what had happened, he went after the woman and scolded her; but the damage could not be repaired. Maybe it will die now, said Rakesh. Maybe, said Grandfather. But the cherry tree had no intention of dying. By the time summer came round again, it had sent out several new