favourable conditions, but still no rain. Every day they hoped that the rains would come. But this year turned out to be different. * This is the first season in five, no, six years that I have not sown, *, nor ploughed. We ought to talk to some astrologers. I have only done what any hard-working farmer would do. Velu looked at her, a little puzzled. She takes care to give her children the rest they need... e Velu felt a cool breeze on his back. . La The highlighted words or phrases that come before a noun but do not describe them are called determiners. Let us learn the use of some common determiners. Articles: a, an, the These are used to introduce nouns. Demonstrative Determiners: this, that, these, those These are used to point out specific items. * Possessive Determiners: my, our, your, his, her, its, their, one s These indicate ownership or relationship. * Definite Numeral Determiners: one, two, three, etc. These specify exact quantities. * Indefinite Numeral Determiners: some, any, no, all, much, many, few, less, several, little and few v Some is used in affirmative sentences, while any and no are used in negative and interrogative sentences. v All refers to the entirety of a group. Much and many denote large quantities of uncountable and countable nouns, respectively. v Few indicates a small number, less refers to a smaller quantity, and several means more than two but not many. v Little means not much, few means not many. Use a little and a few to convey a positive sense. ENVIRONMENT Distributive Determiners: each, every, either, neither Y Each refers to individual items or people, every refers to all items or people collectively. Y Either means one of two options and neither means not one of the two options. Now, fill in the blanks by choosing the correct determiner from those given in the brackets. It was 1. (a/an) rainy afternoon, and 2. (a/the) sky was thick with dark clouds. Mala noticed a large puddle quickly forming in front of 3. (her/their) house. Excited, she called for her brother to join her, knowing that both of them always loved playing in 4. (a/the) rain. While jumping from 5. (some/one) puddle to another, Mala spotted 6. (few/a few) snails slowly creeping along the wet sidewalk and pointed them out to her brother. With 7. (each/every) jump, the sound of both 8. _ heard through the soft patter of raindrops. Though (her/their) squeals and laughter was they were fully drenched 9. (either/neither) siblings minded it. It had been a perfect rainy day. 6) Let us listen I Listen to the weather forecast. As you listen, fill in the blanks with the . exact word you listen to. (Transcript for teacher on page 204) a 1. Delhi will mostly have a sky with light rain. 2. Moderate rain is likely to happen in 3. Kolkata is likely to have a maximum temperature of around C. 4. There is a