because he@@ok good card of them. synonym: kind 2. He was munificent towards the needy and donated a lot for their health care. synonym: ENVIRONMENT 3. When he lost his job, all his friends gave him succour by supporting him with money. synonym: 4, When the sun s rays came into the dark room, the whole room was full of radiance. synonym: 5. The little girl was speechless with ineffable joy when she got her birthday gift from her aunt. synonym: III You have learnt about some archaic words. Some more archaic words are given below. Refer to a dictionary to find commonly used words which are similar in meaning. 1. morrow 2. hither 3. quoth 4. betwixt 5. yonder Let us listen I Listen to the talk about paddy cultivation. As you listen, at number the events in the correct order in which they ( <i ae happen. (Transcript for teacher on page 203) ~ 1. Transplanting of seedlings 2. Ploughing of soil 3. Threshing of grains 4. Puddling of land 5. Harvesting of paddy 6. Irrigating the field 7. Milling of rice II Now, listen to the talk again. As you listen, choose the correct option to answer the questions that follow. 1. What is the main step in preparing the soil for cultivation of rice? (i) Ploughingthesoil (ii) Clearing the soil (iii) Puddling the soil 2. How long does it take for rice seeds to grow into seedlings before being transplanted? (i) 2-3 weeks (ii) 4-5 weeks (iii) 6-7 weeks POORVI 3. Why is drying rice grains important after threshing? (i) To get rice seeds for plantation (ii) To separate the rice grains easily (iii) To store the rice grains for longer De Z < Let us speak In English, some letters are not pronounced in certain words. For example, in words like knife , knowledge , and know , the first letter k is not pronounced. Let us look at a few more such examples. In the words given below the letter n is silent when it appears with m at the end of the word. hymn, column, autumn, solemn Now, say these words aloud. In the words given below the letter b is silent when it appears with m . womb, tomb, bomb, climb, comb Now, say these words aloud. In our country, harvest is celebrated with the preparation of delicious dishes. Work in groups and make a presentation on any popular dish made during the harvest festival in your region. Use the prompts given in the box to make your presentation. Make sure that all the members share their views. Include the following: What is the dish called? Is it known by any other name in other parts of India? - What ingredients are used to make the dish? How is the dish prepared? How is the dish served? What does the dish taste like? What is the special ritual related to the preparation of this dish? Describe any special memory associated with the