the poem in Column 1 with their expressions in Column 2. Choose the appropriate poetic device from the box given below and write in Column 3. 1. sweet and (i) creates a clear description omnipotent of the scene and appeals to mother the senses . The wealth of implied comparison of our valleys, growth and reaping with new-garnered beginning and end of all and ripe life . Thou art the the earth is being given Seed and the human-like qualities Scythe V Certain words or phrases are repeated in the same line of the poem. For example, The gold of our fields and the gold of our fruit; Find more such repetitions from the poem. What is the poet s purpose of using repetition in the poem? VI The poem uses symbolism to convey deeper meanings. Match the symbols in Column 1 with the meanings they convey in Column 2. 1. Prithvi (the Earth) (i) light, energy, life representing the giver of warmth and prosperity 2. Surya (the Sun) (ii) mercy and nourishment crucial for agriculture and sustenance 3. Varuna (Rain) (iii) fertile land, motherhood, nurturing the source of all life ENVIRONMENT POORVI Let us think and reflect I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow. 1. We bring thee our songs and our garlands for tribute, The gold of our fields and the gold of our fruit; O giver of mellowing radiance, we hail thee, We praise thee, O Surya, with cymbal and flute. (i) What does the act of bringing songs and garlands as tribute suggest about the people s relationship with the divine? A. They fear the gods and wish to calm them in any way possible. B. They have a deep sense of reverence and gratitude towards the divine. C. They are forced to perform rituals without understanding the divine. D. They depend on the gods for their daily needs and activities. (ii) Complete the following sentence suitably. The word gold in the phrases the gold of our fields and the gold of our fruit symbolises (iii) How does the description O giver of mellowing radiance help us understand Surya s role in the harvest? (iv) Fillin the blank by selecting the correct option from those given in the brackets. The use of cymbal and flute signifies . Goy and 2 celebration/meditation and worship) 2. All Voices: . Lord of the Universe, Lord of our being, , Father eternal, ineffable Om! Thou art the Seed and the Scythe of our harvests, ey, Thou art our Hands and our Heart and our Home. = (i) Inthe phrase Lord of our being, what does the word being most > ~ likely refer to? A. Our physical body B. Our entire existence C. Our spiritual practices D. Our earthly possessions (ii) Identify whether the following statement is true or false. The imagery of the Seed and the Scythe symbolises the divine s role as both the beginning (creation) and the end (harvest) of the agricultural cycle.