his worries, he smiled, knowing that every farmer hopes for the next 6. (rain/reign) by nature to bring life back to the land. III Choose the correct meanings from the given options for the underlined words or phrases in the following sentences. 1. Being annoyed, she muttered something which nobody heard. (i) spoke in a low voice (ii) spoke slowly (iii) spoke angrily 2. At the new work place, Riya felt forlorn for a week. (i) upset andirritated (ii) angryand bitter (iii) sad and neglected 3. When all his friends had gone, he was at_a loss because he did not know what to do. (i) confused (ii) shocked (iii) lonely 4. When the little child saw her father, her eyes sparkled. (i) glowed dimly (ii) showed joy (iii) opened wide ENVIRONMENT IV Match each word (adjective) in Column 1 with a word (noun) that collocates in Column 2. Write the adjective-noun collocation in Column 3. 6, One example has been done for you. a (Cr V Underline the verbs and identify the forms of tenses for the following ~ sentences from the text. 1. Oh, it is hard not to be able to work... 2. ...1 am too old. 3. What are you smiling at, Amma? 4. But my son, that is what I am talking about. 5. The earth has worked for years, centuries... 6. I have worked hard and honestly. The forms of tenses in the given statements are Simple Present Tense (1 and 2), Present Progressive Tense (3 and 4) Present Perfect Tense (5 and 6). Now, fill in the blanks with the correct form of Simple Present, Present Progressive or Present Perfect tenses of the verbs given in brackets. Ravi (i) (be) a farmer who (ii) __ _-s (practtise) crop rotation on his land. Each season, he (iii) _ (plant) different crops to maintain the soil s health. This year, he (iv) (grow) legumes, which help restore the nutrients in the soil. Over the years, Ravi (v) (learn) that planting the same crop repeatedly (vi) (deplete) the soil, making it less fertile. By rotating crops, he (vii) _ (Keep) the land productive and fertile. He (viii) _ (see) a noticeable improvement in his yields since adopting this method. Now, Ravi (ix) (share) his knowledge with other farmers, explaining how crop rotation(x) (benefit) both the soil and their harvests. 195 POORVI VI Study the highlighted words in the following sentences from the text. o& The rains came all these years without any such consultations. . So many favourable conditions, but still no rain. Every day they hoped that the rains would come. But this year turned out to be different. * This is the first season in five, no, six years that I have not sown, *, nor ploughed. We ought to talk to some astrologers. I have only done what any hard-working farmer would do. Velu looked at her, a little puzzled. She takes care to give her children the rest they need... e Velu felt