in the box to make your presentation. Make sure that all the members share their views. Include the following: What is the dish called? Is it known by any other name in other parts of India? - What ingredients are used to make the dish? How is the dish prepared? How is the dish served? What does the dish taste like? What is the special ritual related to the preparation of this dish? Describe any special memory associated with the preparation of this dish. ENVIRONMENT Good morning to all of you gathered here... Introduce the members of |Todaywe,_,__ and____are here to tell your group and your topic | you about... Explain the structure of We will start off with... your presentation * Following this, we will move on to... The next point we will deal with is... Finally, we will speak about... Speak about the first point | Let s begin by... I d like to start by... Describe the details Now Ill move on to... Next... I'd like to now discuss... Let s now consider... Let me tell you about Conclude your presentation | In conclusion, I d like to say... To summarise.. Thank the audience Thank you for listening. Thank you for your attention. Let us write Creative slogans are used to spread a message to capture the reader s attention. Some examples are given below: Education is the Key, Unlock Your Destiny! * Protect the Environment Today for a Better Tomorrow Learn, Grow, Succeed Go Green by Keeping the Planet Clean Your school wishes to express gratitude to the farmers who play an important role in providing us the food on our plates. Draft a creative slogan to be put up on the school notice board. POORVI Remember to focus on the main idea to be expressed * use simple language be concise express yourself in a few words You may write the slogan on a chart paper and decorate it. m - I Millets are a varied group of small-seeded grasses. They have more fibre et and minerals than other cereals. Millets have been a part of the Indian ie | cuisine for years. They have been rediscovered worldwide as superfoods. 1. Read the information on Pearl Millet given below. se, e P Pea rl Mi l | | et (Pennisetum glaucum (L.) R. Br.) Common name: | Vernacular names: Cultivation areas: 00, Bajra Spiked millet or Pear! millet (English), Rajasthan, Bajra (Bengali, Hindi, Oriya, Punjabi, Urdu), | Maharashtra, Bajree (Rajasthani, Gujarati, Marathi), Gujarat, Sajje (Kannada), Kambu (Tamil), Uttar Pradesh and Sajja (Telugu) Haryana Nutritional Profile: Highest niacin content amongst It is the sixth major cereal in terms of area and production and has all cereals; rich in protein and the highest drought tolerance potential of all millets. Pearl millet is dietary fiber. the most widely cultivated cereal in India after rice and wheat. NUTRIENTS VALUE PER _ Health benefits: 100 GRAMS Energy (Kcal) 347 Protein (g) 10.9 Fat (g) 5.43 Carbohydrate (g) 61.8 Ca (mg)