and ripe; O sender of rain and the dewfall, we hail thee, We praise thee, Varuna, with cymbal and pipe. we \ ENVIRONMENT = Women s Voices: > Queen of the gourd-flower, queen of the harvest, Sweet and omnipotent mother, O Earth! Thine-is the plentiful bosom that feeds us, -Fhine istthe womb where our riches have birth. 7 We bring thee our love and our garlands for tribute, With gifts of thy opulent giving we come; -O source of our manifold gladness, we hail thee, We praise thee, O Prithvi, with cymbal and drum. All Voices: Lord of the Universe, Lord of our being, Father eternal, ineffable Om! Thou art the Seed and the Scythe of our harvests, Thou art our Hands and our Heart and our Home. We bring thee our lives and our labours for tribute, Grant us thy succour, thy counsel, thy care. O Life of all life and all blessing, we hail thee, We praise thee, O Bramha, with cymbal and prayer. SAROJINI NAIDU a Yh oe aN i 04-08-2025 11:48:34 | POORVI 1 Let us discuss Zz & - I Write the stanza number for the main idea of each stanza given below. | oe Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. } 1. The speakers recognise the lord s kindness and | praise him for nourishing the field. 2. The speakers praise the generosity of the creator of the universe who ensures a rich harvest. 3. The speakers devote their lives and work as a mark of respect to the lord and seek his support, wisdom, and care. : a 4. The speakers pay homage to the Earth and fal i appreciate her role in supporting life, by S _ dedicating their harvest. II Fill in the blanks by choosing the appropriate words or phrases from within the brackets. 1. The setting of the poem is a rural landscape, possibly during a (harvest/religious) festival. 2. The tone of the poem is_ respectful and celebratory because it praises (the men and women/ nature and the Lord) with deep respect and gratitude. 3. In the line Thou art our Hands and our Heart and our Home , the letter h is capitalised in Hands , Heart and Home because . Git represents the hard work of farmers/God resides in them) III Identify the poetic device used in the following lines from the poem. Bright and munificent lord of the morn! We bring thee our lives and our labours for tribute IV Match the lines from the poem in Column 1 with their expressions in Column 2. Choose the appropriate poetic device from the box given below and write in Column 3. 1. sweet and (i) creates a clear description omnipotent of the scene and appeals to mother the senses . The wealth of implied comparison of our valleys, growth and reaping with new-garnered beginning and end of all and ripe life . Thou art the the earth is being given Seed and the human-like qualities