the project about? : Its about the Chipko Movement. I have to make a PowerPoint presentation and talk about it in class. : That s good! Chipko Movement was all about hugging trees to prevent them from being cut, isn t it? Such an inspiring movement it was! : Yes, it was the first time that common people came together for the noble cause of saving trees. It showed how people can also make a difference. Have you heard or read about something similar? : Yes, of course. The success of the Chipko Movement led to the Appiko Movement. : Really? Doesn t appiko mean hugging in Kannada? So, did they also hug trees to protect them? : Yes they did. In this movement people not only hugged trees to protect them but also regenerated the forest areas in the Western Ghats. : That s great! This reminds me of what my teacher shared about Saalumarada Thimakka last week. She is a Padma Shri awardee. : What an amazing personality! ve heard about her and I m interested to know what your teacher has shared with you. SON MOTHER : SON MOTHER : SON MOTHER SON MOTHER : : She is an Indian environmentalist who has been planting trees since 1948. She has planted over 8000 trees in the area around her village. Wonderful! : What I admire about her is the commitment she has towards conserving the environment. Incredible! That is one superwoman! But do you know who the Forest Man of India is? : Yes, ve read about him. It is Jadav Payeng, from Assam. He too is a Padma Shri awardee. Isn t he the one who single-handedly turned a barren land of around a thousand acres into a lush green forest? He did so by planting nearly forty million trees. : Yes, you re absolutely right. It was not something that happened overnight. It took him thirty years to achieve this. This forest has become a habitat for different kinds of animals including migratory birds. : Fascinating, isn t it? I ve read a book and watched a documentary in school about him which has really inspired me. I m glad that you have begun to care about the environment too. HARVEST HYMN Or y, Let us listen (refer to page 181) I Listen to this talk about paddy cultivation. As you listen, number the _ events in the correct order in which they happen. Hello everyone! Did you know that rice is actually a type of grass, and the part we eat is its seed? Let me tell you about the process of cultivating rice. It all starts with preparing the land. First, the soil has to be ploughed. Rice is typically grown in fertile soil that holds a lot of water. The most important step in preparing the soil is to soak it with plenty of water. This step is called puddling. Once the nursery bed is prepared, the seeds can be planted. After