with his grandfather and a willingness to learn from him) How does the grandfather s advice reflect his view about luck and effort? . Winter came early. The cherry tree bent low with the weight of snow. Field-mice sought shelter in the roof of the cottage. The road from the valley was blocked, and for several days there was no newspaper, and this made Grandfather quite grumpy. His stories began to have unhappy endings. In February it was Rakesh s birthday. He was nine and the tree was four, but almost as tall as Rakesh. (i) (ii) (iii) Complete the following sentence suitably. The phrase field-mice sought shelter in the roof of the cottage suggests that What can be inferred about the cherry tree s toughness from the line, The cherry tree bent low with the weight of snow ? A. The weight of the tree was more than the snow. B. The tree could withstand harsh weather. C. The tree was growing close to the ground. D. The snow gave support to the tree. How did the early winter affect Grandfather s mood and storytelling? a ENVIRONMENT \ cj aC ~ 4 3 a) -e ae | Ne, - * f] . POORVI 1. (iv) Complete the sentence by choosing the correct option. The comparison of Rakesh s age to the cherry tree s age symbolises . (the tree s growth paralleling Rakesh s own development/the tree standing as a dear one on Rakesh s birthday) Why did Rakesh s parents send him to Mussoorie? ~ II Answer the following questions. bl 2. Why did Rakesh let the praying-mantis remain on the branch of the cherry tree? . How is life in the Himalayan foothills described in the story? . What might Rakesh mean when he says, Is this what it feels to be God? at the end of the story? . How does the writer describe the relationship between Rakesh and his grandfather? . What can you infer about the connection between humans and nature based on the story? . Imagine Rakesh reflects on his wonderful experience of watching a seed being transformed into a full-grown cherry tree. Write how he must have felt. Let us learn I Each word list has one word that does not match with the other words. Identify the odd word. One example has been done for you. 1. an F&F WwW DN chop, trim, slice, mince ( chop , slice and mince are words used for cutting with a knife; whereas trim is to cut a part with a pair of scissors) . plodded, galloped, scrambled, trudged . tender, delicate, soft, smooth . stared, peered, pecked, gazed . growing, blossoming, progressing, planting ENVIRONMENT II Choose the most suitable taste words given in the box below and write against the food items that follow. sweet sour tangy bitter spicy salty bland (tasteless) [ i] i] U . tamarind . jaggery . neem leaves . paneer (cottage cheese) . lemon . pickle ND UW