Kambu (Tamil), Uttar Pradesh and Sajja (Telugu) Haryana Nutritional Profile: Highest niacin content amongst It is the sixth major cereal in terms of area and production and has all cereals; rich in protein and the highest drought tolerance potential of all millets. Pearl millet is dietary fiber. the most widely cultivated cereal in India after rice and wheat. NUTRIENTS VALUE PER _ Health benefits: 100 GRAMS Energy (Kcal) 347 Protein (g) 10.9 Fat (g) 5.43 Carbohydrate (g) 61.8 Ca (mg) 27.4 Fe (mg) 6.4 Uses: Khichdi, Roti, Upma, Idli, Khakhra, Parathas oo Folic Acid (ug) 36.1 Use the link given below to know more about other kinds of millets. Reduces cholesterol Promotes bone health Beneficial in treating stomach ulcers Promotes heart health Aids in weight loss https://eatrightindia.gov.in/millets2023/assets/documents/Millets%20-%20 Nutritious%20Cereal%200f%20India.pdf 2. Work in groups of four and do the following activities. (i) Find out if millets are a part of your cuisine. (ii) Find recipes with millets and compile them into a booklet. (iii) Create a recipe of your choice. II Songs related to harvest season form a part of our culture and heritage. Talk to the elders in your house and learn a song sung on a harvest yy festival. Share it with your classmates and teacher. Then, compile all the 184 songs to create a songbook with the help of teacher. WAITING FOR THE RAIN Let us do these activities before we read. I Have you ever waited for the rains? Why? II How do you feel when it rains after a long time? III Why do you think the farmers wait for the rains? IV Discuss in groups what happens when you wait for something or someone for a long period of time. 1. How do you spend the waiting period? 2. What do you think about? 3. How do you feel? Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. POORVI Let usread I T hope it rains at least today, Velu thought, as he opened his eyes. Velu was a farmer. The sun was beginning to rise, glowing crimson like fire. Velu scanned the sky. There was not a cloud. It doesn t look encouraging, he muttered to himself and got up. Rain or no rain, a farmer wakes up early. Velu worked hard. His piece of land never failed him. Season after season he cultivated it, harvesting jowar one season and dhal the next. Throughout the year he worked, never thinking of rest or taking a holiday. For nearly six years it had been so, ever since he had got his own piece of land. But this year turned out to be different. At the end of summer, \ the rains didn t come. Velu and * his neighbours waited, but their os waiting didn t end. Days, weeks and months passed, and still there was no rain. The fields lay untended, the earth hardened, crusted and cracked. The barren land looked forlorn and the farmers lived entirely on hope. Every day = ey hoped that the