of grass, and the part we eat is its seed? Let me tell you about the process of cultivating rice. It all starts with preparing the land. First, the soil has to be ploughed. Rice is typically grown in fertile soil that holds a lot of water. The most important step in preparing the soil is to soak it with plenty of water. This step is called puddling. Once the nursery bed is prepared, the seeds can be planted. After that, we sow the seeds on the soil s surface. Paddy farmers have to ensure that their fields stay flooded with water because irrigation is crucial. It takes around 4 to 5 weeks for the seeds to grow into seedlings. After this comes the most important step transplanting. The seedlings that were prepared in the nursery bed are uprooted and then transplanted into the flooded field. In around 120 days, the rice plants are fully grown. At this point, the crops are harvested by cutting them. Following this, the seeds are separated from the plant. This is called threshing. To reduce the moisture content even more, the separated grains are dried. This ensures that they can be stored or processed further. Through a process called milling, the rice is separated from the outer covering on it. Finally, the rice reaches the market, and that s where we get it to make all kinds of delicious foods. Whether it s Appam, Pulao, Khichdi, or Daal Bhaat, rice is a big part of many meals. Now listen to the talk again. As you listen, choose the correct option to answer the questions that follow. WAITING FOR THE RAIN yo) Let us listen (refer to page 197) I Listen to the weather forecast. As you listen, fill in the blanks with the exact word you listen to. Hello and welcome to today s weather forecast. Delhi is expected to have a generally cloudy sky with light rain. The temperature will range between a minimum of 25 C anda maximum of 36 C. The sky will generally be cloudy with moderate rain in Mumbai. The minimum temperature is 24 C and the maximum will be around 30 C. Moving eastwards, Kolkata will have a partly cloudy sky with one or two spells of rain or thundershowers. The minimum temperature will be 28 C and the maximum will be around 34 C. Chennai is expected to have a partly cloudy sky with a possibility of thunderstorm. The minimum temperature will be 27 C and the maximum will be around 36 C. Bengaluru will have a generally cloudy sky with light rain. The minimum temperature will be 21 C and will rise to a maximum of around 29 C. Hyderabad is expected to have a generally cloudy sky with light rain or drizzle. Temperature will be between a minimum of 23 C and a maximum of 33 C. ~ That s all from me today. Have a beautiful day ahead. Don t forget to carry your