facts and advantages. v Paragraph 3: Include consequences and disadvantages. v Paragraph 4: Provide suggestions. End with a word of hope, a word of caution or a call for action. Now, complete the article for a magazine on Trees Our Lifeline . Use the words and phrases given in the box below. : absorb carbon dioxide Moreover, our planet reduces pollution ! , Additionally would stop existing ensures a better future | : climate control Trees Our Lifeline To conclude ! If trees were not there (i) -by (write your name and class) Trees are essential for life on Earth. Without them, life as we know (ii) . This is the reason why trees are our lifeline. Trees provide us with food, shelter, and even medicine. Trees (iii) and release oxygen, helping us breathe. This process also (iv) and keeps the environment clean. (v) ) POORVI trees give us fruits, nuts, and other foods. Trees also help in (vi) and prevention of soil erosion. (vii) , the air would be polluted, and we would struggle to breathe. (viii) would be barren, lacking food, shelter, and life-giving greenery. (ix) , trees are true friends. Protecting and planting trees (x) for everyone on Earth. Therefore, we must act now to protect and plant more trees, preserving Earth s green lifeline for future generations. Let us explore I Did you know that the banyan tree is the National Tree of India? Our country has age-old banyan trees. Some of them are: 1. The Great Banyan, located in Shibpur, Howrah, near Kolkata. 2. Dodda Aalada Mara, located in Kethohalli village, near Bengaluru. 3. Thimmamma Marrimanu, in Anantapur District in Andhra Pradesh. It was recorded as the largest tree specimen in the world in the Guinness Book of World Records in 1989. II Kailash Sankhala, The Tiger Man of India , was an Indian biologist and conservationist. He carried out a census of the tigers in India in 1971. Later, because of his studies, he was appointed the first director of Project Tiger an initiative to prevent the extinction of the Indian Tiger. He was awarded the Padma Shri in 1992. Now, find more information about such Indian environmentalists and share with your classmates. Rakesh saw the V-shaped formation of wild ducks flying northward. Did you know? There is a reason that these birds fly in this V-shaped formation. j The birds position themselves to fly just behind and to the side of the; bird in front (V-shape), timing their wing beats to catch the uplifting wind currents. This helps them fly long distances easily and save their! energy too. =e ee = HARVEST HYMN Let us do these activities before we read. I I -_ III Work in pairs and share your responses with your classmates and teacher. 1. India celebrates many harvest festivals. When is the harvest festival celebrated in your region and how is it celebrated? 2. A hymn refers to a song of praise. (i) To whom do we offer a