Then [ll keep it. Nothing is lucky if you put it away. some use. What can I do with a seed? Plant it So Rakesh found a small space and began to dig up a flowerbed. Hey, not there, said Grandfather. I ve sown mustard in that bed. Plant it in that shady corner, where it won t be disturbed. Rakesh went to a corner of the garden where the earth was soft and yielding. He did not have to dig. He pressed the seed into the soil with his thumb and it went right in. Then he had his lunch, and ran off to play cricket with his friends, and forgot all about the cherry seed. When it was winter in the hills, a cold wind blew down from the snows and went whoo-whoo-whoo in the deodar trees, and the garden was dry and bare. In the evenings Grandfather and Rakesh sat over a charcoal fire, and Grandfather told Rakesh stories stories about people ENVIRONMENT POORVI Kade, o> who turned into animals, and ghosts who lived in trees, and beans that jumped and stones that wept and in turn, Rakesh would read to him . from the newspaper, Grandfather s eyesight being rather weak. Rakesh found the newspaper very dull eo, especially after the stories but Grandfather wanted all the news... They knew it was spring when the wild duck flew north again, to Siberia. Early in the morning, when he got up to chop wood and light a fire, Rakesh saw the V-shaped formation streaming northward, the calls of the birds carrying clearly through the thin mountain air. Se One morning in the garden he 1 CO uN bent to pick up what he thought | al was a small twig and found to his surprise that it was well rooted. He stared at it for a moment, then x ran to fetch Grandfather, calling, . @ Dada, come and look, the cherry * tree has come up! What cherry tree? asked Grandfather, who had forgotten about it. The seed we planted last year look, it s come up! <4 Rakesh went down on_ his haunches, while Grandfather bent almost double and peered down at the tiny tree. It was about haunches: sit . . ; four inches high. on the feet with legs bent Yes, it s a cherry tree, said peereddown: Grandfather. You should . looked carefully Water it now and then. cu ee Rakesh ran indoors and came difficulty back with a bucket of water. Don t drown it! said Grandfather. Rakesh gave it a sprinkling co) Wi y, and circled it with NN i (/; pebbles. TRE S {| Eee v7 ENVIRONMENT ry eer ye What are the pebbles for? asked Grandfather. For privacy, said Rakesh. y He looked at the tree every morning but it did not seem to be ~ growing very fast, so he stopped looking at it except quickly, out of the corner of his eye. And, after a week