in silence bound not by words but by a timeless bond POORVI Let us listen I You will listen to a conversation between a son and his mother. As you listen, select four true statements from 1-7 given below. (Transcript for teacher on page 201) 1. The mother encouraged her son to deliver a presentation on the Chipko Movement. 2. The son was surprised to know about the Appiko Movement. 3. The son agreed that the Chipko Movement was about people uniting to make an impact. 4. The mother expressed a desire to share more details about Saalumarada Thimakka. 5. The mother was curious to hear about Saalumarada Thimakka. 6. The mother and son were in disagreement about the work of Jadav Payeng. 7. The son found the information on Jadav Payeng wonderful. Let us speak A syllable is a single, unbroken vowel sound in a word. Some words have only one syllable. Some have two and some more than two. For example, the word tree has one syllable. The word cherry has two syllables che-rry. (Here the hyphen is used to mark the gap between the two syllables.) A syllable can also be called a beat because you can clap out the beats in the word. ~ -_ Work in pairs. Read aloud the following words from the text. Write 7 the number of syllables in each word. Check your answers with your > 0 classmates and teacher. t 1 ' mountains grandfather tender disturbed ' caterpillar Himalayan performed intention slope newspaper favourite ( 1 Now, read the words aloud again with the beats. Check if the number of ws syllables matches with the number of beats. ENVIRONMENT II Speak about Van Mahotsav Diwas and its significance. Before you speak in the class or assembly, prepare yourself on the following points: When is it celebrated? Who celebrates it? Why is it celebrated? How is it celebrated? What is the message it conveys? Let us write An article is a piece of writing on a specific topic. It showcases independent opinions expressed by a writer. Articles are published in newspapers, newsletters, magazines, journals, and online portals. Let us understand how to draft an article for a school magazine. Remember to write the heading or title at the top, write the name of the writer below it as a byline, and follow the correct layout. v Paragraph 1: Give a brief introduction of the topic or issue. Focus on the main idea of the paragraph. v Paragraph 2: Elaborate by giving facts and advantages. v Paragraph 3: Include consequences and disadvantages. v Paragraph 4: Provide suggestions. End with a word of hope, a word of caution or a call for action. Now, complete the article for a magazine on Trees Our Lifeline . Use the words and phrases given in the box below. : absorb carbon dioxide Moreover, our planet reduces pollution ! , Additionally would stop existing ensures a better future | : climate control Trees Our Lifeline To conclude