it s special. Just one small seed, said Rakesh, and he touched the smooth bark of the tree that he had grown. He ran his hand along the trunk of the tree and put his finger to the tip of a leaf. I wonder, he whispered. Is this what it feels to be God? RUSKIN BOND ENVIRONMENT pod ae 9 ay) Le nae el Whe nightjar: a bird cicadas: insects known for their loud distinctive calls, especially during evenings POORVI \1 Let us discuss &: I Complete the table given below based on your understanding of e \ Part II of the story. One example has been done for you. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. 1. A woman cut the cherry tree| (i) Grandfather scolded _ the while cutting grass. woman. 2. (ii) Rakesh was thinner but stronger when he came back. 3. A hairy caterpillar started | (iii) eating the leaves of the cherry tree. (iv) Rakesh and Grandfather gazed at the tree as though it was a miracle. 5. Rakesh tasted one of the small| (v) cherries during summer. Let._us think and reflect I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow. 1. Have acherry, Grandfather, he said, as soon as he saw his grandfather in the garden. Grandfather took one cherry and Rakesh promptly ate the other two. He kept the last seed in his mouth for some time, rolling it round and round on his tongue until all the tang had gone. Then he placed the seed on the palm of his hand and studied it. Are cherry seeds lucky? asked Rakesh. Of course. Then I'll keep it. Nothing is lucky if you put it away. If you want luck, you must put it to some use. (i) (ii) (iii) (iv) Substitute the underlined phrase with a correct word from the extract. The Kho-kho captain changed her strategy quickly and without delay when a new player came in from the opposing team. What does Rakesh s action of rolling the cherry seed in his mouth most likely suggest about his mood at that moment? A. He is feeling impatient and restless. B. He is enjoying the taste and the moment. C. He is bored and has nothing better to do. D. He is thoughtful and feeling playful. Complete the following sentence suitably with reference to Rakesh and his grandfather. Rakesh s decision to plant the seed shows that . (he respects and values his grandfather s advice/he has a close bond with his grandfather and a willingness to learn from him) How does the grandfather s advice reflect his view about luck and effort? . Winter came early. The cherry tree bent low with the weight of snow. Field-mice sought shelter in the roof of the cottage. The road from the valley was blocked, and for several days there was no newspaper, and this made Grandfather quite grumpy. His stories began to have unhappy endings. In February it was Rakesh s