art our Hands and our Heart and our Home. = (i) Inthe phrase Lord of our being, what does the word being most > ~ likely refer to? A. Our physical body B. Our entire existence C. Our spiritual practices D. Our earthly possessions (ii) Identify whether the following statement is true or false. The imagery of the Seed and the Scythe symbolises the divine s role as both the beginning (creation) and the end (harvest) of the agricultural cycle. (iii) Identify the phrases from the extract that mean the following: A. The divine as a timeless, everlasting presence B. Beyond human comprehension or description (iv) How do we know that these lines from the extract are spoken as a chorus? II Answer the following questions. 1. Why do the farmers hail the God of rain? 2. What is being referred to as wealth of our valleys ? Why? 3. State one reason why the women refer to the Earth as a source of manifold gladness . 4. Why does everyone in the poem offer their labours for tribute ? 5. Why has the poet presented the poem as voices of men, women, and all voices? 6. How does the poet create the joyous atmosphere of rural India at harvesting time? . Why is the poem presented as a hymn? Let us learn I Match the pictures of the farming implements given in Column 1 with their use given in Column 2. Then, fill in the blanks in Column 3 to complete the name of the implement. ENVIRONMENT POORVI (i) A tool with a long handle |S with metal teeth for collecting hay or leaves. \ CKL_ A small hand tool used for digging and making shallow furrows. A hand-held tool with a curved blade attached to a short handle. It is used for harvesting crops. A tool pulled by oxen. It is used for turning over the soil in the field so that seeds can be sown or planted. A farm tool having a flat rectangular blade attached to a long wooden handle used for digging the soil. A hand-held tool with a long-curved blade attached to a long handle used for cutting tall grass. II Choose the correct synonyms for the underlined words in the given sentences from the box below. Circle the words or phrases in the sentences that helped you to infer the meanings. One example has been done for you. 1. generous help brightness indescribable kind : 1. The king was beneficent to the poor because he@@ok good card of them. synonym: kind 2. He was munificent towards the needy and donated a lot for their health care. synonym: ENVIRONMENT 3. When he lost his job, all his friends gave him succour by supporting him with money. synonym: 4, When the sun s rays came into the dark room, the whole room was full of radiance. synonym: 5. The little girl was speechless with ineffable joy when she got her birthday gift from her aunt.