is to cut a part with a pair of scissors) . plodded, galloped, scrambled, trudged . tender, delicate, soft, smooth . stared, peered, pecked, gazed . growing, blossoming, progressing, planting ENVIRONMENT II Choose the most suitable taste words given in the box below and write against the food items that follow. sweet sour tangy bitter spicy salty bland (tasteless) [ i] i] U . tamarind . jaggery . neem leaves . paneer (cottage cheese) . lemon . pickle ND UW FP Ww DY . adish of vegetables Now, use any five taste words and make sentences of your own. III Choose the correct antonyms for the textual words given below from the . box. There are two extra words that you will not need. growing ordinary unprotected cheerful hard wide fasting shaky fussing coldness jt tender | | 5. feasting | 2. sturdy | | 6 grumpy | 3. narrow | 7. sheltered / 4 warmth | | 8. special | IV Read the following lines from the text and underline all the verbs and identify the form of tense. 1. Rakesh was on his way home from school when he bought the cherries. 2. Rakesh was looking for Grandfather without finding him in any of his favourite places around the house. 3. Rakesh and Grandfather gazed at the tree as though it had performed a miracle. The forms of tenses in the given statements are Simple Past Tense (1 and 3), Past Progressive Tense (2), and Past Perfect Tense (3). POORVI Now, fill in the blanks with the correct form of Simple Past, Past Progressive, or Past Perfect Tenses of the verbs given in brackets. One example has been done for you. (i) I was sitting (sit) with my grandparents in the garden, sharing the wonderful memories from my childhood. As we (ii) (talk), I (iii) (realise) how much wisdom they (iv) ____(impart)tomeovertheyears. While I (v) (listen) to their stories for hours together, I(vi)_ (remember)thetimeswe (vii) ___ (spend) together planting flowers and learning about life. By the time I left, the sun (viii) (set), and I (ix) (feel) a deep sense of gratitude for the bond we (x) (nurture) through love, care, and countless memories. e V Study the punctuation marks in the following sentences from the text. Hey, not there, said Grandfather, I've sown mustard in that bed. Plant it in that shady corner, where it won t be disturbed. When Grandfather saw what had happened, he went after the woman and scolded her; but the damage could not be repaired. She did not try to avoid the tree: one sweep, and the cherry tree was cut in two. Punctuation refers to the symbols used in writing to clarify meaning and separate sentences and their components. Proper punctuation ensures the clarity and flow of a text, guiding readers through its structure. ee ee Here are some of the most common punctuation marks: Full stop (.) ends a declarative sentence For example: She went to the store. * Comma