The following year there were more blossoms. And suddenly the tree was taller than Rakesh, even though it was less than half his age. And then it was taller than Grandfather, who was older than some of the oak trees. ENVIRONMENT prayingmantis: an insect grumpy: badtempered gazed: looked at something for a long time with admiration POORVI flitted: flew quickly reclining: lying back But Rakesh had grown too. He could run and jump and climb trees as well as most boys, and he read a lot of books, although he still liked listening to Grandfather s tales. In the cherry tree, bees came to feed on the nectar in the blossoms, and tiny birds pecked at the blossoms and broke them off. But the tree kept blossoming right through the spring, and there were always more blossoms than birds. That summer there were small cherries on the tree. Rakesh tasted one and spat it out. It s too sour, he said. They'll be better next year, said Grandfather. But the birds liked them especially the bigger birds, such as the bulbuls and scarlet minivets and they flitted in and out of the foliage, feasting on the cherries. On a warm sunny afternoon, when even the bees looked sleepy, Rakesh was looking for Grandfather without finding him in any of his favourite places around the house. Then he looked out of the bedroom window and saw Grandfather reclining on a cane chair under the cherry tree. There s just the right amount of shade here, said Grandfather. And I like looking at the leaves. They re pretty leaves, said Rakesh. And they are always ready to dance, if there s a breeze. After Grandfather had come indoors, Rakesh went into the garden and lay down on the grass beneath the tree. He gazed up through the leaves at the great blue sky; and turning on his side, he could see the mountains striding away into the clouds. He was still lying beneath the tree when the evening shadows crept across the garden. Grandfather came back and sat down beside Rakesh, and they waited in silence until the stars came out and the nightjar began to call. In the forest below, the crickets and cicadas began tuning up; and suddenly the trees were full of the sound of insects. There are so many trees in the forest, said Rakesh. What s so special about this tree? Why do we like it so much? We planted it ourselves, said Grandfather. That s why it s special. Just one small seed, said Rakesh, and he touched the smooth bark of the tree that he had grown. He ran his hand along the trunk of the tree and put his finger to the tip of a leaf. I wonder, he whispered. Is this what it feels to be God? RUSKIN BOND ENVIRONMENT pod ae 9 ay) Le nae el Whe nightjar: a bird cicadas: insects known for their loud distinctive calls, especially during evenings POORVI