fully drenched 9. (either/neither) siblings minded it. It had been a perfect rainy day. 6) Let us listen I Listen to the weather forecast. As you listen, fill in the blanks with the . exact word you listen to. (Transcript for teacher on page 204) a 1. Delhi will mostly have a sky with light rain. 2. Moderate rain is likely to happen in 3. Kolkata is likely to have a maximum temperature of around C. 4. There is a chance ofa in Chennai. 5. Bengaluru will have a temperature of 29 C. 6. Taking an is advisable because of the weather conditions. _. ~ 2) POORVI I I -_ Let us speak Here is a tongue twister about weather . Practice saying it as fast as you can. { I I I I ( Whether the weather be fine, or whether the weather be not, whether the weather be cold, or whether the weather be hot, we ll weather the weather, whatever the weather, whether we like it or not. i] 1 1 i] Rain has arrived after a long dry spell on the Earth. Imagine the Rain and the Earth have a conversation. Work in pairs and present the role-play. You may use the hints in the table given below. You may start the conversation in the following way. Rain: Greetings, Earth! It s been a while since we ve met. How have you been? Earth: Hello Rain! Iam so glad to see you. To continue the conversation, use the hints given below. Rain Ask about how the Earth has been. Speak about your long journey from the Earth to the sky and back again to the Earth. Ask about how the Earth can use the gift you brought rain water. Elaborate how much you enjoy being on the Earth. Thank the Earth for the invite. Promise to return on time the next year. Earth iN Respond and express relief at the arrival of Rain. Enquire why it took so long for Rain to arrive. Express gratitude for the gift of water. Speak about how important Rain is to you for agriculture, for plants and animals to survive. Enquire how Rain feels about being on Earth. Invite Rain to join the celebration of the rivers, forests, and people of Earth. ENVIRONMENT Let us write I You have observed the difficulties faced by the people in your neighbourhood due to scarcity of water especially during the summer months. Write a letter to the Councillor of your Municipal ward, requesting her/him to set up a rain water harvesting unit. Provide suggestions to address the issue. Remember to use formal language keep sentences short and to the point state the purpose clearly and concisely * give relevant details Format and Layout: Sender s address Date The Municipal Councillor (Receiver s designation and address) Subject: Request to Install a Rainwater Harvesting Unit in Ward No. 44 Dear Madam, Paragraph 1: Drawing attention to the problem Paragraph 2: Causes and Consequences Body of