hillside, her scythe swishing through the heavy monsoon foliage. She did not try to avoid the tree: one sweep, and the cherry tree was cut in two. When Grandfather saw what had happened, he went after the woman and scolded her; but the damage could not be repaired. Maybe it will die now, said Rakesh. Maybe, said Grandfather. But the cherry tree had no intention of dying. By the time summer came round again, it had sent out several new shoots with tender green leaves. he: a tool sah . Tan < Rakesh had grown taller too. He was eight now, a sturdy boy sharp, curved with curly black hair and deep black eyes. Blackberry eyes, blade with a Grandfather called them. long handle leaves yw That monsoon Rakesh went home to his village, to help his foliage: green = father and mother with the planting and ploughing and sowing. He was thinner but stronger when he came back to Grandfather s house at the end of the rains to find that the cherry tree had grown another foot. It was now up to his chest. Even when there was rain, Rakesh would sometimes water the tree. He wanted it to know that he was there. One day he found a bright green praying-mantis perched ona branch, peering at him with bulging eyes. Rakesh let it remain there; it was the cherry tree s first visitor. The next visitor was a hairy caterpillar, who started making a meal of the leaves. Rakesh removed it quickly and dropped it ona heap of dry leaves. Come back when you re a butterfly, he said. Winter came early. The cherry tree bent low with the weight of snow. Field-mice sought shelter in the roof of the cottage. The road from the valley was blocked, and for several days there was no newspaper, and this made Grandfather quite grumpy. His stories began to have unhappy endings. In February it was Rakesh s birthday. He was nine and the tree was four, but almost as tall as Rakesh. One morning, when the sun came out, Grandfather came into the garden to let some warmth get into my bones, as he put it. He stopped in front of the cherry tree, stared at it fora few moments, and then called out, Rakesh! Come and look! Come quickly before it falls! Rakesh and Grandfather gazed at the tree as though it had performed a miracle. There was a pale pink blossom at the end of a branch. The following year there were more blossoms. And suddenly the tree was taller than Rakesh, even though it was less than half his age. And then it was taller than Grandfather, who was older than some of the oak trees. ENVIRONMENT prayingmantis: an insect grumpy: badtempered gazed: looked at something for a long time with admiration POORVI flitted: flew quickly reclining: lying back But Rakesh had grown too. He could run and jump and climb trees as well as most