village. It was already evening. The sun was low in the sky. And... what was that? Velu felt a cool breeze on his back. Then he felt a tiny drop on his shoulder. He ~, looked up. Yes... the clouds were gathering ~ in the distance. It was growing dark. Soon there would be lightning. And thunder. And sweet, fragrant rain. Velu ran home, laughing and happy. AMAKSHI BALASUBRAMANIAN Let us discuss I Complete the following statements given below with suitable reasons. 1. Velu asked the old woman to stop smiling because 2. Velusaid thatit was hard not being able to worksince 3. Velu was confused when the old lady said that the land needed rest because 4. The old lady said that it was good for the land when it didn t rain as 5. Velu ran home laughing and happy because Let us think and reflect I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow. 1. ..D. can t see how talking to astrologers will bring rain. He decided to go to the weather office in the city and talk to someone. But the people at the weather office said they couldn t really tell him when the sky would gather clouds and bring rain. We are at a loss ourselves! they exclaimed. So many favourable conditions but still no rain. Very odd! POORVI (i) What does the first line of the extract tell us about Velu s beliefs? (ii) Complete the following sentence with a suitable reason. Velu is determined to seek information about the rain because . (he was at a loss of words/he wants to find a practical solution to the drought affecting his farm) (iii) Complete the table with reference to Velu s weather office visit. (iv) Complete the following sentence with a suitable option. The absence of rain despite favourable conditions, shows A. lack of astrological knowledge B. ineffectiveness of farmers like Velu C. delay in understanding the weather D. unpredictability of nature * 2. The soil, the land, the earth... shouldn t someone let the land rest a a a bit? the old woman said, softly, smiling. Rest? Let the land rest? I don t understand, Velu looked at her, a little puzzled. ; Yes, my son, that is the difficulty. You don t realise that the earth is = old... (i) The old woman s advice was accompanied with a soft tone anda smile. What does that tell us about her? v) % (ii) Fillin the blank with the correct option from those given below. The old woman s advice Velu, at that moment. ) "yi A. failed to impress B. confused - C. scared D. made sense to >) on (iii) State one thing about the old woman when she referred to Velu ; as my son , while offering advice. Ve, 7 (iv) Complete the following sentence with a suitable explanation. The difficulty that the old woman mentions is due to the fact that ENVIRONMENT II Answer