THE CHERRY TREE Let us do these activities before we read. 0873CHO4 I Work in pairs and answer the questions that follow. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. 1. Have you ever used a seed or a sapling to grow a plant? 2. What kind of care did the plant need? Who helped you with it? 3. How did you feel when you saw the plant grow? II What kind of trees do people plant in their homes? Why is it important to plant trees? III Name some fruit trees that grow in your region. What type of conditions help these fruit trees to grow? POORVI stunted: stopped (from growing to the usual size) outskirts: the areas that form the edge of a town or city a aN -@: & 3 One day, when Rakesh was six, he walked home from the Mussoorie bazaar eating cherries. They were a little sweet, a little sour; small, bright red cherries, which had come all the way from the Kashmir Valley. Here in the Himalayan foothills where Rakesh lived, there were not many fruit trees. The soil was stony, and the dry cold winds stunted the growth of most plants. But on the more sheltered slopes there were forests of oak and deodar. Rakesh lived with his grandfather on the outskirts of Mussoorie, just where the forest began. His father and mother lived in a small village fifty miles away, where they grew maize and rice and barley in narrow terraced fields on the lower slopes of the mountain. But there were no schools in the village, and Rakesh s parents were keen that he should go to school. As soon as he was of school-going age, they sent him to stay with his grandfather in Mussoorie. He had a little cottage outside the town. Rakesh was on his way home from school when he bought the cherries. He paid fifty paise for the bunch. It took him about half-an-hour to walk home, and by the time he reached the cottage there were only three cherries left. Have a cherry, Grandfather, he said, as soon as he saw his grandfather in the garden. Grandfather took one cherry and Rakesh promptly ate the other two. He kept the last seed in his mouth for some time, rolling it round and round on his tongue until all the tang had gone. Then he placed the seed on the palm of his hand and studied it. Are cherry seeds lucky? asked Rakesh. Of course. Then [ll keep it. Nothing is lucky if you put it away. some use. What can I do with a seed? Plant it So Rakesh found a small space and began to dig up a flowerbed. Hey, not there, said Grandfather. I ve sown mustard in that bed. Plant it in that shady corner, where it won t be disturbed. Rakesh went to a corner of the garden where the earth was soft and yielding. He did not have to