only because of the availability of water, but also because the soil would be more fertile there. It made the process of growing crops easier. LET'S EXPLORE Observe the scene on the next page. It depicts an agricultural community froma few millenniums ago. List the main activities you can identify. 4 Timeline and Sources of History Reprint 2025-26 chapter4_310125.indd 71 & 03-02-2025 04:57:21 | THINK ABOUT IT Bothin the earlier picture of a rock shelter and in this one, men and women are given certain roles. While they may appear to be natural , they are not necessarily accurate and do not cover all situations. For instance, in a rock shelter, women may have helped prepare colours for painting the rock or may have done some of the painting. In both scenes, men may have done some of the cooking or may have helped take care of children. Keeping in mind that we have only limited information, think about such roles and situations, and discuss in class. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Tapestry of the Past Reprint 2025-26 | chapter4_310125.indd 72 & 03-02-2025 04:57:21 | As communities grew, so did their social complexity. Leaders or chieftains were responsible for the well-being of the people, and everyone collectively worked towards Welfare: the community s welfare. For example, there was no sense prosperity and of individual ownership; the lands were collectively sowed | well-being. and harvested. As time went by, hamlets grew into sizeable villages that Hamlet: exchanged goods mostly food, clothing and tools. Slowly, feel cor networks of communication and exchange wereestablished | small village. among those villages, and some of them grew into small towns. New technologies appeared for example pottery, for making pots and other clay objects; and the use of metal (copper first, iron later), which helped make durable tools, objects of daily use and ornaments. We will see in Chapter 6 how this stage prepared for the emergence of what is called civilisation . For now, it is important to remember that this early progress of humanity had to face many challenges. At some critical & times, humanity could have almost disappeared, as some earlier species did. We will never know those early humans to whose courage and persistence we owe our existence today. Before we move on... > We have explored some ways to learn more about our pasts. The concept of a timeline helps us understand the sequence of historical events at different times. > There are different ways of measuring time: years, decades, centuries, millenniums. > Sources of history are many; they help us reconstruct and interpret historical events. > Wehave also had a brief look into the lives of early humans and how human societies grew more complex in time. 4 Timeline and Sources of History Reprint 2025-26 chapter4_310125.indd 73 & 03-02-2025 04:57:21 | Exploring Society: India and Beyond Tapestry of the Past chapter4_310125.indd 74 Questions, activities and projects 1. As a project, write the history of your family (or village if you