69 & 03-02-2025 04:57:20 | The Beginnings of Human History Modern humans (Homo sapiens) have walked the planet for about 300,000 (three lakh) years. This appears to be a very long time, yet it is only a tiny fraction of the Earth s history. Let us have a quick look at our early history. LET S EXPLORE In the above picture, look at some activities of early humans in a rock shelter. Which ones can you recognise? Give a brief description for each. Early humans faced many challenges from nature and lived in bands or groups to help each other. They were constantly seeking shelter and food, and were mainly hunters and gatherers; this means that they relied on hunting and collecting edible plants and fruits for their survival. Our early ancestors also had certain beliefs about the natural elements and possibly also some notion of afterlife. Afterlife: A life that begins after death. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Tapestry of the Past Reprint 2025-26 chapter4_310125.indd 70 & 03-02-2025 04:57:21 | These groups lived in temporary camps, rock shelters or caves, and communicated with each other using languages that are now lost. They used fire and started making objects that made their lives easier, like improved stone axes and blades, arrowheads and other tools. Aspects of their life are visible in rock paintings found in hundreds of caves all over the world. Some of those paintings depict simple figures or a few symbols; others are more detailed and represent scenes with animals or humans. In time, these early humans learned to make simple ornaments such as stone or shell beads, pendants made of animal teeth, and sometimes exchanged them with other groups. The First Crops Over long ages, the Earth s climate has gone through many changes. At certain times, it was very cold and much of the Earth was covered with ice this is called an Ice Age , as you will learn in greater detail in Science. Later, when the climate warmed up, this ice partly melted, and the resulting waters swelled the existing rivers and eventually drained into the oceans. The last Ice Age lasted from over 100,000 (one lakh) years ago to around 12,000 years ago. Afterwards, living conditions improved for humans; in many parts of the world, they started settling down and cultivating cereals and grains. They also domesticated animals such as cattle, goats, etc. With more food available, these communities grew in size and number, and often settled down near rivers. This was not only because of the availability of water, but also because the soil would be more fertile there. It made the process of growing crops easier. LET'S EXPLORE Observe the scene on the next page. It depicts an agricultural community froma few millenniums ago. List the main activities you can identify. 4 Timeline and Sources of History Reprint 2025-26 chapter4_310125.indd 71 & 03-02-2025 04:57:21 | THINK ABOUT IT Bothin the earlier picture of a rock shelter and in this one, men