also has two poles North and South. Think like a scientist Repeat Activity 4.3 with (i) 2 and 4 cells with the same coil, (ii) 2 cells but different number of turns of the coil. What do you observe? A single cell provides only a small amount of current, so the magnetic field is weak. As a result, the deflection of compass needle is less and the coil can only attract a few clips. A battery with more cells gives a larger current as compared to that with a single cell. This creates a stronger magnetic field, so the deflection of the compass needle is more and the coil can attract more clips. The increase in number of turns of the coil also makes the coil a stronger magnet! Also, repeat Activity 4.4 by changing the direction of the current. So, the strength of an electromagnet can be changed by changing the amount of electric current flowing through the coil or the number of turns of the coil, , or both. Also, its poles can be reversed by changing the direction of the current. A step further Do you remember learning earlier (in the chapter Exploring Magnets in Curiosity, Grade 6) that a freely suspended magnet rests along the north-south direction because our Earth itself behaves like a giant magnet? But why does Earth behave like a magnet? Deep inside the Earth, the movement of liquid iron in the core creates electric currents, which generate a magnetic field. Many migratory birds, fish, and animals use this field to navigate across continents and oceans. The Earth s magnetic field also acts as a shield, blocking harmful particles from space, and helps protect life on Earth. 6/28/2025 3:49:53 PM 4.1.2 Lifting electromagnets Lifting electromagnets are _ strong electromagnets, that may be hung to the cranes. The crane operator can control the magnet by switching the current ON and OFF. When the current is turned ON, the electromagnet lifts the iron/steel objects; when the current is switched OFF, magnetic field disappears, and the objects are released. Lifting electromagnets are widely used in factories and scrap yards, to move, lift, and sort heavy metal items efficiently. A step further We have learnt that when electric current flows through a conductor (like a wire), it produces a magnetic field around it. In the higher grades, you will learn even more about this wonderful Are electromagnets also used in real life, for lifting objects? that just as electricity can produce magnetism, a moving magnet can also lead to an electric current. This deep connection between electricity and magnetism is vital to our daily lives, as it forms the basis of many devices, from electric motors to power generators. 4.2 Does a Current Carrying Wire Get Hot? | Activity 4.5: Let us observe In this activity, we will use a special kind of wire, called a nichrome wire. e Take a cardboard piece of about 10cm length and 10 cm width, two nails, a nichrome wire of