< =_ = 43 Se 2 ao u = Ee ped oe a Science Exhibition Lifting Electromagnet If we don t have an electric lamp while making an electric circuit with an electric cell, is there any other way through which we can find out if current is flowing in the circuit? Is it possible to make temporary magnets? How can these be made? We can generate heat by burning fossil fuels and wood; but how is heat generated in various electrical appliances? How do we know if a cell or a battery is dead? Can all cells and batteries be recharged? Chapter 4.indd 46 6/28/2025 3:49:31 PM | Chapter 4.indd 47 WWW WWW (erate 4 Electricity: Magnetic and Heating ects 4 It was the day of the science exhibition, and the school was buzzing with energy. Mohini and Aakarsh, along with their friends, went from one exhibit to another, eagerly exploring different models, asking questions and taking notes. One simple model really fascinated them. It was a working model of a lifting electromagnet which was displayed by their senior, Sumana. In it, instead of a hook like a typical crane, there was an iron nail wrapped with a wire, which was connected to a battery. When Sumana closed the circuit, the nail picked up iron paper clips like a magnet. When she opened the circuit, the clips fell off. Mohini and Aakarsh, were surprised. They remembered learning earlier (in the chapter Exploring Magnets , Curiosity, Grade 6) that magnetic materials were attracted by magnet and that iron was a magnetic material. But in Sumana s model, there was no magnet, only an electric circuit. They were so excited that they wanted to try it out themselves. 4.1 Does an Electric Current Have a Magnetic Effect? | Activity 4.1: Let us investigate e Collect a magnetic compass, an electric cell,acellholder, JH.8\.") two drawing pins, a safety pin, two nails, two pieces of connecting wires (one longer and one shorter), and two small pieces of cardboard. e Using two drawing pins, a safety pin, and a cardboard piece, make a switch (as you made it earlier in the chapter Electricity: Circuits and their Components in Curiosity, Grade 7). e Place the cell in the cell holder. e Fix two nails to a piece of cardboard as shown in Fig. 4.1a. Fix the middle portion of the longer wire stretched between the nails, such that itis slightly above the surface of the cardboard. Attach one end of that wire to the cell holder and another end to the switch. e Connect the second wire between the cell holder and the switch. e Place the magnetic compass beneath the wire between the two nails (Fig. 4.14). (b) Fig. 4.1: An electric circuit and a magnetic compass 6/28/2025 3:49:32 PM Chapter 4.indd 48 While watching the compass needle, move the switch to ON position to allow electric current to flow through the wire (Fig. 4.1b). What do you observe? e Now again while watching