this and when he was certain that an electric current indeed produced a magnetic field, he published his findings. This led to other scientists repeating his experiment to check if they got the same results, and further investigating the connection between electricity and magnetism. uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade WWW 6/28/2025 3:49:38 PM WWW WWW (erate 4 Electricity: Magnetic and Heating ects 4 The magnetic effect of electric current has many practical applications, suchas in devices like electromagnets, electric bells, motors, fans, loudspeakers, and more. Can we use electric current to make a magnet? 4.1.1 Electromagnets | Activity 4.2: Let us explore e Take around 50 cm long length of a flexible insulated wire, an iron nail, an electric cell, and few iron paper clips. e Tightly wrap the wire around the nail in the form of a coil, as shown in Fig. 4.2, and secure it with an adhesive tape. e Connect the ends of the wire to the cell. Take care to not connect the wires to the cell for more than a few seconds; otherwise, the cell may weaken quickly. e Bring the nail close to the iron paper clips and lift up. Do the clips hang to the ends of the nail? Fig. 4.2: Coil of wire connected with a cell e Disconnect the wire from the cell to stop the flow of electric current in the wire. Do the clips fall down? When electric current flows through the coil, the clips cling to it. But when the current is stopped, the clips no longer cling to it. Let us now try to investigate these observations in detail through Activity 4.3. | Activity 4.3: Let us experiment e Take around 100 cm long flexible insulated wire, a piece of chart paper, an iron nail, an electric cell, two magnetic compasses, and few iron/steel paper clips. e Roll a piece of chart paper to make a cylinder of diameter roughly equal to the width of a pencil. Secure it with an adhesive tape. | . . . . Fig. 4.3: (a) A coil e Tightly wind around 50 turns of the insulated wire on the of insulated wire cylinder to form a cylindrical coil as shown in Fig. 4.3a. Secure the wire with an adhesive tape. Chapter 4.indd 49 6/28/2025 3:49:43 PM Chapter 4.indd 50 U (e) Fig. 4.3: (b) Coil and magnetic compasses; (c) Coil connected to a cell; (d) Coil with iron nail inserted; (e) Coil with iron nail Place the compasses near the two ends of the cylindrical coil (Fig. 4.3b). Connect the two ends of the coil with the terminals of the cell as shown in Fig. 4.3c and observe the magnetic compasses. Do you find any deflection in the needles of the compasses? (b) Disconnect the wire from the cell. Do the needles of the compasses come back to their original positions? Insert aniron nailinthe paper cylinder (Fig. 4.3d) and repeat the steps. Is there any difference in the deflection of