the fact that the heat generated depends on the magnitude of the electric current. The heat generated in a wire ; depends on the material, thickness, and length of the wire, and the / duration for which the current flows. / In Grade 7, we have learnt that an incandescent lamp glows because its filament is heated by an electric current. Many household appliances, such as electric room heaters, stoves, irons, immersion rods, water heaters, kettles, and hair dryers (Fig. 4.6) work on the same principle of the heating effect of electric current. All these devices contain a rod or a coil of wire, called a heating element. In some appliances where this element is visible, it can be seen glowing red hot. Oh, now I understand why the incandescent torch lamp sometimes used to get warm when we did the activity of making it glow using an electric cell. Chapter 4.indd 53 6/28/2025 3:50:05 PM (b) (c) (a) (e) (p Fig. 4.6: Simple household electric heating appliances (a) Room heater; (b) Electric stove; (c) Electric kettle; (d) Electric iron; (e) Water heating immersion coil; or (f) Hair dryer The heating effect of electric current is useful in many everyday appliances. But sometimes, it can cause problems, like energy loss in wires during transmission. Overheating in appliances may cause damage to plugs and sockets where plastic parts may melt, or even lead to fires. In household circuits, there are safety devices placed in the circuit to minimise such incidents. Ever heard of ... Beyond household use, heating effect of electric current has several industrial applications. One notable example is in steel manufacturing industries, where a specially designed high-temperature furnace (an enclosed space built to generate heat) uses electric current to produce heat. This is used to melt and recycle scrap steel, converting it into usable steel. uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade @ WWW A A step further To prevent unnecessary heating in household switchboards, it is important to use appropriate wires, plugs, and sockets that are rated for the specified electric current of the connections. Chapter 4.indd 54 6/28/2025 3:50:20 PM Chapter 4.indd 55 WWW WWW (erate 4 Electricity: Magnetic and Heating ects Sa The portable sources of electricity, such as cells and batteries, are so fascinating. Using these, we could light up a small lamp, make a magnet, and heat up a wire. Yes, but have you ever wondered what is inside these cells and batteries that produces electricity? 4.3 How Does a Battery Generate Electricity? Let us start with one of the earliest types of electric cells ever made. 4.3.1 Voltaic cell Electric A Voltaic cell, also known as Galvanic cell, is shown in Fig. 4.7. It contains two metal plates made of different materials and a liquid called an electrolyte, placed in a glass or plastic container. The plates, called electrodes, are partly dipped in the electrolyte, which is usually a weak acid or salt solution. A chemical reaction between the plates and the electrolyte produces