| only when the _ positive ey a. ) SS. terminal (longer wire) of the LED is connected to the positive terminal of Copper strip Fig. 4.8: (a) Electric cell made using lemons; . (b) Connections in lemon cell the battery, and negative terminal (shorter wire) of the LED is connected to the negative terminal of the battery]. A glowing LED indicates that your cell is working. In this cell, the metal electrodes are the copper wires and the iron nails. The electrolyte is the lemon juice, which helps conduct electricity. You may also use salt solutions instead of lemon juice. A step further Some common metal pairs for Voltaic cells are zinc/copper, zinc/ silver, aluminium/copper, iron/copper, magnesium/copper, and lead/copper. Some metals like copper act as positive electrodes, yet some other metals like zinc act as negative electrodes. This is due to their chemical properties. We will learn more about this in the higher grades. uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade @ WWW A Chapter 4.indd 56 6/28/2025 3:50:32 PM Chapter 4.indd 57 WWW WWW {nat 4 Electricity: Magnetic and Heating eects 5 4.3.2 Dry cells Voltaic cells were an important discovery, but they are not convenient for everyday use. Instead, dry cells are one of the most widely used electric cells today. They are called dry because the electrolyte is not a liquid but a thick moist paste. The structure of a dry cell is shown in Fig. 4.9. It consists of a zinc container which acts as a negative terminal and a carbon rod at the centre covered with metal cap that acts as the positive terminal. The carbon rod is surrounded by the paste-like electrolyte. The dry cell is a single use cell, meaning once it is used up, it has to be disposed of. For several applications, rechargeable batteries are increasingly being used now. 4.3.3 Rechargeable batteries Metal cap Carbon rod Electrolyte Zinc container (a) (b) Fig. 4.9: (a) Dry cell; (b) Its internal structure Rechargeable batteries can be recharged and reused multiple times. This prevents wastage and saves money over time as well. (a) (d) (e) Fig. 4.10: Typical rechargeable batteries used in (a) Laptops; (b) Mobile phones; (c) Camera; (d) Inverter; (e) Vehicles; (f) Charging a mobile phone There are many different kinds of rechargeable batteries that are used for different applications from small batteries used in watches and phones to batteries used in laptops and tablet to bigger batteries that run inverters or drive electric vehicles (Fig. 4.10). However, rechargeable batteries also do not last forever. After being charged and used many times, they slowly wear out. Oh, so this is the reason why after a year or two, the phone battery requires charging more often! 6/28/2025 3:51:18 PM A step further Today, the lithium-ion (Li-ion) battery is the most common type of rechargeable battery, found in almost all devices that use batteries. These batteries rely on special metals like lithium and cobalt, which are mined and processed in limited parts of the