holder and another end to the switch. e Connect the second wire between the cell holder and the switch. e Place the magnetic compass beneath the wire between the two nails (Fig. 4.14). (b) Fig. 4.1: An electric circuit and a magnetic compass 6/28/2025 3:49:32 PM Chapter 4.indd 48 While watching the compass needle, move the switch to ON position to allow electric current to flow through the wire (Fig. 4.1b). What do you observe? e Now again while watching the compass needle, move the switch to OFF position. What do you observe this time? e Move the switch between ON and OFF positions a few more times. Carefully observe how the compass needle behaves the each time. You may have noticed that when the current flows, the compass needle gets deflected from its original direction. When the current stops, the needle returns to its original direction. As we have learnt earlier (in the chapter Exploring Magnets in Curiosity, Grade 6), the compass needle is a tiny magnet which deflects when a magnet is brought near it and this magnetic effect can act through any non-magnetic materials kept in between. But why does the compass needle deflect when the current flows through the wire? The deflection indicates that the current carrying wire has a magnetic effect on the compass needle. When the current stops, this magnetic effect disappears and the compass needle returns to its original direction. The region around a magnet or a current carrying wire where its magnetic effect can be felt, such as by the deflection of a compass needle, is said to have a magnetic field. When electric current flows We have learnt about magnets) through a conductor (like a wire), it and electric current in earlier} produces a magnetic field around it. grades. I used to think that there This phenomenon is known as the was no link between the two. But ; . magnetic effect of electric current. now we found that electricity _ - . and magnetic effect are linked! } [he magnetic field disappears when the current stops flowing. Be a scientist You have just now made the same discovery which was made by the scientist Hans Christian Oersted (1777-1851) in 1820, that is, the discovery that electricity and magnetism are linked. He was a professor at a university in Denmark. It is said that once while giving a demonstration, he noticed that whenever an electrical circuit was closed or opened, the needle of a magnetic compass, lying nearby, deflected. He investigated this and when he was certain that an electric current indeed produced a magnetic field, he published his findings. This led to other scientists repeating his experiment to check if they got the same results, and further investigating the connection between electricity and magnetism. uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade WWW 6/28/2025 3:49:38 PM WWW WWW (erate 4 Electricity: Magnetic and Heating ects 4 The magnetic effect of electric current has many practical applications, suchas in devices like electromagnets, electric