two ends of the cylindrical coil (Fig. 4.3b). Connect the two ends of the coil with the terminals of the cell as shown in Fig. 4.3c and observe the magnetic compasses. Do you find any deflection in the needles of the compasses? (b) Disconnect the wire from the cell. Do the needles of the compasses come back to their original positions? Insert aniron nailinthe paper cylinder (Fig. 4.3d) and repeat the steps. Is there any difference in the deflection of the compass needles? (c) Place some iron paper clips near the two ends of the nail. Are the clips attracted to the ends of the nail? It is observed that when current is passed through the cylindrical coil, it behaves like a magnet and deflects the needle of a magnetic compass. When an iron nail is inserted in the core of the coil, then the coil becomes a stronger magnet and the deflection of the magnetic compass needle is much more. It also attracts iron clips (Fig. 4.3e). When the current is stopped, the cylindrical coil loses its magnetic effect. A current carrying coil that behaves as a magnet is called an electromagnet. For practical applications, most electromagnets have an iron core to make them stronger. Does electromagnet also have two poles like a bar magnet? and clips Activity 4.4: Let us investigate e Take the electromagnet made in Activity 4.3 and a magnetic compass. Label the two ends of the coil as A and B. e Place the magnetic compass near the end A of the coil as shown in Fig. 4.4a. e Connect the coil to the cell and observe the compass. Note down which pole of the magnetic compass is attracted to end A. uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade @ WWW A 6/28/2025 3:49:47 PM Chapter 4.indd 51 WWW WW {nape 4 Electricity: Magnetic and Heating eects 5 (@ Db Fig. 4.4: Compass needle near (a) End A; (b) End B of an electromagnet As we have learnt earlier, when two magnets are brought close to each other, their unlike poles (North-South) attract each other. So, if north pole of the magnetic compass is attracted towards end A of the electromagnet, then end A is south pole. e Repeat this procedure to find the polarity of end B as well (Fig. 4.4b). Did you find that the polarity of end B is opposite to the polarity of end A? We learnt in grade 6 that a magnet has two poles. Just like a magnet, an electromagnet also has two poles North and South. Think like a scientist Repeat Activity 4.3 with (i) 2 and 4 cells with the same coil, (ii) 2 cells but different number of turns of the coil. What do you observe? A single cell provides only a small amount of current, so the magnetic field is weak. As a result, the deflection of compass needle is less and the coil can only attract a few clips. A battery with more cells gives