start with one of the earliest types of electric cells ever made. 4.3.1 Voltaic cell Electric A Voltaic cell, also known as Galvanic cell, is shown in Fig. 4.7. It contains two metal plates made of different materials and a liquid called an electrolyte, placed in a glass or plastic container. The plates, called electrodes, are partly dipped in the electrolyte, which is usually a weak acid or salt solution. A chemical reaction between the plates and the electrolyte produces electricity. When the circuit is connected, electric current flows from the positive terminal through the circuit to the negative terminal. Over time, the chemicals get used up, and the cell stops working. It is then called dead and cannot supply any more electricity. Fig. 4.7: Simple representation of a Voltaic cell Ever heard of ... The Voltaic or Galvanic cells get their names from two Italian scientists, Alessandro Volta and Luigi Galvani. In the late 1700s, Galvani noticed that a dead frog s leg kicked when touched with two different metals copper and iron. It was already known by then that electricity could stimulate muscular motion and Galvani thought the electricity came from the frog itself. But Volta had a different idea. He believed the electricity came from the metals, and not the frog. To test this, he used saltwater-soaked paper instead of the frog s leg and still got an electric current. This showed that it was the combination of metals and liquid that generated electric current leading to the invention of the first battery! Electric current Electrode 1 ~Flectrode 2 Electrolyte (Liquid) 6/28/2025 3:50:28 PM | Activity 4.6: Let us construct e Take five or six juicy lemons, copper wires/ strips (1-2 mm thick) and iron nails. Also take one LED and some connecting wires. Can we also make our own Voltaic cell using easily available materials? e Insert the copper wire and the iron nailin one of the lemons keeping them apart by a small distance as shown in Fig. 4.8a. e Repeat the above step for all the remaining lemons. e Join the copper wires and nails as shown in Fig. 4.8b. e Connect the LED between the copper wire of the first lemon and the iron nail of the last lemon, using connecting wires. What do you observe? Does the LED glow? (a) e If the LED does not glow, reverse its connections. Does the LED glow now? [Remember that we have learnt earlier that current can pass through the LED 5) Geb I ae | only when the _ positive ey a. ) SS. terminal (longer wire) of the LED is connected to the positive terminal of Copper strip Fig. 4.8: (a) Electric cell made using lemons; . (b) Connections in lemon cell the battery, and negative terminal (shorter wire) of the LED is connected to the negative terminal of the battery]. A glowing LED indicates that your cell is working. In this cell, the metal electrodes are the copper wires and the iron