not last forever. After being charged and used many times, they slowly wear out. Oh, so this is the reason why after a year or two, the phone battery requires charging more often! 6/28/2025 3:51:18 PM A step further Today, the lithium-ion (Li-ion) battery is the most common type of rechargeable battery, found in almost all devices that use batteries. These batteries rely on special metals like lithium and cobalt, which are mined and processed in limited parts of the world. Because of this, countries are now racing to secure supplies, recycle old batteries, and develop new technologies. Scientists are also working on the next big leap: solid-state solid materials. These future batteries would be much safer, charge faster and last longer. Improved rechargeable batteries are very important as the world moves to developing environmentally friendly sources of electrical power. When electric current flows through a conductor (like a wire), it produces a magnetic field around it. This phenomenon is known as the magnetic effect of electric current. A current carrying coil that behaves as a magnet is called an electromagnet. For practical applications, most electromagnets have an iron core to make them stronger. Generation of heat in conductors due to flow of electric current is known as the heating effect of electric current. Acell ora battery is a device that generates electric current because of chemical reactions taking place inside it. @ Rechargeable batteries can be recharged and reused multiple times. Keep the curiosity alive 1. Fill in the blanks: (i) The solution used in a Voltaic cell is called (ii) A current carrying coil behaves like a 2. Choose the correct option: (i) Dry cells are less portable compared to Voltaic cells. (True/False) (ii) A coil becomes an electromagnet only when electric current flows through it. (True/False) (iii) An electromagnet, using a single cell, attracts more iron paper clips than the same electromagnet with a battery of 2 cells. (True/False) uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade WWW Chapter 4.indd 58 6/28/2025 3:51:23 PM Chapter 4.indd 59 Prepare some questions based on your learnings so far ... short time. (i) The wire becomes warm. (ii) A magnetic compass placed below the wire is deflected. Choose the correct option: (a) Only (i) is correct (b) Only (ii) is correct (c) Both (i) and (ii) are correct (d) Both (ij) and (ii) are not correct . Match the items in Column A with those in Column B. (i) Voltaic cell (a) Best suited for electric heater Works on magnetic effect of (ii) Electric iron (b) electric current Works on heating effect of (iii) Nichrome wire (c) Patna. Generates electricity by (hi) JE eeererine yma (d) chemical reactions . Nichrome wire is commonly used in electrical heating devices because it (i) is a good conductor of electricity. (ii) generates more heat for a given current. (iii) is cheaper than copper. (iv) is an insulator of electricity. . Electric heating devices (like an electric heater or a stove) are often considered more convenient