lead to an electric current. This deep connection between electricity and magnetism is vital to our daily lives, as it forms the basis of many devices, from electric motors to power generators. 4.2 Does a Current Carrying Wire Get Hot? | Activity 4.5: Let us observe In this activity, we will use a special kind of wire, called a nichrome wire. e Take a cardboard piece of about 10cm length and 10 cm width, two nails, a nichrome wire of thickness about 0.3 mm (26-28 gauge) and length of 10 cm, an electric cell, a cell holder, a switch, and connecting wires. While doing the activity for electromagnet, did you also notice that the wire ends got warm? Why would that happen? e Mount the nails on the cardboard about 5 cm apart. e Tie the nichrome wire between these nails and make the connections as shown in Fig. 4.5 with the switch in OFF position. e Touch the nichrome wire. What do you feel? e Move the switch to ON position for about 30 s and then move it back to OFF. Touch the nichrome wire momentarily uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade @ WWW A Chapter 4.indd 52 6/28/2025 3:49:57 PM WWW WWW {nat 4 Electricity: Magnetic and Heating eects 5 (Do not hold the nichrome wire). , (EUGSai0Es: What difference do you feel? e Repeat the last two steps to confirm the observation. Do not touch the wire for an extended period to avoid any injuries. You may have observed that nichrome wire feels warm when current is passed through it. This happens because, when electric current flows through any conductor, it faces some Opposition or resistance to its flow. Different conductors offer different levels of resistance to the flow of current. A nichrome wire, for example, offers higher resistance compared to a copper wire of the same size and length. This resistance causes some of the electrical energy to be converted into heat energy. When an electric current passes through a conductor, it gets heated. This warming is known as the heating Fig. 4.5: Heating effect in a wire effect of electric current. Think like a scientist This activity should be carried out strictly under the supervision of a teacher. Repeat Activity 4.5 with a battery of 2 cells. What do you notice? For the same duration, does the wire heat up more with one cell or two cells? The amount of heat generated is more in the experiment with 2 cells. This is due to the fact that the heat generated depends on the magnitude of the electric current. The heat generated in a wire ; depends on the material, thickness, and length of the wire, and the / duration for which the current flows. / In Grade 7, we have learnt that an incandescent lamp glows because its filament is heated by an electric current. Many household appliances, such as electric room heaters, stoves, irons, immersion rods, water heaters, kettles, and hair dryers (Fig.