(ii) Electric iron (b) electric current Works on heating effect of (iii) Nichrome wire (c) Patna. Generates electricity by (hi) JE eeererine yma (d) chemical reactions . Nichrome wire is commonly used in electrical heating devices because it (i) is a good conductor of electricity. (ii) generates more heat for a given current. (iii) is cheaper than copper. (iv) is an insulator of electricity. . Electric heating devices (like an electric heater or a stove) are often considered more convenient than traditional heating methods (like burning firewood or charcoal). Give reason(s) to support this statement considering societal impact. . Look at the Fig. 4.4a. If the compass placed near the coil deflects: (i) Draw an arrow on the diagram to show the path of the electric current. (ii) Explain why the compass needle moves when current flows. (iii) Predict what would happen to the deflection if you reverse the battery terminals. WWW WWW {nat 4 Electricity: Magnetic and Heating eects 5 . An electric current flows through a nichrome wire for a 6/28/2025 3:51:30 PM Chapter 4.indd 60 thoug e ht.. 8. Suppose Sumana forgets to move the switch of her lifting electromagnet model to OFF position (in introduction story). After some time, the iron nail no longer picks up the iron paper clips, but the wire wrapped around the iron nail is still warm. Why did the lifting electromagnet stop lifting the clips? Give possible reasons. 9. In Fig. 4.11, in which case the LED will glow when the switch is closed? MW Tron nail Copper strip Tron nail Copper strip Lemon juice Fig. 4.11 10. Neha keeps the coil exactly the same as in Activity 4.4 but slides the iron nail out, leaving only the coiled wire. Will the coil still deflect the compass? If yes, will the deflection be more or less than before? 11. We have four coils, of similar shape and size, made up from iron, copper, aluminium, and nichrome as shown in Fig. 4.12. Iron Copper Aluminium Nichrome (a) (b) (c) (a) Fig. 4.12 Reflect on the questions framed by your friends and try to answer ... 6/28/2025 3:51:37 PM Chapter 4.indd 61 WWW WWW (erate 4 Electricity: Magnetic and Heating ects When current is passed through the coils, compass needles placed near the coils will show deflection. (i) Only in circuit (a) (ii) Only in circuits (a) and (b) (iii) Only in circuits (a), (b), and (c) (iv) In all four circuits Discover, design, and debate e Make coils of turns 25, 50, 75, and 100. Connect them to the same cell one by one. Note the deflection in a magnetic compass placed in the same position in all the cases. Report your observations. Draw conclusion of the effect of number of turns of the coil on the strength of the electromagnet. e Take two thin nichrome wires of equal length and different thickness (approximately one of these wire thickness to be double of the other, say 0.3 mm and 0.6 mm). Connect