so familiarly addressed by this common personage. She stammered, But, Madame I do not know you must be mistaken No, I am Matilda Loisel. Her friend uttered a cry of astonishment, Oh! my poor Matilda! How you have changed! 44 Footprints without Feat Reprint 2025-26 ce Pla herve eee Yes, I have had some hard days since I saw you; and some miserable ones and all because of you ... Because of me? How is that? You recall the diamond necklace that you loaned me to wear to the Minister s ball? Yes, very well. Well, I lost it. How is that, since you returned it to me? I returned another to you exactly like it. And it has taken us ten years to pay for it. You can understand that it was not easy for us who have nothing. But it is finished and I am decently content. Mme Forestier stopped short. She said, You say that you bought a diamond necklace to replace mine? Yes. You did not perceive it then? They were just alike. And she smiled with proud and simple joy. Mme Forestier was touched and took both her hands as she replied, Oh! My poor Matilda! Mine were false. They were not worth over five hundred francs! Guy DE MauPASSANT The Necklace 45 Reprint 2025-26 r\ GLOSSARY incessantly: continuously tureen: covered dish from which soup is served at the table M.: abbreviation for Monsieur (form of address for a man in French) Mme: abbreviation for Madame (form of address for a woman in French) vexation: state of being distressed ruinous: disastrous usurers: money-lenders, especially those who lend money on a high rate of interest sou: a former French coin of low value awry: not in the correct position or shape; twisted Think dbout i 1. The course of the Loisels life changed due to the necklace. Comment. 2. What was the cause of Matilda s ruin? How could she have avoided it? 3. What would have happened to Matilda if she had confessed to her friend that she had lost her necklace? 4. If you were caught in a situation like this, how would you have dealt with it? Talk about il 1. The characters in this story speak in English. Do you think this is their language? What clues are there in the story about the language its characters must be speaking in? 2. Honesty is the best policy. 83. We should be content with what life gives us. e The Dowry by Guy de Maupassant e A Cup of Tea by Katherine Mansfield e The Bet by Anton Chekov 46 Footprints without Feat Reprint 2025-26