we go to the theatre. It seems very pretty to me... He was silent, stupefied, in dismay, at the sight of his wife weeping. He stammered, What is the matter? What is the matter? By a violent effort, she had controlled her vexation and responded in a calm voice, wiping her moist cheeks, Nothing. Only I have no dress and consequently I cannot go to this affair. Give your card to some colleague whose wife is better fitted out than I. He was grieved, but answered, Let us see, Matilda. How much would a suitable costume cost, something that would serve for other occasions, something very simple? She reflected for some seconds thinking of a sum that she could ask for without bringing with it an immediate refusal and a frightened exclamation from the economical clerk. Finally she said, in a hesitating 40 Footprints without Feat Reprint 2025-26 voice, I cannot tell exactly, but it seems to me that four hundred francs ought to cover it. He turned a little pale, for he had saved just this sum to buy a gun that he might be able to join some hunting parties the next summer, with some friends who went to shoot larks on Sunday. Nevertheless, he answered, Very well. I will give you four hundred francs. But try to have a pretty dress. READ AND FIND OUT What fresh problem now disturbs Mme Loisel? How is the problem solved? The day of the ball approached and Mme Loisel seemed sad, disturbed, anxious. Nevertheless, her dress was nearly ready. Her husband said to her one evening, What is the matter with you? You have acted strangely for two or three days. And she responded, I am vexed not to have a jewel, nothing to adorn myself with. I shall have such a poverty-stricken look. I would prefer not to go to this party. He replied, You can wear some natural flowers. In this season they look very chic. She was not convinced. No , she replied, there is nothing more humiliating than to have a shabby air in the midst of rich women. Then her husband cried out, How stupid we are! Go and find your friend Mme Forestier and ask her to lend you her jewels. She uttered a cry of joy. It is true! she said. I had not thought of that. The next day she took herself to her friend s house and related her story of distress. Mme Forestier went to her closet, took out a large jewel-case, brought it, opened it, and said, Choose, my dear. She saw at first some bracelets, then a collar of pearls, then a Venetian cross of gold and jewels of admirable workmanship. She tried the jewels before the glass, hesitated, but could neither decide to take them nor leave them. Then she asked, Have you nothing more? Why, yes. Look for yourself. I do not know what will please you. Suddenly she discovered, in a black satin box, a