with the Royal Philharmonic Society s prestigious Soloist of the Year Award. Says master percussionist James Blades, God may have taken her hearing but he has given her back something extraordinary. What we hear, she feels far more deeply than any of us. That is why she expresses music so beautifully. Evelyn confesses that she is something of a workaholic. I ve just got to work ... often harder than classical musicians. But the rewards are enormous. Apart from the regular concerts, Evelyn also gives free concerts in prisons and hospitals. She also gives high priority to classes for young musicians. Ann Richlin of the Beethoven Fund for Deaf Children says, She is a shining inspiration for deaf children. They see that there is nowhere that they cannot go. Evelyn Glennie has already accomplished more than most people twice her age. She has brought percussion to the front of the orchestra, and demonstrated that it can be very moving. She has given inspiration to those who are handicapped, people who look to her and say, If she can do it, I can. And, not the least, she has given enormous pleasure to millions. DEBORAH COWLEY * ke Thinking about the Text worlcaholic (informal): a person who finds it difficult to stop working priority: great importance I. Answer these questions in a few words or a couple of sentences each. 1. How old was Evelyn when she went to the Royal Academy of Music? 2. When was her deafness first noticed? When was it confirmed? II. Answer each of these questions in a short paragraph (830-40 words). 1. Who helped her to continue with music? What did he do and say? 2. Name the various places and causes for which Evelyn performs. Ill. Answer the question in two or three paragraphs (100-150 words). 1. How does Evelyn hear music? s 20 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 Part II The Shehnai of Bismillah Khan BEFORE You READ Do you know these people? What instruments do they play? e Think of the shehnai and the first thing you'll probably imagine is a wedding or a similar occasion or function. The next would probably be Ustad Bismillah Khan, the shehnai maestro, playing this instrument. Emperor Aurangzeb banned the playing of a musical instrument called pungi in the royal residence for it had a shrill unpleasant sound. Pungi became the generic name for reeded noisemakers. Few had _ genericname: aname thought that it would one day be revived. A barber 8!Ven to a class or of a family of professional musicians, who had access group as a whole to the royal palace, decided to improve the tonal 'ede wind hich quality of the pungi. He chose a pipe with a natural ee the hollow stem that was longer and broader than the flute, the clarinet, ete. pungi, and made seven holes on the body of the pipe. When he played on it, closing and opening some of these holes, soft and melodious sounds were The Sound