to open my mind and body to sounds and vibrations. The rest was sheer determination and hard work. She never looked back from that point onwards. She toured the United Kingdom with a youth orchestra and by the time she was sixteen, she had decided to make music her life. She auditioned for the Royal Academy of Music and scored one of the highest marks in the history of the academy. She gradually moved from orchestral work to solo performances. At the end of her three-year course, she had captured most of the top awards. And for all this, Evelyn won t accept any hint of heroic achievement. If you work hard and know where you are going, you'll get there. And she got right to the top, the world s most sought-after multipercussionist with a mastery of some thousand instruments, and hectic international schedule. It is intriguing to watch Evelyn function so effortlessly without hearing. In our two-hour discussion she never missed a word. Men with bushy beards give me trouble, she laughed. It is s 18 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 impaired: weakened xylophone: a musical instrument with a row of wooden bars of different lengths percussionist: a person who plays the drum, the tabla, etc. potential: quality or ability that can be developed auditioned: gave a short performance so that the director could decide whether she was good enough intriguing: fascinating and curious 7. It is intriguing to watch Evelyn function so effortlessly without hearing not just watching the lips, it s the whole face, especially the eyes. She speaks flawlessly with a Scottish lilt. My speech is clear because I could hear till I was eleven, she says. But that doesn t explain how she managed to learn French and master basic Japanese. As for music, she explains, It pours in through every part of my body. It tingles in the skin, my cheekbones and even in my hair. When she plays the xylophone, she can sense the sound passing up the stick into her fingertips. By leaning against the drums, she can feel the resonances flowing into her body. On a wooden platform she removes her shoes so that the vibrations pass through her bare feet and up her legs. flawlessly: without a fault or mistake lilt: a way of speaking tingles: causes a slight pricking or stinging sensation resonances: echoes of sounds The Sound of Music / 19 # Reprint 2025-26 8. 10. & Not surprisingly, Evelyn delights her audiences. In 1991 she was presented with the Royal Philharmonic Society s prestigious Soloist of the Year Award. Says master percussionist James Blades, God may have taken her hearing but he has given her back something extraordinary. What we hear, she feels far more deeply than any of us. That is why she expresses music so beautifully. Evelyn confesses that she is something of a workaholic. I ve just got to work ... often harder than classical musicians. But the rewards are enormous. Apart from the