a family of professional musicians, who had access group as a whole to the royal palace, decided to improve the tonal 'ede wind hich quality of the pungi. He chose a pipe with a natural ee the hollow stem that was longer and broader than the flute, the clarinet, ete. pungi, and made seven holes on the body of the pipe. When he played on it, closing and opening some of these holes, soft and melodious sounds were The Sound of Music / 21 4 Reprint 2025-26 produced. He played the instrument before royalty and everyone was impressed. The instrument so different from the pungi had to be given a new name. As the story goes, since it was first played in the Shah s chambers and was played by a nai (barber), the instrument was named the shehnai . Bi v4. a eS F aia | TSS, Shehnai Pungi 2. The sound of the shehnai began to be considered auspicious. And for this reason it is still played in temples and is an indispensable component of any North Indian wedding. In the past, the shehnai was part of the naubat or traditional ensemble of nine instruments found at royal courts. Till recently it was used only in temples and weddings. The credit for bringing this instrument onto the classical stage goes to Ustad Bismillah Khan. 3. As a five-year old, Bismillah Khan played gilli-danda near a pond in the ancient estate of Dumraon in Bihar. He would regularly go to the nearby Bihariji temple to sing the Bhojpuri Chaita , at the end of which he would earn a big laddu weighing 1.25 kg, a prize given by the local Maharaja. This happened 80 years ago, and the little boy has travelled far to earn the highest civilian award in India the Bharat Ratna. 4. Born on 21 March 1916, Bismillah belongs to a well-known family of musicians from Bihar. His grandfather, Rasool Bux Khan, was the shehnainawaz of the Bhojpur king s court. His father, Paigambar Bux, and other paternal ancestors were also great shehnai players. s 22, / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 auspicious: promising to bring good fortune indispensable: without which a piece of work cannot be done ensembles (pronounced onsomble ): things (here, instruments) considered as a group paternal ancestors: ancestors of the father ds e 5. The young boy took to music early in life. At the age of three when his mother took him to his maternal uncle s house in Benaras (now Varanasi), Bismillah was fascinated watching his uncles practise the shehnai. Soon Bismillah started accompanying his uncle, Ali Bux, to the Vishnu temple of Benaras where Bux was employed to play the shehnai. Ali Bux would play the shehnai and Bismillah would sit captivated for hours on end. Slowly, he started getting lessons on end: for a very in playing the instrument and would sit practising long time without throughout the day. For years to come the temple of * PPins Balaji and