was fascinated watching his uncles practise the shehnai. Soon Bismillah started accompanying his uncle, Ali Bux, to the Vishnu temple of Benaras where Bux was employed to play the shehnai. Ali Bux would play the shehnai and Bismillah would sit captivated for hours on end. Slowly, he started getting lessons on end: for a very in playing the instrument and would sit practising long time without throughout the day. For years to come the temple of * PPins Balaji and Mangala Maiya and the banks of the Ganga became the young apprentice s favourite haunts where he could practise in solitude. The flowing waters of the Ganga inspired him to improvise and invent raagas that were earlier considered to be beyond the range of the shehnai. 6. At the age of 14, Bismillah accompanied his uncle to the Allahabad Music Conference. At the end of his recital, Ustad Faiyaz Khan patted the young boy s back and said, Work hard and you shall make it. With the opening of the All India Radio in Lucknow in 1938 came Bismillah s big break. He soon became an often-heard shehnai player on radio. 7. When India gained independence on 15 August 1947, Bismillah Khan became the first Indian to greet the nation with his shehnai. He poured his heart out into Raag Kafi from the Red Fort to an audience which included Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, who later gave his famous Tryst with Destiny speech. 8. Bismillah Khan has given many memorable performances both in India and abroad. His first trip abroad was to Afghanistan where King Zahir Shah was so taken in by the maestro that he gifted him priceless Persian carpets and other souvenirs. The King of Afghanistan was not the only one to be en inby: attracted fascinated with Bismillah s music. Film director 4PY Vijay Bhatt was so impressed after hearing Souvenirs: things Bismillah play at a festival that he named a film oes in memory ofa place, person or after the instrument called Gunj Uthi Shehnai. The event The Sound of Music / 23 # Reprint 2025-26 e i film was a hit, and one of Bismillah Khan s compositions, Dil ka khilona hai toot gaya..., turned out to be a nationwide chartbuster! Despite this chartbuster. recordhuge success in the celluloid world, Bismillah breaker Khan s ventures in film music were limited to two: celluloid: oldVijay Bhatt s Gunj Uthi Shehnai and Vikram fashioned way of Srinivas s Kannada venture, Sanadhi Apanna. I just 1s to films can t come to terms with the artificiality and glamour of the film world, he says with emphasis. 9. Awards and recognition came thick and fast. Bismillah Khan became the first Indian to be invited to perform at the prestigious Lincoln Centre Hall in the United States of America. He also took part in the World Exposition in Montreal, in the Cannes Art Festival and in the Osaka Trade Fair. So well known did he become internationally that an auditorium in