been done for you. adjective only before noun not before noun both before and after the verb be indispensable impressed afraid outdoor paternal countless priceless Use these words in phrases or sentences of your own. * Speaking I. Imagine the famous singer Kishori Amonkar is going to visit your school. You have been asked to introduce her to the audience before her performance. How would you introduce her? Here is some information about Kishori Amonkar you can find on the Internet. Read the passage and make notes of the main points about: her parentage the school of music she belongs to her achievements her inspiration awards Padma Bhushan Kishori Amonkar, widely considered the finest female vocalist of her generation, was born in 1931, daughter of another great artist, Smt. Mogubai Kurdikar. In her early years she absorbed the approach and repertoire of her distinguished mother s teacher Ustad Alladiya Khan. As her own style developed, however, she moved away from Alladiya Khan s JaipurAtrauli gharana style in some respects, and as a mature artist her approach is usually regarded as an individual, if not unique, variant of the Jaipur model. Kishori Amonkar is a thinker, besotted by what she calls the mysterious world of her raagas. She dissects them with the precision of a perfectionist, almost like a scientist, until the most subtle of shades and emotions emerge and re-emerge. She is very much inspired by the teachings of the ancient Vedic sages, written at a time when vocal music was highly devotional in character. This s 28 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 soul searching quality of her music, coupled with a very intellectual approach to raaga performance has gained her quite a following in India and has helped to revive the study of khayal. Significant awards bestowed on this artist include the Sangeet Natak Akademi Award (1985), the Padma Bhushan (1987), and the highly coveted Sangeet Samradhini Award (considered one of the most prestigious awards in Indian Classical Music) in 1997. II. Use your notes on Kishori Amonkar to introduce her to an imaginary audience. You may use one of the following phrases to introduce a guest: I am honoured to introduce.../I feel privileged to introduce.../We welcome you... * H writing If you work hard and know where your're going, you'll get there, says Evelyn Glennie. You have now read about two musicians, Evelyn Glennie and Ustad Bismillah Khan. Do you think that they both worked hard? Where did they want to go ? Answer these questions in two paragraphs, one on each of the two musicians. Whenever you see darkness, there is extraordinary opportunity for the light to burn brighter. Bono _& oe The Sound of Music / 29 # Reprint 2025-26 Wind x The wind blows strongly and causes a lot of destruction. How can we make friends with it? Wind, come softly. Don t break the shutters of the windows. Don't scatter the papers. Don t throw down the books on the shelf. There, look what you