(What did the authorities permit us to do?) A musician decided to __._ sCSFsFS :SC (Whaat id thle Musician decide to do?) Il. From the text on Bismillah Khan, find the words and phrases that match these definitions and write them down. The number of the paragraph where you will find the words/phrases has been given for you in brackets. 1. 2. 3. the home of royal people (1) the state of being alone (5) a part which is absolutely necessary (2) s 26 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 vd e 4. to do something not done before (5) 5. without much effort (13) 6. quickly and in large quantities (9) _____ and. Ill. Tick the right answer. 1. When something is revived, it (remains dead/lives again). When a government bans something, it wants it (stopped/started). When something is considered auspicious, (welcome it/avoid it). When we take to something, we find it (boring/interesting). ak oN When you appreciate something, you (find it good and useful/find it of no use). 6. When you replicate something, you do it (for the first time/for the second time). 7. When we come to terms with something, it is (still upsetting/no longer upsetting). IV. Dictionary work e The sound of the shehnai is auspicious. The auspicious sound of the shehnai is usually heard at marriages. The adjective auspicious can occur after the verb be as in the first sentence, or before a noun as in the second. But there are some adjectives which can be used after the verb be and not before a noun. For example: Ustad Faiyaz Khan was overjoyed. We cannot say: *the overjoyed man. Look at these entries from the Oxford Advanced Learner s Dictionary (2005). elder adi., noun awake adj., verb adjective 1 [only before noun] (of people, especially two members of the same family) older: my elder brother his elder sister 2 (the elder) used without a noun immediately after it to show who is the older of two people: the elder of their two sons 3 (the elder) (formal) used before or after sb s name to show that they are the older of two people who have the same name: the elder Pitt Pitt, the elder. adjective [not before noun] not asleep (especially immediately before or after sleeping): to be half/fully awake; to be wide awake. I was still awake when he came to bed. The Sound of Music / 27 # Reprint 2025-26 * oy Consult your dictionary and complete the following table. The first one has been done for you. adjective only before noun not before noun both before and after the verb be indispensable impressed afraid outdoor paternal countless priceless Use these words in phrases or sentences of your own. * Speaking I. Imagine the famous singer Kishori Amonkar is going to visit your school. You have been asked to introduce her to the audience before her performance. How would you introduce her? Here is some information about Kishori Amonkar you can find on the