waiting for shearing to begin. Uh/ valley near Palampur in Himachal Pradesh. meadows. By September they began their return movement. On the way they stopped once again in the villages of Lahul and Spiti, reaping their summer harvest and sowing their winter crop. Then they descended with their flock to their winter grazing ground on the Siwalik hills. Next April, once again, they began their march with their goats and sheep, to the summer meadows. New words Bhabar A dry forested area below the foothills of Garhwal and Kumaun Bugyal Vast meadows in the high mountains Further to the east, in Garhwal and Kumaon, the Gujar cattle herders came down to the dry forests of the bhabar in the winter, and went up to the high meadows the bugyals in summer. Many of them were originally from Jammu and came to the UP hills in the nineteenth century in search of good pastures. This pattern of cyclical movement between summer and winter pastures was typical of many pastoral communities of the Himalayas, including the Bhotiyas, Sherpas and Kinnauris. All of them had to adjust to seasonal changes and make effective use of available pastures in different places. When the pasture was exhausted or unusable in one place they moved their herds and flock to new areas. This continuous movement also allowed the pastures to recover; it prevented their overuse. Fig.4 Gaddi sheep being sheared. By September the Gaddi shepherds come down from the high meadows (Dhars/). On the way down they halt for a while to have their sheep sheared. The sheep are bathed and cleaned before the wool is cut. Reprint 2025-26 %9 ao) = = iS o s = () = _ < n _ a o iS _ n wo a ToT c= s e = lo) a = vu Y i= UO cP) = ~ Tc i= a] Pe Tc iS 1.2 On the Plateaus, Plains and Deserts [itm Not all pastoralists operated in the mountains. They were also to be found in the plateaus, plains and deserts of India. Dhangars were an important pastoral community of Maharashtra. In the early twentieth century their population in this region was estimated to be 467,000. Most of them were shepherds, some were blanket weavers, and still others were buffalo herders. The Dhangar shepherds stayed in the central plateau of Maharashtra during the monsoon. This was a semi-arid region with low rainfall and poor soil. It was covered with thorny scrub. Nothing but dry crops like bajra could be sown here. In the monsoon this tract became a vast grazing ground for the Dhangar flocks. By October the Dhangars harvested their bajra and started on their move west. After a march of about a month they reached the Konkan. This was a flourishing agricultural tract with high rainfall and rich soil. Here the shepherds were welcomed by Konkani peasants. After the kharif harvest was cut at this time, the fields had to be fertilised and made ready for the