livestock. Courtesy: The Massai Association. 110 F Reprint 2025-26 Fig.15 The title Maasai derives from the word Maa. Maa-sai means 'My People . The Maasai are traditionally nomadic and pastoral people who depend on milk and meat for subsistence. High temperatures combine with low rainfall to create conditions which are dry, dusty, and extremely hot. Drought conditions are common in this semi-arid land of equatorial heat. During such times pastoral animals die in large numbes. Courtesy: The Massai Association. Source E Pastoral communities elsewhere in Africa faced similar problems. In Namibia, in south-west Africa, the Kaokoland herders traditionally moved between Kaokoland and nearby Ovamboland, and they sold skin, meat and other trade products in neighbouring markets. All this was stopped with the new system of territorial boundaries that restricted movements between regions. The nomadic cattle herders of Kaokoland in Namibia complained: We have difficulty. We cry. We are imprisoned. We do not know why we are locked up. We are in jail. We have no place to live .. We cannot get meat from the south ... Our sleeping skins cannot be sent out ... Ovamboland is closed for us. We lived in Ovamboland for a long time. We want to take our cattle there, also our sheep and goats. The borders are closed. The borders press us heavily. We cannot live. Statement of Kaokoland herders, Namibia, 1949. Quoted in Michael Bollig, The colonial encapsulation of the north western Namibian pastoral economy , Africa 68 (4), 1998. Reprint 2025-26 ao) = = iS o s = () = < n a o iS n wo a Source F In most places in colonial Africa, the police were given instructions to keep a watch on the movements of pastoralists, and prevent them from entering white areas. The following is one such instruction given by a magistrate to the police, in south-west Africa, restricting the movements of the pastoralists of Kaokoland in Namibia: Passes to enter the Territory should not be given to these Natives unless exceptional circumstances necessitate their entering ... The object of the above proclamation is to restrict the number of natives entering the Territory and to keep a check on them, and ordinary visiting passes should therefore never be issued to them. Kaokoveld permits to enter , Magistrate to Police Station Commanders of Outjo and Kamanjab, 24 November, 1937. The loss of the finest grazing lands and water resources created pressure on the small area of land that the Maasai were confined within. Continuous grazing within a small area inevitably meant a deterioration of the quality of pastures. Fodder was always in short supply. Feeding the cattle became a persistent problem. 3.2 The Borders are CloSCC Mia In the nineteenth century, African pastoralists could move over vast areas in search of pastures. When the pastures were exhausted in one place they moved to a different area to graze their cattle. From the late nineteenth century, the colonial government began imposing various restrictions on their mobility. Like the Maasai,