us about the life of pastoral groups. In the early nineteenth century, Buchanan visited the Gollas during his travel through Mysore. He wrote: Their families live in small villages near the skirt of the woods, where they cultivate a little ground, and keep some of their cattle, selling in the towns the produce of the dairy. Their families are very numerous, seven to eight young men in each being common. Two or three of these attend the flocks in the woods, while the remainder cultivate their fields, and supply the towns with firewood, and with straw for thatch. From: Francis Hamilton Buchanan, A Journey from Madras through the Countries of Mysore, Canara and Malabar (London, 1807). In the deserts of Rajasthan lived the Raikas. The rainfall in the region was meagre and uncertain. On cultivated land, harvests fluctuated every year. Over vast stretches no crop could be grown. So the Raikas combined cultivation with pastoralism. During the monsoons, the Raikas of Barmer, Jaisalmer, Jodhpur and Bikaner stayed in their home villages, where pasture was available. By October, when these grazing grounds were dry and exhausted, they moved out in search of other pasture and water, and returned again during the Pad Sources A and B. > Write briefly about what they tell you about the nature of the work undertaken by men and women in pastoral households. > Why do you think pastoral groups often live on the edges of forests? next monsoon. One group of Raikas known as the Maru _ | Fig.6 - A camel herder in his settlement. This is on the Thar desert near Jaisalmer in Rajasthan. The camel herders of the region are Maru (desert) sheep and goat. Raikas, and their settlement is called a dhandi. (desert) Raikas herded camels and another group reared Reprint 2025-26 xo) = = = vu xo) lo) = Vu = ~ i= n w oe) lo) c=] a oO a ToT c= s e = lo) a = vu Y i= UO cP) i ~ Tc i= a] Be Tc & Fig. 7 A camel fair at Balotra in western Rajasthan. Camel herders come to the fair to sell and buy camels. The Maru Raikas also display their expertise in training their camels. Horses from Gujarat are also brought for sale at this fair. So we see that the life of these pastoral groups was sustained by a careful consideration of a host of factors. They had to judge how long the herds could stay in one area, and know where they could find water and pasture. They needed to calculate the timing of their movements, and ensure that they could move through different territories. They had to set up a relationship with farmers on the way, so that the herds could graze in harvested fields and manure the soil. They combined a range of different activities cultivation, trade, and herding to make their living. How did the life of pastoralists change under colonial rule? Fig.8 A camel fair