complex story of self-discovery that is humorously told. The narrator is a vain and foolish young man who in a moment of crisis realises that he is poor, foolish and stupid . The questions are designed to help the students notice the humour in the narration. % This unit has a formal, expository passage for dictation. Students should be encouraged to learn the spellings of unfamiliar words beforehand. The dictation of such passages also encourages the development of grammar in the students minds, as they recall complex language. % The Writing task is based on a sketch from a photograph that tells a story. Encourage the students to read the words given alongside the sketch. Let the students form pairs or groups to talk freely about the sketch before they start writing. y% A new kind of activity introduced in this lesson is to compare two translations of the beginning of a story. This activity suggests to the students that language is not fixed ; there are different ways of experiencing an idea, which also lead to small changes in the idea that is expressed. This activity should be done as a fun activity. 6. My CHILDHOOD i % The autobiographical account of childhood embodies the themes of harmony and prejudice, tradition and change. The questions guide the children to identify the instances of the themes. % A map reading activity is given in this unit. Students will find out the geographical location of Dhanushkodi and Rameswaram, and the languages spoken at that time by different communities. This & 44 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 will develop a critical understanding of how life and society in the deep south changed and developed over the years. Dhanuskodi and Rameswaram are on an island, the Pamban Island, off the Tamil Nadu coast. % The dictionary work encourages children to identify the contexts, literal and metaphorical, in which the given words occur. You may find other such words to add to the exercise. % The dictation exercise in this unit requires the rearrangement of jumbled paragraphs. Ideally this kind of dictation should be carried out with passages that the students have not seen before. The teacher dictates the three parts of the given passage, in random order, one to each group in class, for example part two first, then part three, and finally part one. The class has to share information in order to put the text together in the right order. This can be a class activity directed by the teacher. % The Speaking exercise includes an activity requiring students to ask other people for their opinion on the topic. Notes for the Teacher / 45 # Reprint 2025-26 % * 4, A Truly Beautiful Mind 0959CHO4 Before You READ Who do you think of, when you hear the word genius ? Who is a genius what qualities do you think a genius has? We shall now read about a young German civil servant who took the world by storm about a hundred