Notes for the Teacher Units 4-6 % . A TRULY BEAUTIFUL MIND ap The story of Einstein tries to show him as a human being, a fairly ordinary person who had his likes and dislikes, his streaks of rebellion, and his problems. The class can think about how a great person was perceived before being recognised as great : it is not as though great people are born with a special sign that allows us to recognise them instantly! What qualities in a person, then, make them a genius or a great person? You can take the help of a science teacher to explain Einstein s Theory of Relativity, to talk about Einstein, and build inter-subject cooperation. The exercise of matching headings to paragraphs in the lesson is useful for finding the topic sentence or to scan a paragraph for specific information. Students may be asked to provide a different heading if they feel some other point is equally important. Students should be guided to write a newspaper report. Note the points given below. Illustrate them by bringing examples from newspapers into the class, and ask students to bring their own examples. A report should have: 1. A headline 2. Name of the reporter e.g. By a Staff Reporter , etc. 3. Place, date, source (the source may also be given at the end of the report). The beginning is usually an expansion of the headline. The middle paragraph gives the details. It is followed by the conclusion or the summing up. The report should be brief, but the headline and the style should be eye-catching. Sometimes important points are given in a box in the centre of the report. Regarding the language of the reports: 1. passives for past action (for example: It is found..., ... has been unearthed.) Reprint 2025-26 2. present tense for statements (The document contains..., The manuscript describes...) % This unit has a passage for dictation, an anecdote. Dictation is an exercise that requires the individual participation of each student. It fosters unconscious thinking, and draws attention to language form. Students can also be given opportunities for self or peer correction after the dictation. Students should first read the passage silently, noticing the use of punctuation marks. The passage to be dictated should be read aloud twice in the class with proper intonation, and pauses between meaningful phrases. The passage is read a third time for students to check through. 5. THE SNAKE AND THE MIRROR ay % The Snake and the Mirror is a complex story of self-discovery that is humorously told. The narrator is a vain and foolish young man who in a moment of crisis realises that he is poor, foolish and stupid . The questions are designed to help the students notice the humour in the narration. % This unit has a formal, expository passage for dictation. Students should be encouraged to learn the spellings of unfamiliar words beforehand. The dictation of such passages also encourages the development of grammar in