Speaking exercise includes an activity requiring students to ask other people for their opinion on the topic. Notes for the Teacher / 45 # Reprint 2025-26 % * 4, A Truly Beautiful Mind 0959CHO4 Before You READ Who do you think of, when you hear the word genius ? Who is a genius what qualities do you think a genius has? We shall now read about a young German civil servant who took the world by storm about a hundred years ago. In the sumuner of 1905, the 26-year-old published in quick succession four ground-breaking papers: about light, the motion of particles, the electrodynamics of moving bodies, and energy. His work took up only a few pages in scientific journals, but changed forever our understanding of space, time and the entire cosmos and transformed the name Einsteim into a synonym for genius. Fifty years after his death, Albert Einstein s genius still reigns. ALBERT Einstein was born on 14 March 1879 in the German city of Ulm, without any indication that he was destined for greatness. On the contrary, his mother thought Albert was a freak. To her, his head seemed much too large. At the age of two-and-a-half, Einstein still wasn t talking. When he finally did learn to speak, he uttered everything twice. Einstein did not know what to do with other children, and his playmates called him Brother Boring. So the youngster played by himself Otto Neugebauer, the historian of ancient mathematics, told a story about the boy Einstein that he characterises as a legend , but that seems fairly authentic. As he was a late talker, his parents were worried. At last, at the supper table one night, he broke his silence to say, The soup is too hot. Greatly relieved, his parents asked why he had never said a word before. Albert replied, Because up to now everything was in order. Reprint 2025-26 freak: a word used disapprovingly to talk about a person who is unusual and doesn t behave, look or think like others much of the time. He especially loved mechanical toys. Looking at his newborn sister, Maja, he is said to have said: Fine, but where are her wheels? A headmaster once told his father that what Einstein chose as a profession wouldn t matter, because he'll never make a success at anything. Einstein began learning to play the violin at the age of six, because his mother wanted him to; he later became a gifted amateur violinist, maintaining amateur: doing this skill throughout his life. something for w But Albert Einstein was not a bad pupil. He went th er tha in A to high school in Munich, where Einstein s family profession had moved when he was 15 months old, and scored good marks in almost every subject. Einstein hated the school s regimentation, and often clashed with regimentation: order his teachers. At the age of 15, Einstein felt so stifled iscipline taken to there that he left the school