skill throughout his life. something for w But Albert Einstein was not a bad pupil. He went th er tha in A to high school in Munich, where Einstein s family profession had moved when he was 15 months old, and scored good marks in almost every subject. Einstein hated the school s regimentation, and often clashed with regimentation: order his teachers. At the age of 15, Einstein felt so stifled iscipline taken to there that he left the school for good. > to The previous year, Albert s parents had moved to j,eathe: suffocated Milan, and left their son with relatives. After prolonged discussion, Einstein got his wish to continue his education in German-speaking Switzerland, in a city which was more liberal than Munich. liberal: willing to Einstein was highly gifted in mathematics and Understand and : . : ee ps respect others interested in physics, and after finishing school, opinions he decided to study at a university in Zurich. But science wasn t the only thing that appealed to the dashing young man with the walrus moustache. Einstein in 1900 at the Einstein in 1955 as we age of 21. remember him now A Truly Beautiful Mind / 47 @ Reprint 2025-26 7. He also felt a special interest in a fellow student, Mileva Maric, whom he found to be a clever creature. This young Serb had come to Switzerland because the University in Zurich was one of the few in Europe where women could get degrees. Einstein saw in her an ally against the philistines those people in his family and at the university with whom he was constantly at odds. The couple fell in love. Letters survive in which they put their affection into words, mixing science with tenderness. Wrote Einstein: How happy and proud I shall be when we both have brought our work on relativity to a victorious conclusion. In 1900, at the age of 21, Albert Einstein was a university graduate and unemployed. He worked as a teaching assistant, gave private lessons and finally secured a job in 1902 as a technical expert in the patent office in Bern. While he was supposed to be assessing other people s inventions, Einstein was actually developing his own ideas in secret. He is said to have jokingly called his desk drawer at work the bureau of theoretical physics. One of the famous papers of 1905 was Einstein s Special Theory of Relativity, according to which time and distance are not absolute. Indeed, two perfectly accurate clocks will not continue to show the same time if they come together again after a journey if one of them has been moving very fast relative to the other. From this followed the world s most famous formula which describes the relationship between mass and energy: E = mc? (In this mathematical equation, E stands for energy, m for mass and c for the speed of the light in a vacuum (about 300,000 km/s). When you sit with a