fission in Berlin had American physicists in an uproar. Many of them had fled from Fascism, just as Einstein had, and now they were afraid the Nazis could build and use an atomic bomb. a * unravelling: starting to fail faltered: became weak deflected: changed direction because it hit something in an uproar. very upset ot A Truly Beautiful Mind / 49 # Reprint 2025-26 * & 15. At the urging of a colleague, Einstein wrote a letter to the American President, Franklin D. Roosevelt, on 2 August 1939, in which he warned: A single bomb of this type . . . exploded in a port, might very well destroy the whole port together with some of the surrounding territory. His words did not fail to have an effect. The Americans developed the atomic bomb in a secret project of their own, and dropped it on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945. 16. Einstein was deeply shaken by the extent of the destruction. This time he wrote a public missive to missive: letter, the United Nations. In it he proposed the formation sPecially long and of a world government. Unlike the letter to Roosevelt, eGsiat this one made no impact. But over the next decade, Einstein got ever more involved in politics agitating for an end to the arms buildup and using his popularity to campaign for peace and democracy. visionary: a person 17. When Einstein died in 1955 at the age of 76, he Who can think about was celebrated as a visionary and world citizen as orginal and much as a scientific genius. intelligent way & & Thinking about the Text 1. Here are some headings for paragraphs in the text. Write the number(s) of the paragraph(s) for each title against the heading. The first one is done for you. (i = Einstein s equation (ii) Einstein meets his future wife (iii) The making of a violinist (iv) Mileva and Einstein s mother A letter that launched the arms race (v. (vi) A desk drawer full of ideas JUUUUUE (vii) Marriage and divorce & 50 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 eNO oo Who had these opinions about Einstein? (i) He was boring. (ii) He was stupid and would never succeed in life. (iii) He was a freak. Explain what the reasons for the following are. (i) Einstein leaving the school in Munich for good. (ii) Einstein wanting to study in Switzerland rather than in Munich. (iii) Einstein seeing in Mileva an ally. (iv) What do these tell you about Einstein? What did Einstein call his desk drawer at the patent office? Why? Why did Einstein write a letter to Franklin Roosevelt? How did Einstein react to the bombing of Hiroshima and Nagasaki? Why does the world remember Einstein as a world citizen ? Here are some facts from Einstein s life. Arrange them in chronological order. [ ] Einstein publishes his special theory of relativity. [ ] He is awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics.