clocks will not continue to show the same time if they come together again after a journey if one of them has been moving very fast relative to the other. From this followed the world s most famous formula which describes the relationship between mass and energy: E = mc? (In this mathematical equation, E stands for energy, m for mass and c for the speed of the light in a vacuum (about 300,000 km/s). When you sit with a nice girl for two hours, it seems like two minutes. When you sit on a hot stove for two minutes, it seems like two hours that s relativity. ALBERT EINSTEIN * OK OK & 48 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 ally. a friend or an associate philistines: a word used disapprovingly to talk about people who do not like art, literature or music patent: a document which gives the rights of an invention to an inventor absolute: measured in itself, not in relation to anything else hl 10. 11. While Einstein was solving the most difficult problems in physics, his private life was unravelling. Albert had wanted to marry Mileva right after finishing his studies, but his mother was against it. She thought Mileva, who was three years older than her son, was too old for him. She was also bothered by Mileva s intelligence. She is a book like you, his mother said. Einstein put the wedding off. The pair finally married in January 1903, and had two sons. But a few years later, the marriage faltered. Mileva, meanwhile, was losing her intellectual ambition and becoming an unhappy housewife. After years of constant fighting, the couple finally divorced in 1919. Einstein married his cousin Elsa the same year. * OK OK 12.Einstein s new personal chapter coincided with his 13. 14. rise to world fame. In 1915, he had published his General Theory of Relativity, which provided a new interpretation of gravity. An eclipse of the sun in 1919 brought proof that it was accurate. Einstein had correctly calculated in advance the extent to which the light from fixed stars would be deflected through the sun s gravitational field. The newspapers proclaimed his work as a scientific revolution. Einstein received the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1921. He was showered with honours and invitations from all over the world, and lauded by the press. * OR OK When the Nazis came to power in Germany in 1933, Einstein emigrated to the United States. Five years later, the discovery of nuclear fission in Berlin had American physicists in an uproar. Many of them had fled from Fascism, just as Einstein had, and now they were afraid the Nazis could build and use an atomic bomb. a * unravelling: starting to fail faltered: became weak deflected: changed direction because it hit something in an uproar. very upset ot A Truly Beautiful Mind / 49 # Reprint 2025-26 * & 15. At the urging of a colleague, Einstein wrote a letter to the