an investigation where one condition is changed and other condition remains the same Condition that is kept the same: Condition that is changed Time taken for complete evaporation Other than the conditions you have explored to find how water can be made to evaporate faster or slower, you can also conduct Activity 8.8 to explore it further. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:12:08 PM Activity 8.8: Let us explore [EEE Take identical caps of two bottles. Pour equal amount of water in each of the cap. @ Place one of the cap in sunlight and keep the other in shade as shown in Fig. 8.6. @ Observe the two caps of bottles after every 15 minutes. Record the time taken for the water to completely evaporate in each case. You can also repeat this activity on a windy or a rainy day, and record your observations. Fig. 8.6: Evaporation of water in sunlight and in shade What conclusions can you draw from Activity 8.8 and other similar experiences? Water evaporates faster from the cap kept in sunlight compared to the cap kept in shade. It is a common observation that clothes dry faster on a hot sunny day. Do clothes dry faster or slower on a windy day? It is once again a common observation that clothes dry faster on a windy day. With the increase in the movement of air, water evaporates faster. A Journey through States of Water Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 8.indd 155 10/4/2024 3:12:09 PM It is also a common observation that clothes dry slowly on a rainy day. On a rainy day, water evaporates slowly. If the amount of water in the air is already high (more humidity), water evaporates slowly. If you want to dry your clothes on a rainy day, how can you make it faster? 8.6 Cooling Effect Aavi s mother purchased a new matka (earthen pot) to replace the stainless steel pot for storing drinking water. Upon returning from school, Aavi notices the earthen pot and drinks water from it. Aavi expresses surprise and asks, Why is the water in the earthen pot so cold? I never observed water getting cold in a stainless steel pot. What do you think is the reason? Now, Water seeps through the surface of the Teava madleesiend. earthen pot and evaporates, which imparts why we feel cooler if we sit \ a cooling effect on the water. What are the under a fan! The wind helps | other examples of cooling effect? Sprinkling the sweat to evaporate ~~ water on the floor or the roof during summer _ and cools us. to cool it, is another example. How do you feel when you rub sanitiser on your hands? Let us perform Activity 8.9 to observe the cooling effect by making a simple and electricity-free model of pot-in-pot cooler. Activity 8.9: Letus make a model = Take two earthen pots of different sizes. @ Fill the bottom of the larger pot with a layer of sand. @ Place the