A Journey through States of Water Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 8.indd 149 10/4/2024 3:12:05 PM from this? This activity shows that water is not seeping from the glass tumbler and the extra water is getting collected because of condensation. es 3 What are the Different States of Water? Water is a substance that can be observed in three different states in our daily life. In the solid state, it exists as ice. On heating, the ice melts and gets converted into its liquid state. On further heating, water gets converted into its gaseous state. Let us perform Activity 8.5 to identify the properties of different states of water. Activity 8.5: Let usidentify @ Put an ice cube in one container and transfer it to another container of different shape. What changes do you notice in the shape of the ice cube? Record your observations in Table 8.3. Pour water from one container to another container ofa different shape. Observe how water behaves compared to the ice cube and make a record. Did you notice how water flows from one container to the other? What happens to its shape? Pour water on a clean surface and observe how it spreads. @ When water gets converted into water vapour, how does this water vapour spread? Compare this with the spreading behaviour of water. Table 8.3: Compare different states of water as S S Water g Water vapour 3 Ice (Liquid (Gaseous S Property (Solid state) state) state) iS Shape a Ability to flow S Ability to spread Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 8.indd 150 10/4/2024 3:12:06 PM Chapter 8.indd 151 What are the differences in the properties of water in solid, liquid and gaseous states? Ice (solid state) retains its shape irrespective of the container in which it is placed while water takes the shape of the container. Ice does not flow or spread. Water (liquid state) flows and changes its shape. Water does not have a fixed shape. It takes up the shape of the container in which itis kept, but the volume of water remains constant. Does water also possess the property to spread? Yes, water also has the property to spread while keeping the volume constant. Water vapour (gaseous state) exhibits a property of spreading out in the entire available space. Gases do not possess a fixed shape. Water vapour exists even at room temperature; though it is invisible to us. It is present in the air around us. The water that evaporates during processes like drying of clothes or mopping of floors contribute to the water vapour in the air around us. You are now familiar with the three states of water. Some other substances also exhibit these states. For example, wax, oil and ghee. Let us look at some more examples of solids, liquids and gases. Look around and find some examples of solid substances. Some examples could be stones, wood and glass. What are the other examples of liquids you can think of? Here are two examples milk and