floors contribute to the water vapour in the air around us. You are now familiar with the three states of water. Some other substances also exhibit these states. For example, wax, oil and ghee. Let us look at some more examples of solids, liquids and gases. Look around and find some examples of solid substances. Some examples could be stones, wood and glass. What are the other examples of liquids you can think of? Here are two examples milk and oil. Think of five more examples. Have you ever noticed that you can smell the food being cooked even without entering the kitchen? How does this smell reach us? It is because the smell of yummy food from cooking spreads through the air and reaches our nostrils, even if we are not in the kitchen. What are the other examples of gases you can think of? What about oxygen and carbon dioxide? 8.4 How can We Change the States of Water? So far we have learnt that water can exist in solid, liquid and gaseous states. How can you change the state of water? Reprint 2025-26 A Journey through States of Water 10/4/2024 3:12:06 PM How can you quickly change ice to its liquid state, water? If we have to change ice into water, and water into water vapour, we have to supply heat to it. If we want to change Q water into ice, what should be done? It can be done by placing water in a cold environment, such as a freezer. Water freezes and is converted into ice. If we take the ice out of the freezer, it melts and is converted into water. Can you think of any other example, besides water, that can change from solid to liquid? A candle, which is made of wax, is one such example. How can we turn candle wax into liquid state? How can we change the liquid wax back into solid state? We should cool the liquid wax to change it into a solid. What are the other liquids you have seen which get converted into a solid? Have you ever seen coconut oil getting converted into its solid state during the winter season? Hence, we can see that water and other substances change their states on heating or cooling. The process of conversion of a solid into liquid state is called melting. The process of conversion of liquid into solid state is called freezing. Let us check the connection between different states of water through Activity 8.6. More to know! Activity 8.6: Let us complete the diagram LS Fill up the blank boxes in Fig. 8.5 marked as A, B, C and 1, 2, 3, 4 for conversion of different states of water using the words given in the box. Two words have been filled for you. Freezes, Evaporates, Gas, Condenses Fig. 8.5: Conversion of different states of water Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 8.indd 152 10/4/2024 3:12:07 PM mus 8.5