of the glass tumbler to Fig. 8.2: A glass tumbler containing . : wold water and ice cubes feel if there is any change. You may have many observations and questions here. Table 8.1: Record the observations and questions I observe I wonder One observation that arises in Aavi s mind is, There are some water droplets (tiny drops) appearing on the outer surface of the glass tumbler. Initially, water droplets are deposited and these droplets combine together to form bigger drops. You can also try the above process with a metal container. You may be curious about where the water droplets come from. Suggest possible reasons explaining the appearance of water droplets on the outer surface of the glass tumbler. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 8.indd 146 10/4/2024 3:11:31 PM Discuss with your friends. Write down the possible reasons in Fig. 8.3. May be ice has come out of the glass tumbler and melted. in he ( Fig. 8.3: Provide your possible reasons explaining the appearance of water droplets on the outer surface of the glass tumbler You may have various possible reasons. You may agree or disagree with the reasons of others. Aavi and Thirav argued with a chain of reasons. What do you think about the possible reasons mentioned in Fig. 8.4? I think that some of \ the water may have seeped out of the glass tumbler. == = No, it cannot seep out. The level of water in the glass tumbler has not decreased. It might have decreased, but may not be significant enough to be seen. = With a tall and narrow bottle, even a slight change in the level of water is noticeable. = We can take water at room temperature in another tumbler and find out whether any water seeps out. A Journey through States of Water Fig. 8.4: Chain of reasoning Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 8.indd 147 10/4/2024 3:11:57 PM Continue the discussion on the given reasons or conduct activities to find evidence for the reasons given to help in this discussion. Where else have you seen water droplets like this? You might have seen dew drops on plants. Why do we see dew drops more in the morning? When we boil the water in a half-filled utensil and cover it with a steel plate, some water drops accumulate on the inner side of the steel plate. Where do these water drops come from? What do you think? When the water vapour present in the air comes in contact with a cold surface, it forms water droplets. The process of conversion of water vapour into its liquid state is called condensation. After understanding the concept of condensation of water, let us go back to Activity 8.3. Could the water appearing on the outer surface of the glass tumbler in Activity 8.3 also be due to condensation of water vapour present in the air? Let us investigate it. Dew drops on plants Activity 8.4: Let us measure