comes in contact with a cold surface, it forms water droplets. The process of conversion of water vapour into its liquid state is called condensation. After understanding the concept of condensation of water, let us go back to Activity 8.3. Could the water appearing on the outer surface of the glass tumbler in Activity 8.3 also be due to condensation of water vapour present in the air? Let us investigate it. Dew drops on plants Activity 8.4: Let us measure eC Aavi and Thirav conduct an activity to find evidence for their reasons. You can also conduct the activity by following the steps given below. Record your data in Table 8.2. @ Takea glass tumbler half-filled with water containing a few ice cubes. Cover it with a small steel plate. Weigh it on a digital weighing balance. @ Observe the reading on the balance and record the weight after every five minutes. Continue observing for 30 minutes. Record your observations in Table 8.2. Predict what will happen to the mass of cold water kept on the digital weighing balance. Will it increase or decrease or remain the same? Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 8.indd 148 10/4/2024 3:12:01 PM Table 8.2: Measurement of mass in condensation experiment using a digital weighing balance Time Mass of water 0 min 5 min 10 min 15 min 20 min 25 min 30 min Do your findings match with your predictions? Explain your observations. You may observe some water droplets on the glass tumbler. Water vapour from the air comes in contact with the cold surface of the glass tumbler and gets converted into water droplets on the glass tumbler through condensation. There is an increase in the reading on the digital weighing balance. Can we conclude that water is not seeping through the wall of the tumbler? Can we also conclude that the water collected outside the tumbler is only due to condensation? No, we cannot say that conclusively from Activity 8.4. What more can you do to show that water is not seeping from the glass tumbler? How would you modify Activity 8.4 to find the answer? Repeat Activity 8.4 with the following modifications @ Mark the water level on the glass tumbler with a permanent marker or a visible tape. What do you observe? Water level in the glass tumbler does not go down but the extra water gets collected on the outer surface of the glass tumbler. What can you conclude More to do! ae A Journey through States of Water Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 8.indd 149 10/4/2024 3:12:05 PM from this? This activity shows that water is not seeping from the glass tumbler and the extra water is getting collected because of condensation. es 3 What are the Different States of Water? Water is a substance that can be observed in three different states in our daily life. In the solid state, it exists as ice. On heating, the ice melts and gets converted into