A Journey through States of Water ~ mh C ABEMSL YI FTP jw ForMILd FQHAS MS STSHHOST STH) Orig cor (AGSENM) If it does not rain well, even the mighty ocean will be drained. (Thirukkural) 3 9 ~ 0677CHo8 = 4 a On a bright summer afternoon, Aavi and Thirav enjoy their shikanji lemonade). After looking at the ice in the lemonade, Thirav wonders about the nature of ice and water. No, these are the same substances. Ice feels hard to touch and we can hold it in our hands, whereas, water cannot be held in the same way. So, they must be different substances. We can put water in the freezer of a refrigerator Yes, I know when water is left in the freezer, it gets and check if it gets converted into ice but converted probably something into ice. gets added to the ice in the freezer. Do you think Thirav is right? How can you find out? Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 8.indd 143 10/4/2024 3:11:15 PM Activity 8.1: Let us observe] @ Putanice cube ina cup, leave it on the table and observe. Ice gets converted into water. What can you conclude from the observations? Does this mean that ice and water are the same substance? Yes, ice and water are the two forms of the same substance. These forms are also called states. These different states of water show many differences in their behaviour. Water flows but ice does not. Water splashes but ice does not. ZT 8.) Investigating Water's Disappearing Act It is a rainy morning. While going to school, Aavi and Thirav observe that there are a lot of water puddles in the playground. That evening, when they go to play, they are surprised to observe that some of the water in the puddles had disappeared. Have you ever noticed water in the puddles disappearing? Where does it go? Discuss with I think the water has been absorbed by the soil on Where else have you seen water disappearing? Can you think of a possible reason why this happens? You might have observed that after washing the utensils, water left on the surface of the utensils, dries up after some time. Does the reason you thought earlier to explain water disappearance apply in this case also? Aavi wonders if water has seeped through the surface of the utensils. Thirav thinks that water does not seep through the surface of the utensils. Design an activity to investigate whose idea is correct. Activity 8.2: Let usinvestigate = Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 @ Take a tablespoon of water on a steel plate as shown in Fig. 8.1. Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 8.indd 144 10/4/2024 3:11:19 PM Observe whether water seeps through to the other side of the plate or not. @ Keep observing this at regular intervals until the water completely disappears. What do you infer? Is this activity enough to come to the conclusion that water does not seep through a steel plate? If