Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 @ Take a tablespoon of water on a steel plate as shown in Fig. 8.1. Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 8.indd 144 10/4/2024 3:11:19 PM Observe whether water seeps through to the other side of the plate or not. @ Keep observing this at regular intervals until the water completely disappears. What do you infer? Is this activity enough to come to the conclusion that water does not seep through a steel plate? If water does not seep through the steel plate. Then, where has the water gone? This water gets converted into gaseous state called water vapour. The water vapour is another state of water. Let us think of another observation where you notice the water disappearing. While making dosa, we sprinkle some water on the hot pan and it disappears. Where does it go? Fig. 8.1: Steel plate with a tablespoon of water Let us draw Draw a detailed sketch (with labels and caption) about what happens to the water. The water which is sprinkled on the hot pan gets converted into steam. Steam is actually water vapour, some part of which converts into water droplets. The process of conversion of water into its vapour state is called evaporation. The process of evaporation takes place continuously, even at room temperature. Can you think of other examples of evaporation? Drying of wet clothes, mopped floor, and sweat on our body are some examples of it. Nowwhat do you thinkis the reason for the disappearance of water from the puddles? Is it due to: (i) seeping of water into the ground or (ii) evaporation of water or (iii) both of these? Hand sanitiser disappears as you rub it on your hands. What happens to it? Do you know? A Journey through States of Water Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 8.indd 145 10/4/2024 3:11:29 PM es . 2 Another Mystery Next day, Aavi, Thirav and their friends decide to make lemonade. During the preparation, they take cold water ina glass tumbler and add ice cubes into it. After a few minutes, they notice something exciting about the outer surface of the glass tumbler. Let us find out by conducting a similar activity ourselves. Activity 8.3:Letusexperiment = @ Take cold water in a glass tumbler. @ Adda few ice cubes into it as shown in Fig. 8.2. @ Leave it undisturbed for five minutes and observe it. Record your observations and the questions that arise in your mind in Table 8.1. You can also touch the outer surface of the glass tumbler to Fig. 8.2: A glass tumbler containing . : wold water and ice cubes feel if there is any change. You may have many observations and questions here. Table 8.1: Record the observations and questions I observe I wonder One observation that arises in Aavi s mind is, There are some water droplets (tiny drops) appearing on the outer surface of the glass tumbler. Initially, water droplets are deposited and these droplets combine together to form