what we call rain. Large pot Lid A Journey through States of Water X N Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 8.indd 157 10/4/2024 3:12:23 PM Under special conditions, it might also fall as hail or snow. Aavi enjoys the rain and creates a poem. You can complete the poem and present it in your class. I wonder, oh! I wonder so, : Which path does water choose to go? xy a I wonder, oh! I wonder so, aii When does it snow? I wonder, oh! I got a wonder call, How does rain fall? Activity 8.10 demonstrates the role of dust particles in the formation of clouds. fy Activity 8.10: Let us engage ina group activity =e @ Take an empty discarded one litre plastic bottle. Pour Caution about one cup of water into it. Handle burning Close the lid tightly. Now quickly squeeze and release paper carefully. the bottle continuously for about 2-3 minutes. Observe the space above the water in the bottle. @ Repeat the same activity after adding a small burnt piece of newspaper into the water. @ What will you observe? @ In this case, you will observe some haziness (clouds) above the water in the bottle. @ Theburnt newspaper provides very small invisible dust particles, around which water vapour condenses and forms clouds. Let us perform Activity 8.11 to represent our understanding of how water changes its state and its movement. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 8.indd 158 10/4/2024 3:12:25 PM Activity 8.11: Let us understand the process Se Label Fig. 8.9 using arrows shown and the words given in the box to show where water is stored, how water changes its state and where it moves. Cloud, Lake, Ocean, River, Groundwater, Evaporation, Condensation, Rain, Snow What did I do well? Fig. 8.9: Change of states and movement of water Was I able to label all The water from the ocean and the Earth s Parts of the water surface evaporates into the atmosphere as eydlet Which)partsiof vapour and returns as rain, hail or snow, "@ Water cycle were ? ultimately flowing back to the oceans. unclear to me? e This circulation of water is known as the water cycle. Only a small portion of water available on the Earth is fit for use by plants, animals and humans. Most of the water is in the oceans and it cannot be used directly. We use water for drinking and also for many other activities. The number of people using water is increasing with a rise in population. The increasing demand for water causes its shortage in many parts of the world. Hence, it is very important to use water wisely and avoid wasting it. Let us keep our water bodies free from pollution. You will learn more about water and its conservation in the chapter Nature s Treasures . A Journey through States of Water 3 ] Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 8.indd 159 10/4/2024 3:12:26 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science |