water on the floor or the roof during summer _ and cools us. to cool it, is another example. How do you feel when you rub sanitiser on your hands? Let us perform Activity 8.9 to observe the cooling effect by making a simple and electricity-free model of pot-in-pot cooler. Activity 8.9: Letus make a model = Take two earthen pots of different sizes. @ Fill the bottom of the larger pot with a layer of sand. @ Place the smaller pot into the centre of the larger one as shown in Fig. 8.7. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 @ Fill the gap between the pots with more sand. Pour water in the sand area. e Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 8.indd 156 10/4/2024 3:12:16 PM Small pot @ Place a lid or wet jute / 7x as wer jure sack to cover the top of . sack the smaller pot. w es Layer of sand Youcan also make a drawing of the pot-in-pot cooler once it is ready. Fig. 8.7: A pot-in-pot cooler Allow 4-5 hours for the mini pot-in-pot cooler to cool down. The time range can be influenced by many conditions. Observe and discuss how it creates a cooling effect inside the pots. Keep some vegetables and fruits in it and observe for a week on a daily basis to check for the freshness of the vegetables and fruits kept inside the cooler. You will have to add water regularly to keep the sand moist. For how many days can the vegetables and fruits be kept fresh in it? What are the conditions which can affect the number of these days? What else can be used in place of sand for better cooling? You all may be familiar with this unique clay pot which is called Surahi (Fig. 8.8). In summers, surahi is used to keep the water cold. Fig. 8.8: A surahi mum 8.7 How Do Clouds Give Us Rain? Condensation plays a significant role in the process of bringing evaporated water back to the Earth s surface. How does this happen? When air moves higher above the _ Earth s surface, it becomes cooler and cooler. At certain heights, the air gets so cool that the water vapour in it turns into droplets which are generally formed around dust particles. These small droplets float in the air and form clouds. Many droplets join together to form bigger drops of water. Some drops get so heavy that they start falling. These falling water drops are what we call rain. Large pot Lid A Journey through States of Water X N Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 8.indd 157 10/4/2024 3:12:23 PM Under special conditions, it might also fall as hail or snow. Aavi enjoys the rain and creates a poem. You can complete the poem and present it in your class. I wonder, oh! I wonder so, : Which path does water choose to go? xy a I wonder, oh! I wonder so, aii When does it snow?