increasing with a rise in population. The increasing demand for water causes its shortage in many parts of the world. Hence, it is very important to use water wisely and avoid wasting it. Let us keep our water bodies free from pollution. You will learn more about water and its conservation in the chapter Nature s Treasures . A Journey through States of Water 3 ] Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 8.indd 159 10/4/2024 3:12:26 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 8.indd 160 The process of conversion of water into its vapour state is called evaporation. The process of conversion of water vapour into its liquid state is called condensation. Water is found in different states solid, liquid and gas. Water changes its state on heating or cooling. Conditions which make the evaporation faster or slower are exposed area, humidity, air movement, etc. Evaporation causes cooling effect. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:12:35 PM Chapter 8.indd 161 The water vapour in the air condenses to form tiny droplets of water, which appear as clouds. Many tiny water droplets come together and fall down as rain, hail or snow. The circulation of water between the Earth surface and atmosphere is known as the water cycle. We have used the process of observation, questioning, possible reason and experimenting to find out the concepts of evaporation and condensation. Let us enhance our learning Which of the following best describes condensation? (i) The conversion of water into its vapour state. (ii) The process of water changing from a liquid into gaseous state. (iii) The formation of clouds from tiny water droplets. (iv) The conversion of water vapour into its liquid state. Identify in which of the given processes, evaporation is very important (i) Colouring with (a) crayons (b) water colours (c) acryliccolours (d) pencil colours (ii) Writing on paper with (a) pencil (b) ink pen (c) ball point pen We see green coloured plastic grass at many places these days. Space around natural grass feels cooler than space around the plastic grass. Can you find out why? Give examples of liquids other than water that evaporate. Fans move air around, creating a cooling sensation. It might seem strange to use a fan to dry wet clothes since fans usually make things cooler, not warmer. Normally, when water evaporates, it requires heat, not cold air. What do you think about this? Usually, when sludge is removed from drains, it is left in heaps next to the drain for 3-4 days. Afterward, it is transported to a garden or a field where it can be used as Reprint 2025-26 A Journey through States of Water 10/4/2024 3:12:36 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 8.indd 162 manure. This approach reduces transportation cost of the sludge and enhances the safety of individuals handling it. Reflect upon it and explain how. Observe the activities in your house for a day. Identify the activities that involve evaporation. How does understanding the process of evaporation help us