greater? The guru or the disciple? Of course, the guru. No doubt about it. Why do you ask? Then put me to the stake first. Put my disciple to death after me. yy ere ar selenite, ey Su 24 / Moments Py * . @ ee Ei fg: Reprint 2025-26 DOT: When the disciple heard this, he understood and began to clamour, Me first! You brought me here first! Put me to death first, not him! The guru and the disciple now got into a fight about who should go first. The king was puzzled by this behaviour. He asked the guru, Why do you want to die? We chose him because we needed a fat man for the stake. You shouldn t ask me such questions. Put me to death first, replied the guru. Why? There s some mystery here. As a wise man you must make me understand. Will you promise to put me to death if I tell you? asked the guru. The king gave him his solemn word. The guru took him aside, out of the servants earshot, and whispered to him, Do you know why we want to die right now, the two of us? We ve been all over the world but we ve never found a city like this or a king like you. That stake is the stake of the god of justice. It s new, it has never had a criminal on it. Whoever dies on it first will be reborn as the king of this country. And whoever goes next will be the future minister of this country. We re sick of our ascetic life. It would be nice to enjoy ourselves as king and minister for a while. Now keep your word, My Lord, and put us to death. Me first, remember? The king was now thrown into deep thought. He didn t want to lose the kingdom to someone else in the next round of life. He needed time. So he ordered the execution postponed to the next day and talked in secret with his minister. It s not right for us to give over the kingdom to others in the next life. Let s go on the stake ourselves and we'll be reborn as king and minister again. Holy men do not tell lies, he said, and the minister agreed. So he told the executioners, We'll send the criminals tonight. When the first man comes to you, put him to death first. Then do the same to the second man. Those are my orders. Don t make any mistake. That night, the king and his minister went secretly to the prison, released the guru and the disciple, disguised themselves as the two, and as arranged beforehand with loyal servants, were taken to the stake and promptly executed. In the Kingdom of Fools/ 25 fad disee Ww a SF 5 My soe Reprint 2025-26 When the bodies were taken down to be thrown to crows and vultures the