the second man. Those are my orders. Don t make any mistake. That night, the king and his minister went secretly to the prison, released the guru and the disciple, disguised themselves as the two, and as arranged beforehand with loyal servants, were taken to the stake and promptly executed. In the Kingdom of Fools/ 25 fad disee Ww a SF 5 My soe Reprint 2025-26 When the bodies were taken down to be thrown to crows and vultures the people panicked. They saw before them the dead bodies of the king and the minister. The city was in confusion. All night they mourned and discussed the future of the kingdom. Some people suddenly thought of the guru and the disciple and caught up with them as they were preparing to leave town unnoticed. We people need a king and a minister, said someone. Others agreed. They begged the guru and the disciple to be their king and their minister. It didn t take many arguments to persuade the disciple, but it took longer to persuade the guru. They finally agreed to rule the kingdom of the foolish king and the silly minister, on the condition that they could change all the old laws. From then on, night would again be night and day would again be day, and you could get nothing for a duddu. It became like any other place. [A Kannada folktale from A.K. Ramanujan s Folk Tales from India] 26 / Moments Reprint 2025-26 wees eee Glossary bailiff: a law officer who makes sure that the decisions of a court are obeyed scrape: a difficult situation that one has got into 2 Tank Asour Ir 1. What are the two strange things the guru and his disciple find in the Kingdom of Fools? 2. Why does the disciple decide to stay in the Kingdom of Fools? Is it a good idea? 3. Name all the people who are tried in the king s court, and give the reasons for their trial. 4. Who is the real culprit according to the king? Why does he escape punishment? 5. What are the Guru s words of wisdom? When does the disciple remember them? 6. How does the guru manage to save his disciple s life? wae Tai Asvour It In Shakespeare s plays the fool is not really foolish. If you have read or seen Shakespeare s plays such as King Lear, As You Like It, Twelfth Night, you may talk about the role of the fool. Do you know any stories in your language about wise fools, such as Tenali Rama or Gopal Bhar? You can also read about them in Ramanujan s collection of folk tales. BME Suecesren Reanine e Tales from Shakespeare by Charles and Mary Lamb e Folk Tales from India: A Selection of Oral Tales from Twentytwo Languages Selected and Edited by A.K. Ramanujan e Classic Folk Tales from Around the World Edited by Robert Nye h In the Kingdom of Fools/ 27