is not easy to judge such complicated cases. Let s get that dancer, wherever she is. The dancing girl, now an old woman, came trembling to the court. Did you walk up and down that street many years ago, while this poor man was building a wall? Did you see him? Yes, My Lord, I remember it very well. So you did walk up and down, with your anklets jingling. You were young and you distracted him, so he built a bad wall. In the Kingdom of Fools/ 21 fad disee Ww a SF 5 My soe Reprint 2025-26 22 / Moments It has fallen on a poor burglar and killed him. You've killed an innocent man. You'll have to be punished. She thought for a minute and said, My Lord, wait. I know now why I was walking up and down that street. I had given some gold to the goldsmith to make some jewellery for me. He was a lazy scoundrel. He made so many excuses, said he would give it now and he would give it then and so on all day. He made me walk up and down to his house a dozen times. That was when this bricklayer saw me. It s not my fault, My Lord, it s the damned goldsmith s fault. Poor thing, she s absolutely right, thought the king, weighing the evidence. We've got the real culprit at last. Get the goldsmith, wherever he is hiding. At once! The king s bailiffs searched for the goldsmith, who was hiding in a corner of his shop. When he heard the accusation against him, he had his own story to tell. My Lord, he said, I m a poor goldsmith. It s true I made this dancer come many times to my door. I gave her excuses because I couldn t finish making her jewellery before I finished the rich merchant s orders. They had a wedding coming, and they wouldn t wait. You know how impatient rich men are! Who is this rich merchant who kept you from finishing this poor woman s jewellery, made her walk up and down, which distracted this bricklayer, which made a mess of his wall, which has now Reprint 2025-26 et ae tn fallen on an innocent man and killed him? & Can you name him? The goldsmith named the merchant, and he was none other than the original owner of the house whose wall had fallen. Now justice had come full circle, thought the king, back to the merchant. When he was rudely summoned back to the court, he arrived crying, It wasn t me but my father who ordered the jewellery! He s dead! I m innocent! But the king consulted his minister and ruled decisively: It s true your father is the true murderer. He s dead, but somebody must be punished in his place. You ve inherited everything from that criminal father of yours, his riches as well as his sins. I