4, In the Kingdom of Fools 0960CH04 It is believed that fools are so dangerous that only very wise people can manage them. Who are the fools in this story? What happens to them? In the Kingdom of Fools, both the king and the minister were idiots. They didn t want to run things like other kings, so they decided to change night into day and day into night. They ordered that everyone should be awake at night, till their fields and run their businesses only after dark, and go to bed as soon as the sun came up. Anyone who disobeyed would be punished with death. The people did as they were told for fear of death. The king and the minister were delighted at the success of their project. One day a guru and his disciple arrived in the city. It was a beautiful city, it was broad daylight, but there was no one about. Everyone was asleep, not a mouse stirring. Even the cattle had been taught to sleep by day. The two strangers were amazed by what they saw around them and wandered around town till evening, when suddenly the whole town woke up and went about its nightly business. The two men were hungry. Now that the shops were open, they went to buy some groceries. To their astonishment, they found that everything cost the same, a single duddu whether they bought a measure of rice or a bunch of bananas, it cost a duddu. The guru and his disciple were delighted. They had never heard of anything like this. They could buy all the food they wanted for a rupee. When they had cooked and eaten, the guru realised that this was a kingdom of fools and it wouldn't be a good idea for them to stay there. This is no place for us. Let s go, he said to his disciple. But the disciple didn t want to leave the place. Everything was cheap here. All he wanted was good, cheap food. The guru said, Reprint 2025-26 They are all fools. This won't last very long, and you can t tell what they'll do to you next. But the disciple wouldn't listen to the guru s wisdom. He wanted to stay. The guru finally gave up and said, Do what you want. I m going, and left. The disciple stayed on, ate his fill every day bananas and ghee and rice and wheat, and grew fat like a street-side sacred bull. One bright day, a thief broke into a rich merchant s house. He had made a hole in the wall and sneaked in, and as he was carrying out his loot, the wall of the old house collapsed on his head and killed him on the spot. His brother ran to the king and complained, Your Highness, when my brother was pursuing his ancient trade, a wall fell on him and killed him. This merchant is to blame. He should have built