day, a thief broke into a rich merchant s house. He had made a hole in the wall and sneaked in, and as he was carrying out his loot, the wall of the old house collapsed on his head and killed him on the spot. His brother ran to the king and complained, Your Highness, when my brother was pursuing his ancient trade, a wall fell on him and killed him. This merchant is to blame. He should have built a good, strong wall. You must | punish the wrongdoer and compensate the family [| for this injustice. The king said, Justice will be done. Don t worry, and at once summoned the owner of the house. 20 / Moments Reprint 2025-26 When the merchant arrived, the king questioned him. What s your name? Such and Such, Your Highness. Were you at home when the dead man burgled your house? Yes, My Lord. He broke in and the wall was weak. It fell on him. The accused pleads guilty. Your wall killed this man s brother. You have murdered a man. We have to punish you. Lord, said the helpless merchant, I didn t put up the wall. It s really the fault of the man who built the wall. He didn t build it right. You should punish him. Who is that? My Lord, this wall was built in my father s time. I know the man. He s an old man now. He lives nearby. The king sent out messengers to bring in the bricklayer who had built the wall. They brought him, tied hand and foot. You there, did you build this man s wall in his father s time? Yes, My Lord, I did. What kind of a wall is this that you built? It has fallen on a poor man and killed him. You ve murdered him. We have to punish you by death. Before the king could order the execution, the poor bricklayer pleaded, Please listen to me before you give your orders. It s true I built this wall and it was no good. But that was because my mind was not on it. I remember very well a dancing girl who was going up and down that street all day with her anklets jingling, and I couldn t keep my eyes or my mind on the wall I was building. You must get that dancing girl. I know where she lives. You're right. The case deepens. We must look into it. It is not easy to judge such complicated cases. Let s get that dancer, wherever she is. The dancing girl, now an old woman, came trembling to the court. Did you walk up and down that street many years ago, while this poor man was building a wall? Did you see him? Yes, My Lord, I remember it very well. So you did walk up and down, with your anklets jingling. You were young and you distracted him, so he built