back to the merchant. When he was rudely summoned back to the court, he arrived crying, It wasn t me but my father who ordered the jewellery! He s dead! I m innocent! But the king consulted his minister and ruled decisively: It s true your father is the true murderer. He s dead, but somebody must be punished in his place. You ve inherited everything from that criminal father of yours, his riches as well as his sins. I knew at once, even when I first set eyes on you, that you were at the root of this horrible crime. You must die. And he ordered a new stake to be made ready for the execution. As the servants sharpened the stake and got it ready for the final impaling of the criminal, it occurred to the minister that the rich merchant was somehow too thin to be properly executed on the stake. He appealed to the king s common sense. The king too worried about it. What shall we do? he said, when suddenly it struck him that all they needed to do was to find a man fat enough to fit the stake. The servants were immediately sent all over the town looking for a man who would fit the stake, and their eyes fell on the disciple who had fattened himself for months on bananas and rice and wheat and ghee. i In the Kingdom of Fools/ 23 ys C5 OP ayo% Reprint 2025-26 What have I done wrong? I m innocent. I m a sanyasi! he cried. That may be true. But it s the royal decree that we should find a man fat enough to fit the stake, they said, and carried him to the place of execution. He remembered his wise guru s words: This is a city of fools. You don t know what they will do next. While he was waiting for death, he prayed to his guru in his heart, asking him to hear his cry wherever he was. The guru saw everything in a vision; he had magic powers, he could see far, and he could see the future as he could see the present and the past. He arrived at once to save his disciple, who had got himself into such a scrape through love of food. As soon as he arrived, he scolded the disciple and told him something in a whisper. Then he went to the king and addressed him, O wisest of kings, who is greater? The guru or the disciple? Of course, the guru. No doubt about it. Why do you ask? Then put me to the stake first. Put my disciple to death after me. yy ere ar selenite, ey Su 24 / Moments Py * . @ ee Ei fg: Reprint 2025-26 DOT: When the disciple heard this, he understood and began to clamour, Me first! You brought me here first! Put me to death first, not him! The guru and the