run so that they run out of breath. They continue to play till the evening when the blue sky turns and the trees are not clearly visible. They can feel their feet I I now that it is cold. Finally, they stop and go home as it is night. Let us think and reflect I Read the given lines and answer the questions that follow. 1. Werunso fast I can t even catch my breath. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 4.indd 117 05-Dec-24 3:59:56 PM Poorvi GRabDE 6 (i) Complete the sentence given below with the correct option. The speaker needs to catch her breath because . everyone decides to walk . all the friends wish to go home Ow LS . running fast results in being breathless o . they need to do breathing exercises (ii) Is the speaker alone? Why do you say so? (iii) What does the pattern in the lines tell us? 2. When blue dark turns to black, cold grass aches our feet, trees creep close game s over. Night wins! (i) Give one reason why the grass is cold. (ii) Complete the sentence suitably. The children s feet are aching because_ (iii) Why does Night win? Night wins because the A. time for play has ended B. children are tired C. time to play at home begins D. night follows day . Let us learn 1. Read the information given in the table and see what the poet has done in the poem The Winner . Reprint 2025-26 Unit 4.indd 118 05-Dec-24 3:59:56 PM Unit 4.indd 119 SPORTS AND WELLNESS a6 . What the poet has done Other examples I This tells us that the The leaves are can t children are really out of | falling, even breath. The pattern is used falling, catch to highlight them being falling. my out of breath. breath Night wins! The poet has used human _| The sun played hide-and-seek qualities for inanimate with the clouds. things. Here, night has been shown as winning. This is called personification. Now, try to write some examples of your own for both. Use your imagination when creating these examples. . The poet has talked about a creek in the poem. You now know that creek is a water body. Complete the word web given below by writing which other water bodies you can think of. Discuss with your teacher. water bodies Let us listen Listen to the riddles and write which sport is being referred to in the table below. Riddle 1 | 2 | 3 | 4 | Sport Reprint 2025-26 oe a 05-Dec-24 3:59:56 PM | Poorvi GRabDE 6 Riddle 1 Run and pass, run and pass Kick a black and white ball Kick it straight into the goal Watch for mud don t fall. What sport am I? Riddle 2 Hold your breath, say Hu-tu-tu, till you touch one or two. Take care to keep a distance wide As you run back to your team s side. Which sport