forgot to get Simran s Art file to school. . You are Kriti You spoke rudely to Nupur. rn nan FF WwW . You are Mohan You wish to thank Hitesh for helping you practice for the Inter-House speech competition. Reprint 2025-26 Yi Unit 4.indd 111 05-Dec-24 3:59:52 PM | Poorvi GRabDE 6 7. You are Meher You are grateful that Simran helped you understand a chapter taught at school when you were absent. 8. You are Rima You are thankful to Gita for helping you collect the notebooks from the staff-room. * Could you please ... * Please can you help me with... Kindly , please. For rude behaviour For a mistake I m very sorry for the way I behaved. I m sorry, that was my fault. * I apologise. I was out of line. For being grateful/thankful Thank you. It means so much to me that you... * I truly appreciate your help with ... Thank you. * I wish to thank you from the bottom of my heart because you ... oe Is SE =~ Let us write Prabhat managed to change the scoreboard while Surya was looking elsewhere. Yet, he did not feel so happy that night. Unable to sleep, he decided to write down his feelings in his diary. Given below is the page where he wrote his feelings that night. Complete it with the help of the phrases given in the box below. I won the match I do not feel happy about it Iwill lose the match I managed to change the scoreboard I felt very happy Everyone congratulated me after my win Surya did not feel bad He had fun playing with me Reprint 2025-26 Unit 4.indd 112 05-Dec-24 3:59:52 PM Unit 4.indd 113 SPORTS AND WELLNESS Saturday 17 August 20XX 8:00 p.m. Today, I defeated Surya in a badminton match but 1. . He was playing very well and was getting the points easily. I was sure that 2. . So, when everyone was laughing at a joke he cracked, 3. . No one noticed the change and 4. . What surprised me the most was that he said 5. and we should play again. How could he be so relaxed after losing a match? He should have been sad if not crying over his loss! Though 6. , 1 did not enjoy as I usually do. It really disturbed me that 7. about losing the match. It is still bothering me. Is it because I changed the score? I do not understand myself. Let me sleep now. I feel that it may make me feel better. Goodnight! . Let us explore . Read the following brief bio-sketches of sportspersons from India. Deepika Kumari Archer from Jharkhand Father, an auto-rickshaw driver and mother, a nurse Practised archery while aiming for mangoes with stones Practised archery with homemade bamboo bows and arrows * Joined Tata Archery Academy Won a gold medal in the 2010 Commonwealth Games Deepika Kumari Reprint 2025-26 T