yoga . The next word must then begin with the letter a . This activity will go on and the whole class will participate and write the words on the blackboard. How many new words have you learnt? Yoga is a physical, mental, and spiritual practice that originated in ancient India. The word originated: Yoga comes from the Sanskrit root yuj , which _ started means to join or to unite . This symbolises the unity of mind and body; thought and action; harmony between human and nature. It is a harmony: holistic approach to health and well-being. balance Sage Patanjali presented the ancient tradition of yoga in a systematic way in Yoga Sutras of Patanjali . He described yoga as the means to make the mind quiet and free from all distractions. AieTenOne: Yoga has become increasingly popular disturbances around the world due to its many health benefits. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 4.indd 122 05-Dec-24 3:59:57 PM SPORTS AND WELLNESS Here are some of the benefits of yoga Yoga postures (asanas) help to stretch and strengthen the muscles, increase flexibility, endurance and balance. This can improve endurance: overall physical fitness. This can also help to capacity to reduce body pains, such as lower back pain. Comtmue _ . . . without giving * Yoga involves breathing techniques and yp meditation, which can help to calm the mind and reduce stress and anxiety. It relaxes anxiety: the mind, improves the quality of sleep and worry increases concentration. Yoga has been shown to boost the immune boost: system. It can improve heart health by increase lowering blood pressure and improving circulation. Yoga can aid in weight loss by burning calories, and maintaining health. Yoga promotes a sense of overall well-being. Wa This is the reason why the benefits of practising \ VY } yoga are internationally recognised. The World ee, (Z. Health Organisation (WHO) on 20 June 2021, launched an App called WHO mYoga. The app contains a collection of videos and audio files to teach and support yoga practice. The aim was to have an easy-to-use and free tool for people across the world to encourage them to practise yoga. We can start practising yoga at any given moment of time. We must remember that when we practise yoga asanas (postures), we do not just stretch the body. The mind has to be with the body. This is the reason why it should be practised without distractions. If each stretch is coordinated with the breath and awareness, our practice will become a yogic practise. WHO mYOGA Reprint 2025-26 i Unit 4.indd 123 26-Mar-25 9:48:25 AM | Poorvi GRabDE 6 Hala CASAL ATHOTTTT 118 8 hathasya prathamangatvadasanam purvamuchyate kuryattadasanam sthairyamarogyam changalaghavam Being the first accessory of Hatha-Yoga, asana is described first. It should be practised for gaining steady posture, health and weightlessness of body. Source: Hatha Yoga Pradipika Let us discuss Read the passage again and fill in the blanks with words from the box. Yoga is a practise that not only