and cracking jokes about all sorts of things. But on Friday, atthe badminton phenomenon: court, Surya was a real phenomenon. He won = someone who points again and again, laughing and joking all 2s special the time. However, Surya was paying so little 4"*s attention to the match that Prabhat managed to change the scoreboard while his opponent was looking elsewhere. Prabhat managed to win by cheating. He made a big thing of his win, but it did not matter to Surya. It s been fun. We should play again some other time, said Surya. Reprint 2025-26 N \ o Unit 4.indd 105 05-Dec-24 3:59:51 PM| Poorvi GRabDE 6 Let us discuss 1. State whether the following is True or False. Prabhat would accept losing to anyone easily. a, 2. What was special about the last Friday of each month? 3. Who was responsible for maintaining the score for the match? 4. Do you think Prabhat wished to play another match with Surya? Why do you think so? Il On that day, everyone was discussing their game and how Prabhat had played so well. Surprisingly, Prabhat could not sleep well that night. He had won the game but he did not feel as happy as he usually did. What was surprising was that Surya did not feel bad about losing. What was more surprising was that Prabhat saw Unit 4.indd 106 05-Dec-24 3:59:52 PM SPORTS AND WELLNESS Surya playing basketball the next day. Surya was so hopeless at it that he could not score a basket for ten minutes. Yet, he enjoyed playing the game. His happy smile never left his face. Prabhat kept a close watch on Surya for some days. He was great at some things, terrible at others but what was common was the enjoyment. He enjoyed everything equally. As Prabhat went on with his observation, he realised that to enjoy a game, you did not need a scoreboard to keep a tally of your scores. Neither did you have to worry about winning nor losing. You needed to enjoy the game for its own sake. What matters is trying to do well, and enjoying every moment of it. Prabhat learnt something through the observations every day, soon realising the change in himself. He had even begun playing hide and seek, and felt sad whenever it was about to end. He also started joking while playing badminton. Soon, the other students started talking amongst themselves, Good fun playing with Prabhat, that fellow definitely has a great sporting spirit. Let us discuss 1. How did Surya feel about playing? 2. What was it about Surya that Prabhat observed? Reprint 2025-26 ye Unit 4.indd 107 05-Dec-24 3:59:52 PM| Poorvi GRabDE 6 o> ot Let us think and reflect I Read the lines given below and answer the questions. 1. If Prabhat sensed that he would lose a game, he would not play it. He would take part only when he was sure of winning, even if the game lasted