| 2 | 3 | 4 | Sport Reprint 2025-26 oe a 05-Dec-24 3:59:56 PM | Poorvi GRabDE 6 Riddle 1 Run and pass, run and pass Kick a black and white ball Kick it straight into the goal Watch for mud don t fall. What sport am I? Riddle 2 Hold your breath, say Hu-tu-tu, till you touch one or two. Take care to keep a distance wide As you run back to your team s side. Which sport am I? Riddle 3 In the water, hold your breath, The water is very cool, Arms turn, legs kick In the blue pool. Which sport am I? Riddle 4 Breathe in, breathe out! Practise every day just right, You will be healthy and fit Get energy and grow in might. What am I? Try to create a riddle about your favourite game/sport/activity. Share your riddles with your classmates. Let s see who all are able to guess it right. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 4.indd 120 05-Dec-24 3:59:56 PM SPORTS AND WELLNESS Let us speak Enact the roles of a parent and a child. Situation 1: Coming home late after play. (Parent upset/Child explaining) Situation 2: Sharing details of the games you played. (Child excited/Parent asking details with interest) Situation 3: Bring a new friend home after playtime. (Child introducing/Parent welcoming) Let us write Write a paragraph about your playtime, using the clues given below. What time do I go out to play? Who do I play with? What games do we play? Which is my favourite game? What do we gain from playing together? When do we finish playing and go home? Now, give a title to your paragraph. oz - Let us explore There are many indigenous games in India. Kho-kho is an example of an indigenous game. Indigenous games are native to a region. Find out some native games of your state and other parts of India. Learn the rules of one such game and play it with your classmates under the supervision of your teacher. Reprint 2025-26 Yi Unit 4.indd 121 05-Dec-24 3:59:56 PM| Poorvi GRabDE 6 Yoca A Way oF LIFE Let us do these activities before we read. 1. What do you know about yoga? Discuss in pairs and share with the whole class. 2. What is 21st June known for? What do we do on this day? 3. List as many words you know related to g yoga. Share them with your classmates. 4. Let us play the game of Antakshari. The first word is yoga . The next word must then begin with the letter a . This activity will go on and the whole class will participate and write the words on the blackboard. How many new words have you learnt? Yoga is a physical, mental, and spiritual practice that originated in ancient India. The word originated: Yoga comes from the Sanskrit root yuj , which _ started means to join or to unite . This symbolises the unity of mind and body;