spirit. Let us discuss 1. How did Surya feel about playing? 2. What was it about Surya that Prabhat observed? Reprint 2025-26 ye Unit 4.indd 107 05-Dec-24 3:59:52 PM| Poorvi GRabDE 6 o> ot Let us think and reflect I Read the lines given below and answer the questions. 1. If Prabhat sensed that he would lose a game, he would not play it. He would take part only when he was sure of winning, even if the game lasted only for a minute. You could not stop him from playing the kind of games he was really good at, like badminton. (i) Complete the sentence suitably. Prabhat would play a game only if____ (ii) Which game was Prabhat good at playing? (iii) Select the most suitable option to complete the sentence. This behaviour of Prabhat tells us that he was A. good atthe game _ B.suretowin C. afraid of losing 2. Surprisingly, Prabhat could not sleep well that night. He had won the game but he did not feel as happy as he usually did. What was surprising was that Surya did not feel bad about losing. What was more surprising was that Prabhat saw Surya playing basketball the next day. (i) Select the one option that tells us about the way Prabhat was feeling that night. A. hurt B. unhappy C. afraid D. focused (ii) Why does Prabhat find Surya s behaviour surprising ? (iii) Fill in the blank by choosing the most suitable option given in the bracket. We can say that Surya s reaction to not winning was (similar to/as serious as/different from) Prabhat s. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 4.indd 108 05-Dec-24 3:59:52 PM SPORTS AND WELLNESS II Answer the following questions. 1. How did Prabhat s attitude towards winning and losing affect his enjoyment of games in the beginning? 2. Why do you think Prabhat cheated in the beginning to win the badminton match against Surya? Go . How did Surya s attitude differ from Prabhat s? ws . Do you think Prabhat s approach to games was healthy? Why or why not? . Why do you think sporting spirit is important? 6. Explain how the title of the story, Change of Heart , is suitable. Let us learn I Make as many words as possible using consecutive letters, without changing the order of the letters, from the words in the boxes. One has been done for you. 2. PHENOMENON |] A | [3. BASKETBALL GA) Gs | Now, you can choose words of your own and create such puzzles. Share them with your class and try solving others. II Read the following sentences and circle the verbs. 1. Everyone was discussing their game and how Prabhat had played so well. 2. He had won the game but he did not feel as happy as he usually did. 3. What was more surprising that Surya had not felt bad about losing. Reprint 2025-26 Yi Unit 4.indd 109 18-Mar-25 2:43:56 PM | Poorvi GRabDE 6 III Arrange