and create such puzzles. Share them with your class and try solving others. II Read the following sentences and circle the verbs. 1. Everyone was discussing their game and how Prabhat had played so well. 2. He had won the game but he did not feel as happy as he usually did. 3. What was more surprising that Surya had not felt bad about losing. Reprint 2025-26 Yi Unit 4.indd 109 18-Mar-25 2:43:56 PM | Poorvi GRabDE 6 III Arrange the circled verbs as the first action (old action) or second action (new action). One has been done for you. S.No Column A Column B yy FIRST ACTION (OLD) SECOND ACTION (NEW) 1. had played was discussing 2. 3. The verbs in column A that refer to the first action or the old action are past perfect. IV Fill in the blanks with the past perfect form of verbs given within the brackets. 1. Prabhat already his homework before going to the badminton match. (finish) 2. Surya basketball for years before joining the school s badminton team. (play) 3. Bythetime Prabhat arrived, Surya already several matches. (win) 4. The new student, Surya, Prabhat before coming to the school. (never meet) 5. Before the games period, Prabhat badminton extensively. (practise) Let us listen I You will listen to an announcement. As you listen, circle the pair that was chosen to play chess. (refer to page 128 for transcript) Reprint 2025-26 Unit 4.indd 110 05-Dec-24 3:59:52 PM SPORTS AND WELLNESS II You will once again listen to the announcement. As you listen, fill in the notes with important details. Answers 1. How many Friday matches will be played? 2. What was put up on the sports notice board? 3. Who will sponsor the kho-kho team s refreshments? 4. Who will be the scorekeeper for chess? 5. Who will be the referee for kho-kho? 6. Which Friday periods are meant for kho-kho? g Let us speak Look at the situations given below. In pairs, take turns to use the three magic words please , thank yow and sorry for the situations given below. Use the prompts given in the table to learn how to thank and apologise properly. 1. You are Vani You want to request your friends to take you in their team during games period. 2. You are Somiwon You want to tell Hitesh to help you with the cleaning of the classroom cupboard. . You are Sumit You accidently spilled water on Nupur s desk. . You are Hitesh You forgot to get Simran s Art file to school. . You are Kriti You spoke rudely to Nupur. rn nan FF WwW . You are Mohan You wish to thank Hitesh for helping you practice for the Inter-House speech competition. Reprint 2025-26 Yi Unit 4.indd 111 05-Dec-24 3:59:52 PM | Poorvi GRabDE 6 7. You are Meher You are grateful that Simran helped you understand a chapter taught at school when you were absent. 8. You are Rima You are