a yogic practise. WHO mYOGA Reprint 2025-26 i Unit 4.indd 123 26-Mar-25 9:48:25 AM | Poorvi GRabDE 6 Hala CASAL ATHOTTTT 118 8 hathasya prathamangatvadasanam purvamuchyate kuryattadasanam sthairyamarogyam changalaghavam Being the first accessory of Hatha-Yoga, asana is described first. It should be practised for gaining steady posture, health and weightlessness of body. Source: Hatha Yoga Pradipika Let us discuss Read the passage again and fill in the blanks with words from the box. Yoga is a practise that not only improves physical flexibility but also improves mental 1. and leads to ahealthier 2. It involves a series of asanas, which increase muscular 3. Practising yoga also leads to a better body and mind 4. and reduces body pain such as the lower back. Moreover, the focus on breathing techniques and meditation makes the mind 5. , lessens 6. , and improves the quality of 7. This helps to adopt a more positive lifestyle. 1. What is the aim of yoga? 2. Explain the idea of unity in yoga. 3. What does the launch of the WHO mYoga app tell us about the importance of yoga? 4. Describe one long-term effect that the practice of yoga can have ona person s qualities. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 4.indd 124 18-Mar-25 2:47:24 PM Unit 4.indd 125 SPORTS AND WELLNESS Let us learn I Read the extract given below and focus on the highlighted words. The app (WHO mYoga) contains a collection of video and audio files to teach and support yoga practice. The aim was to have an easy-to-use and free tool for people across the world to encourage them to practise yoga. The word practice and practise sound the same but have different spellings and usage. 1. Complete the sentences given below by filling in the blanks with correct use of practice (as a noun) or practise (as a verb). Share the answers with your classmates and the teacher. (i) It is important to have a regular of stretching every morning to stay flexible. Gi) I Yoga every day to keep my mind and body healthy. (iii) The teacher said, you can join the school hockey team but it requires a lot of to improve your skills. (iv) Our athletics coach asked us to running on grass to strengthen our grip while running. (v) I deep breathing exercises when I feel stressed to calm myself down. (vi) Developing a good habit of eating fruits and vegetables should be a daily . 2. Another common word that has the s and c variation in spellings is advice (noun) and advise (verb). Make two sentences each using advice and advise and share with your classmates and the teacher. E II Make as many words as you can using the letters shown. Use the letter A in all the words that you make. Reprint 2025-26 05-Dec-24 3:59:58 PM Poorvi GRabDE 6 Let us listen You will listen to a girl talk about practising yoga. As you listen, select four true statements from the sentences given in