CHANGE OF HEART as Let us do these activities before we read. I Which games or sports do you play? II Read the questions given below. Talk about them and make a list. 1. Which games or sports do you play for fun? 2. Which games or sports do you play for competition? III How do you feel when you win or lose? IV Work in pairs. Tick the correct meaning of the following: 1. friendly matches (i) matches played to win a trophy (ii) matches played without competition 2. opponent (i) someone who you compete with (ii) someone you want to be a partner with 3. tally of marks (i) final marks on a report card (ii) record of points in a game/match 4. sporting spirit (i) following all the rules in a game (ii) being fair and respecting each player in a game Reprint 2025-26 Unit 4.indd 103 05-Dec-24 3:59:50 PM Poorvi GRabDE 6 = Let us read I Prabhat always wanted to win. His parents, teachers, and friends said that he did not know how to accept defeat. The fact was that he could not bear losing, not even at marbles. He felt so good when he won that he never wanted to give up that feeling. On the contrary, losing made him feel terrible. He thought that losing was the worst thing that could happen to anyone. If Prabhat sensed that he would lose a game, he would not play it. He would take part only when he was sure of winning, even if the game lasted only for a minute. You could not stop him from playing the kind of games he was really good at, like badminton. A new student joined Prabhat s school, and his name was Surya. Surya was an excellent badminton player. Prabhat waited for the last Friday ofthe month. Last Friday was significant. This was when the coach conducted friendly matches in the games period. The teams were decided on Monday and it was no surprise when Prabhat and Surya were chosen to play a round against each other. Prabhat was given the responsibility of keeping score for their match. On one hand, Prabhat prepared for the match with great seriousness. Surya, on the other hand, seemed relaxed, not taking the things seriously at all. He walked about the Reprint 2025-26 Unit 4.indd 104 defeat: loss on the contrary: just the opposite terrible: unhappy sensed: had known significant: important conducted: organised 05-Dec-24 3:59:50 PM SPORTS AND WELLNESS whole time, smiling and cracking jokes about all sorts of things. But on Friday, atthe badminton phenomenon: court, Surya was a real phenomenon. He won = someone who points again and again, laughing and joking all 2s special the time. However, Surya was paying so little 4"*s attention to the match that Prabhat managed to change the scoreboard while his opponent was looking elsewhere. Prabhat managed to win by cheating. He made a big thing of his win, but it did not matter