possibility of passing through the slit depends only on the angle between the rotating arms and not on their lengths (as long as they are shorter than the length of the slit). Lines and Angles Challenge: Reduce this angle. Angle The angle is still reduced. ; the same! 2.8 Special Types of Angles Let us go hack to Vidya s notebook and observe her opening the cover of the book in different scenarios. She makes a full turn of the cover when she has to write while holding the book in her hand. She makes a half turn of the cover when she has to open it on her table. In this case, observe the arms of the angle formed. They lie in a straight line. Such an angle is called a straight angle. A O B Fig. 2.11 Let us consider a straight angle ZAOB. Observe that any ray oc divides it into two angles, ZAOC and ZCOB. Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 ; ; ~~ a) 42 Is it possible to draw OC such that the two angles are equal to each other in size? Talk Let s Explore We can try to solve this problem using a piece of paper. Recall that when a fold is made, it creates a crease which is straight. Take a rectangular piece of paper and on one of its sides, mark the straight angle AOB. By folding, try to get a line (crease) passing through O that divides ZAOB into two equal angles. How can it be done? Fold the paper such that OB overlaps with OA. Observe the crease and the two angles formed. Lines and Angles i i i i i i i ee a ee a 4 a ee A a a a aa Justify why the two angles are equal. Is there a way to superimpose and check? Can this superimposition be done by folding? Each of these equal angles formed are called right angles. So, a straight angle contains two right angles. Because they're always right. Why shouldn't you argue with a 90 angle? %& If a straight angle is formed by half of a full turn, how much of a full turn will form a right angle? Observe that a right angle resembles the shape of an L . An angle is a right angle only if it is exactly half of a straight angle. Two lines that meet at right angles are called perpendicular lines. %f Figure it Out 1. How many right angles do the windows of your classroom contain? Do you see other right angles in your classroom? Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 2. Join A to other grid points in the figure by a straight line to geta straight angle. What are all the different ways of doing it? @ C ) C ) C ) C ) @ @ @ e @ e @ e @ C ) C ) C ) @ @ @ @ @ t ) @