the hands is 30 . Why? b. What will be the angle at 2 o clock? And at 4 o clock? 6 o clock? c. Explore other angles made by the hands of a clock. Ans. (a) The angles at the centre of the clock is 360 which is divided into 12 equal parts. So. . 360 The angle between two successive numbers = > 30 (b) At 2 O clock = 60 = 2x30 At 4 0 clock = 120 = 4x30 At 6 O clock = 180 = 6x30 (c) At 3 O clock = 90 At 9 O clock = 270 Try for other angles made by the hands of a clock. Q.2. The angle of a door: Is it possible to express the amount by which a door is opened using an angle? What will be the vertex of the angle and what will be the arms of the angle? Ans. Yes, the vertex of the angle will be the point where door meets the wall. The arms will be the edges of the door and the wall. Q.3. Vidya is enjoying her time on the swing. She notices that the greater the angle with which she starts the swinging, the greater is the speed she achieves on her swing. But where is the angle? Are you able to see any angle? Ans. Student may not see the angle, but when the starting arm is fixed as the position where she starts swinging. The angle can be thought to be between positions where she starts the swinging (the initial position) and the position where she attains the greatest position of the swing at any one side. Q.4. Here is a toy with slanting slabs attached to its sides; the greater the angles or slopes of the slabs, the faster the balls roll. Can angles be used to describe the slopes of the slabs? What are the arms of each angle? Which arm is visible and which is not? Ans. Yes, angles can be used directly to describe slopes of the slab, larger the angle, greater the slope of the slab. For each angle, one arm is a side and one arm is the slope. The vertical arm is not visible, whereas the other arm is visible. Here in this toy, edges of the slabs are the arms of the angles. Top horizontal ray is not visible, other arms in the form of edges of the slab are visible. Teacher should motivate students to get other possible answers. [9] Page 49 Section 2.10 Figure it Out Q.1. In Fig. 2.23, list all the angles possible. Did you find them all? Now, guess the measures of all the angles. Then, measure the angles with a protractor. Record all your numbers in a table. See how close your guesses are to the actual measures. Ans. ZCAP, ZACD, ZAPL, ZDLP, ZRPL, ZSLP, ZPRS, ZLSR, ZBRS, ZCLP Try more! Page 52 Section 2.11 Figure it Out Q.2. Use a protractor to