Ans. a) Yes, O is the starting point and point B lies on the rays that goes endlessly in the . . > . . > direction of A. OA is the extension of OB. b) No, OA is a ray with starting point O whereas AO is a ray with starting point A. [2] Section 2.5 Page 19 Figure it Out Q.1. Can you find the angles in the given pictures? Draw the rays forming any one of the angles and name the vertex of the angle. > > Ans. Yes, one of the angles is ZBDC. It s vertex is D. One ray is DC and the other rays DB. Try for other pictures. Q.2. Draw and label an angle with arms ST and SR. Ans. Q.4. Name the angles marked in the given figure. R S T Ans. ZRTQ, ZRTP Q.5. Mark any three points on your paper that are not on one line. Label them A, B, C. Draw all possible lines going through pairs of these points. How many lines do you get? Name them. How many angles can you name using A, B, C? Write them down, and mark each of them with a curve as in Fig. 2.9. OSS Ans. We get three lines AB, BC, CA. Using A, B & C we can name three angles: ZABC or ZCBA, ZBCA or ZACB & ZCAB or ZBAC. [3] Q.6. Now mark any four points on your paper so that no three of them are on one line. Label them A, B, C, D. Draw all possible lines going through pairs of these points. How many lines do you get? Name them. How many angles can you name using A, B, C, D? Write them all down, and mark each of them with a curve as in Fig. 2.9. DBDsseeo dm >> Ans. We get six lines AB, BC, CD, DA, AC & BD Using A, B, C & D we can name the following angles ZBAC, ZCAD, ZBAD, ZADB, ZBDC, ZADC, ZDCA, ZACB, ZDCB, ZCBD, ZDBA & ZCBA Section 2.6 Page 20 eF Is it always easy to compare two angles? No. it is not always easy to compare two angles. For eg. 89 & 91 angles cannot be compared without measuring or overlapping. But for the given figures, comparison is easy. Page 23 % Where else do we use superimposition to compare? A few examples are- line segments, squares and circles. Think of more. %% Figure it out Q.1. Fold a rectangular sheet of paper, then draw a line along the fold created. Name and compare the angles formed between the fold and the sides of the paper. Make different angles by folding a rectangular sheet of paper and compare the angles. Which is the largest and smallest angle you made? [4] Ans. B E A Angles Formed: ZAEF, ZBEF, ZDFE, ZCFE Here ZAEF & ZCFE are larger than ZBEF & ZDFE Try more cases by folding rectangular sheets in different ways.