LINES AND ANGLES ) a 0674CHO2 In this chapter, we will explore some of the most basic ideas of geometry including points, lines, rays, line segments and angles. These ideas form the building blocks of plane geometry , and will help us in understanding more advanced topics in geometry such as the construction and analysis of different shapes. 2.1 Point aa Mark a dot on the paper with a sharp tip of a pencil. The sharper the tip, the thinner will be the dot. This tiny dot will give you an idea of a point. A point determines a precise location, but it has no length, breadth or height. Some models for a point are given below. The tip of a The sharpened The pointed compass end of a pencil end of a needle If you mark three points on a piece of paper, you may be required to distinguish these three points. For this purpose, each of the three points may be denoted by a single capital letter such as eN lac] en Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 2_Lines and Angles.indd 13 13-08-2024 16:14:25 Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Z, P and T. These points are read as Point Z , Point P and Point T . Of course, the dots represent precise locations and must be imagined to be invisibly thin. 2.2 Line Segment Fold a piece of paper and unfold it. Do you see a crease? This gives the idea of a line segment. It has two end points, A and B. Mark any two points A and B on a sheet of paper. Try to connect A to B by various B routes (Fig. 2.1). What is the shortest route from A to B? B This shortest path from Point A to Point B (including A and B) as shown here is called the line segment from A to B. It is denoted by either AB or BA. The points A and B are called the end points of the line segment AB. Pig. 2.1 2.3 Line Imagine that the line segment from A to B (.e., AB) is extended beyond A in one direction and beyond B in the other direction without any end (see Fig. 2.2). This is a model for a line. Do A you think you can draw a complete picture of Fig. 2.2 a line? No. Why? _ A line through two points A and B is written as AB. It extends forever in both directions. Sometimes a line is denoted by a letter like lorm. Observe that any two points determine a unique line that passes through both of them. Lines and Angles 2.4 Ray A ray is a portion of a line that starts at one point (called the starting point or initial point of the ray) and goes on endlessly in a direction. The following are some models for a ray: Beam of light from a Ray of light from a torch Sun rays lighthouse Look at the diagram (Fig.