Write the measures of the following angles: a. Z KAL Notice that the vertex of this angle coincides with the centre of the protractor. So the number of units of 1 degree angle between KA and AL gives the measure of ZKAL. By counting, we get ZKAL = 30 Making use of the medium sized and large sized marks, is it possible to count the number of units in 5s or 10s? b. ZWAL c. ZTAK Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Labelled protractor This is a protractor that you find in your geometry box. It would appear similar to the protractor above except that there are numbers written on it. Will these make it easier to read the angles? There are two sets of numbers on the protractor: one increasing from right to left and the other increasing from left to right. Why does it include two sets of numbers? xe Name the different angles in the figure and write their measures. Lines and Angles Did you include angles such as TOQ? Which set of markings did you use inner or outer? What is the measure of ZTOS? Can you use the numbers marked to find the angle without counting the number of markings? Here, OT and OS pass through the numbers 20 and 55 on the outer scale. How many units of 1 degree are contained between these two arms? Can subtraction be used here? How can we measure angles directly without having to subtract? Place the protractor so the center is on the vertex of the angle. Align the protractor so that one the arms passes through the 0 mark as in the picture below. What is the degree measure of ZAOB? Make your own Protractor! You may have wondered how the different equally spaced markings are made on a protractor. We will now see how we can make some of them! 1. Draw a circle of a convenient radius on a sheet of paper. Cut out the circle (Fig. 2.13). A circle or one full turn is 360 . 2. Fold the circle to get two equal halves and cut it through the crease to get a semicircle. Write O in the bottom right corner of the semicircle. Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 \Fig. 2.13 The measure of half a circle is of a full turn. (Fig. 2.14) So, the measure of half a turn = 7 of 180 f 0 }}= 180 . Fig. 2.14 Thus, write 180 in the left bottom corner of the semicircle. 180 units 3. Fold the semi-circular sheet in half as shown in Fig. 2.15 to form a quarter circle. The measure of a quarter circle is j of a full turn. The measure of t turn = j of 360 = Or, the measure ofa : turn = 7 of a half turn = 5 of 180 = Thus, mark 90 at the top of the semicircle. Fig. 2.15 Lines and Angles 4. Fold the sheet again as shown in