if your paper protractor can be used here! H I H 4. How can you find the degree measure of the angle given below using a protractor? 5. Measure and write the degree measures for each of the following angles: Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Z a a 7. 6. Find the degree measures of 7BXE, ZCXE, ZAXB and /BXC. Lines and Angles 8. Make the paper craft as per the given instructions. Then, unfold and open the paper fully. Draw lines on the creases made and measure the angles formed. lA 2h US 9. Measure all three angles of the triangle shown in Fig. 2.21 (a), and write the measures down near the respective angles. Now add up the three measures. What do you get? Do the same for the triangles in Fig. 2.21 (b) and (c). Try it for other triangles as well, and then make a conjecture for what happens in general! We will come back to why this happens in a later year. (a) (b) (c) Fig. 2.21 Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Mind the Mistake, Mend the Mistake! A student used a protractor to measure the angles as shown below. In each figure, identify the incorrect usage(s) of the protractor and discuss how the reading could have been made and think how it can be corrected. MU iit Mu) ZY = 120 ZZ = 85 sy Te =72\ 3] st3 Zhe\? S/els S a & S Z WN s/ KS axe / oXS Z < s Ss co) %Y 2s, a oe & S Cy O% 09 oe a oo C) w Wy oz, os 06 O oF Ww Uy ott Foot 08 a) M1111), iit wd Lines and Angles %& Figure it Out Where are the angles? 1. Angles in a clock: a. The hands of a clock make different angles at different times. At 1 o clock, the angle between the hands is 30 . Why? b. Whatwillbetheangleat2o0 clock? And at 4 o clock? 6 o clock? c. Explore other angles made by the hands of a clock. 2. The angle of a door: Is it possible to express the amount by which a door is opened using an angle? What will be the vertex of the angle and what will be the arms of the angle? 3. Vidya is enjoying her time on the swing. She notices that the greater the angle with which she starts the swinging, the greater is the speed she achieves on her swing. But where is the angle? Are you able to see any angle? Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 4. Here is a toy with slanting slabs attached to its sides; the greater the angles or slopes of the slabs, the faster the balls roll. Can angles be used to describe the slopes of the slabs? What are the arms of each angle? Which arm is visible and which is not? 5. Observe the images below where there is an insect and its rotated version. Can