letter like lorm. Observe that any two points determine a unique line that passes through both of them. Lines and Angles 2.4 Ray A ray is a portion of a line that starts at one point (called the starting point or initial point of the ray) and goes on endlessly in a direction. The following are some models for a ray: Beam of light from a Ray of light from a torch Sun rays lighthouse Look at the diagram (Fig. 2.3) of a ray. Two points are marked on it. One is the starting point A and the other P isa point P on the path of the ray. We then denote the ray by AP. Fig. 2.3 % Figure it Out 8 Rihan marked a point Sheetal marked two points on a piece of paper. on a piece of paper. How How many lines can he many different lines can draw that pass through she draw that pass through the point? both of the points? Can you help Rihan and Sheetal find their answers? Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 2. Name the line segments in Fig. 2.4. Which of the five marked points are on exactly one of the line segments? Which are on two of the line segments? Q M Fig. 2.4 3. Name the rays shown in Fig. 2.5. Is T the starting point of each of these rays? N B Fig. 2.5 4. Draw a rough figure and write labels appropriately to illustrate each of the following: < _> <> a. OP and OQ meet at O. =_ <>. . b. XY and PQ intersect at point M. c. Linel contains points E and F but not point D. d. Point P lies on AB. 5. In Fig. 2.6, name: a. Five points b. Aline Four rays d. Five line segments Lines and Angles _ 6. Here is aray OA (Fig. 2.7). It starts at O and A passes through the point A. It also passes B through the point B. _ a. Can you also name it as OB ? Why? _>> )s Wwx > O b. Can we write OAas AO? Why or why not? Fig. 2.7 2.5 Angle D An angle is formed by two rays having a we common starting point. Here is an angle formed by rays BD and BE where B is vertex the common starting point (Fig. 2.8). arm The point B is called the vertex of the E angle, and the rays BD and BE are called Fig. 2.8 the arms of the angle. How can we name this angle? We can simply use the vertex and say that it is the Angle B. To be clearer, we use a point on each of the arms together with the vertex to name the angle. In this case, we name the angle as Angle DBE or Angle EBD. The word angle can be replaced by the symbol 2 , Le., ZDBE or ZEBD. Note that in specifying the angle,