see it. Team 2 now gets to look at the angle. They have to quickly discuss and guess the number of degrees in the angle (without using a protractor!). Team 1 now demonstrates the true measure of the angle with a protractor. Team 2 scores the number of points that is the absolute difference in degrees between their guess and the correct measure. For example, if Team 2 guesses 39 , then they score 10 points (49 -39 ). Each team gets five turns. The winner is the team with the lowest score! %F Let s Play a Game #2 We now change the rules of the game a bit. Play this game with your classmates by again making two teams, Team 1 and Team 2. Here are the instructions and rules: Lines and Angles e Team 1 announces to all, an angle measure, e.g., 34 . e Aplayer from Team 2 must draw that angle on the board without using a protractor. Other members of Team 2 can help the player by speaking words like Make it bigger! or Make it smaller! . e A player from Team 1 measures the angle with a protractor for all to see. Team 2 scores the number of points that is the absolute difference in degrees between Team 2 s angle size and the intended angle size. For example, if player s angle from Team 2 is measured to be 25 , then Team 2 scores 9 points (34 -25 ). e Each team gets five turns. The winner is again the team with the lowest score. posto sss * Teacher s Note b----NNSK OO These games are important to play to build intuition about angles: and their measures. Return to this game at least once or twice on ! different days to build practice in estimating angles. Note that these games can also be played between pairs of students. ! eee ee ee ee eee ee ee OQ e- - - - - f ge -Q- - = g- ge we we ewe ew ew ew ee Be el %& Figure it Out 1. In Fig. 2.23, list all the angles possible. Did you find them all? Now, guess the measures of all the angles. Then, measure the angles with a protractor. Record all your numbers in a table. See how close your guesses are to the actual measures. Fig. 2.23 Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 OS ~~ a a a a a a a a a ea 2. Use a protractor to draw angles having the following degree measures: a. 110 b. 40 c. 75 d. 112 e. 134 3. Draw an angle whose degree measure is the same as the angle given below: Also, write down the steps you followed to draw the angle. 2.11 Types of Angles and their Measures We have read about different types of angles in this chapter. We have seen that a straight angle is 180 and a right angle is 90 . How