2.8 the arms of the angle. How can we name this angle? We can simply use the vertex and say that it is the Angle B. To be clearer, we use a point on each of the arms together with the vertex to name the angle. In this case, we name the angle as Angle DBE or Angle EBD. The word angle can be replaced by the symbol 2 , Le., ZDBE or ZEBD. Note that in specifying the angle, the vertex is always written as the middle letter. To indicate an angle, we use a small curve at the vertex (refer to Fig. 2.9). Vidya has just opened her book. Let us observe her opening the cover of the book in different scenarios. Case 1 Case 2 Case 3 Case 4 Case 5 Case 6 Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 %F Do you see angles being made in each of these cases? Can you mark their arms and vertex? Which angle is greater the angle in Case 1 or the angle in Case 2? Just as we talk about the size of a line based on its length, we also talk about the size of an angle based on its amount of rotation. So, the angle in Case 2 is greater as in this case she needs to rotate the cover more. Similarly, the angle in Case 3 is even larger than that of Case 2, because there is even more rotation, and Cases 4, 5, and 6 are successively larger angles with more and more rotation. The size of an angle is the amount of rotation or turn that is needed about the vertex to move the first ray to the second ray. Final position of ray Amount of turn is the size of the angle Vertex Initial position of ray Fig. 2.9 Let s look at some other examples where angles arise in real life by rotation or turn: e Inacompass or divider, we turn the arms to form an angle. The vertex is the point where the two arms are joined. Identify the arms and vertex of the angle. e A pair of scissors has two blades. When we open them (or turn them ) to cut something, the blades form an angle. Identify the arms and the vertex of the angle. Lines and Angles Look at the pictures of spectacles, wallet and other common objects. Identify the angles in them by marking out their arms and vertices. / Do you see how these angles are formed by turning one arm with respect to the other? ae * Teacher s Note ~~-~------- >> >>> >>e Teacher needs to organise various activities with the students to recognise the size of an angle as a measure of rotation. %f Figure it Out 1. Can you find the angles in the given pictures? Draw the rays forming any one of the angles and name the vertex of the angle. Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 2. Draw and label an