Observe that ZREB is a straight angle. Hence, the degree measure of ZREB = 180 of which 80 is covered by ZTER. A similar argument can be applied to find the measure of SET. %& Figure it Out 1. Draw angles with the following degree measures: a.140 b.82 c.195 d.70 e.35 Estimate the size of each angle and then measure it with a protractor: ASE J * on . Classify these angles as acute, right, obtuse or reflex angles. Make any figure with three acute angles, one right angle and two obtuse angles. Draw the letter M such that the angles on the sides are 40 each and the angle in the middle is 60 . Draw the letter Y such that the three angles formed are 150 , 60 and 150 . Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 6. The Ashoka Chakra has 24 spokes. What is the degree measure of the angle between two spokes next to each other? What is the largest acute angle formed between two spokes? 7. Puzzle: I am an acute angle. If you double my measure, you get an acute angle. If you triple my measure, you will get an acute angle again. If you quadruple (four times) my measure, you will get an acute angle yet again! But if you multiply my measure by 5, you will get an obtuse angle measure. What are the possibilities for my measure? = A point determines a location. It is denoted by a capital letter. = A line segment corresponds to the shortest distance between two points. The line segment joining points S and T is denoted by ST. = A line is obtained when a line segment like ST is extended on both sides indefinitely; it is denoted by ST or sometimes by a single small letter like m. = Arayisa portion ofa line starting at a point D and going in one direction indefinitely. It is denoted by DP where P is another point on the ray. = Anangle canbe visualised a as two rays starting from a common starting point. Two rays OP and OM form the angle 7POM (also ci called MOP); here, O is called the vertex of the angle, and the rays OP and OM are called the arms of the angle. = The size of an angle is the amount of rotation or turn needed about the vertex to rotate one ray of the angle onto the other ray of the angle. = The sizes of angles can be measured in degrees. One full rotation or turn is considered as 360 degrees and denoted as 360 . = Degree measures of angles can be measured using a protractor. = Angles can be straight (180 ), right (90 ), acute (more than 0 and less than 90 ), obtuse (more than 90 and less than 180 ), and reflex (more than 180 and less than 360 ). CHAPTER 2 SOLUTIONS Lines and Angles Section 2.4 Page No. 15 Figure it