formed by turning one arm with respect to the other? ae * Teacher s Note ~~-~------- >> >>> >>e Teacher needs to organise various activities with the students to recognise the size of an angle as a measure of rotation. %f Figure it Out 1. Can you find the angles in the given pictures? Draw the rays forming any one of the angles and name the vertex of the angle. Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 2. Draw and label an angle with arms ST and SR. 3. Explain why ZAPC cannot be labelled as P. Math A Talk 4. Name the angles marked in the given figure. T R 5. Markany three points on your paper that are not on one line. Label them A, B, C. Draw all possible lines going through pairs of these points. How many lines do you get? Name them. How many angles can you name using A, B, C? Write them down, and mark each of them with a curve as in Fig. 2.9. Lines and Angles 6. Now mark any four points on your paper so that no three of them are on one line. Label them A, B, C, D. Draw all possible lines going through pairs of these points. How many lines do you get? Name them. How many angles can you name using A, B, C, D? Write them all down, and mark each of them with a curve as in Fig. 2.9. 2.6 Comparing Angles Look at these animals opening their mouths. Do you see any angles here? If yes, mark the arms and vertex of each one. Some mouths are open wider than others; the more the turning of the jaws, the larger the angle! Can you arrange the angles in this picture from smallest to largest? CF Is it always easy to compare two angles? Here are some angles. Label each of the angles. How will you compare them? Draw a few more angles; label them and compare. Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Comparing angles by superimposition Any two angles can be compared by placing them one over the other, i.e., by superimposition. While superimposing, the vertices of the angles must overlap. After superimposition, it becomes clear which angle is smaller and which is larger. B Cc Q R Q(B) RC The picture shows the two angles superimposed. It is now clear that ZPQR is larger than ZABC. Equal angles. Now consider ZAOB and /ZXOY in the figure. Which is greater? Xx Xx J. / O B O Y O B Y The corners of both of these angles match and the arms overlap with each other, i.e., OA < OX and OB < OY. So, the angles are equal in size. The reason these angles are considered to be equal in size is because when we visualise each of these angles as being formed out of rotation, we can see that there is an equal amount of rotation _ _ _ _ _ _ needed to