Such angles are called acute angles. In the third group, all angles are greater than a right angle but less than a straight angle. The turning is more than a quarter turn and less than a half turn. Such angles are called obtuse angles. % Figure it Out 1. Identify acute, right, obtuse and straight angles in the previous figures. 2. Make a few acute angles and a few obtuse angles. Draw them in different orientations. Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 3. Do you know what the words acute and obtuse mean? Acute means sharp and obtuse means blunt. Why do you think these words have been chosen? Find out the number of acute angles in each of the figures below. /\ ABs What will be the next figure and how many acute angles will it have? Do you notice any pattern in the numbers? 2.9 Measuring Angles We have seen how to compare two angles. But can we actually quantify how big an angle is using a number without having to compare it to another angle? We saw how various angles can be compared using a circle. Perhaps a circle could be used to assign measures for angles? Fig. 2.12 To assign precise measures to angles, mathematicians came up with an idea. They divided the angle in the centre of the circle into Lines and Angles Nem s ee OO OOOOOeeeererrene OE 0 eure es 0 0 OOOO esr 2) Sana _0en OE oO eer, en ee SOS OTe esas 2). _ a E<E 000 OO OOO OOOO OOOO SOS SS 360 equal angles or parts. The angle measure of each of these unit parts is 1 degree, which is written as 1 . This unit part is used to assign measure to any angle: the measure of an angle is the number of 1 unit parts it contains inside it. For example, see this figure: 30 units > It contains 30 units of 1 angle and so we say that its angle measure is 30 . Measures of different angles: What is the measure of a full turn in degrees? As we have taken it to contain 360 degrees, its measure is 360 . %eF What is the measure of a straight angle in degrees? A straight angle is half of a full turn. As a full-turn is 360 , a half turn is 180 . What is the measure of a right angle in degrees? Two right angles together form a straight angle. As a straight angle measures 180 , a right angle measures 90 . 180 units 90 units O B O B A pinch of history A full turn has been divided into 360 . Why 360? The reason why we use 360 today is not fully known. The division of a circle into Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 360 parts goes back to ancient times. The Rigveda, one of the very oldest texts of humanity going back thousands of years, speaks of a wheel