angle? Are you able to see any angle? Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 4. Here is a toy with slanting slabs attached to its sides; the greater the angles or slopes of the slabs, the faster the balls roll. Can angles be used to describe the slopes of the slabs? What are the arms of each angle? Which arm is visible and which is not? 5. Observe the images below where there is an insect and its rotated version. Can angles be used to describe the amount of rotation? How? What will be the arms of the angle and the vertex? Hint: Observe the horizontal line touching the insects. 4am } eleiaieteleieieieieteteietetetetel tele * Teacher s Note '------------------> ! It is important that students see the application of each mathematical ! ' concept in their daily lives. Teacher can organise some activities where ! students can appreciate the practical applications of angles in real-life | ! situations, e.g., clocks, doors, swings, concepts of uphill and downhill, ! ; location of the sun, the giving of directions, etc. beeen ene en en oe e = = =OP -|D]-F- - g-gn nnn ween ew ew ew ew ewe ew ew ew ew ee ew ew ew ew ew ee ee ee ee ew A 2.10 Drawing Angles Vidya wants to draw a 30 angle and name it ZTIN using a protractor. In ZTIN, I will be the vertex, IT and IN will be the arms of the angle. Keeping one arm, say IN, as the reference (base), the other arm IT should : : - take a turn of 30 . Lines and Angles _> Step 1: We begin with the base and draw IN: ooo I N Step 2: We will place the centre point of the protractor on I and align IN to the 0 line. Step 3: Now, starting from 0, count your degrees (0, 10, 30) up to 30 on the protractor. Mark point T at the label 30 . Step 4: Using a ruler join the point I and T. ZTIN = 30 is the required angle. Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Fig. 2.22 %F Let s Play a Game #1 This is an angle guessing game! Play this game with your classmates by making two teams, Team 1 and Team 2. Here are the instructions and rules for the game: Team 1 secretly choose an angle measure, for example, 49 and makes an angle with that measure using a protractor without Team 2 being able to see it. Team 2 now gets to look at the angle. They have to quickly discuss and guess the number of degrees in the angle (without using a protractor!). Team 1 now demonstrates the true measure of the angle with a protractor. Team 2 scores the number of points that is the absolute difference in degrees between their guess and the correct measure. For example, if Team 2 guesses 39 , then they score 10 points (49 -39 ). Each