sheet of paper, then draw a line along the fold created. Name and compare the angles formed between the fold and the sides of the paper. Make different angles by folding a rectangular sheet of paper and compare the angles. Which is the largest and smallest angle you made? [4] Ans. B E A Angles Formed: ZAEF, ZBEF, ZDFE, ZCFE Here ZAEF & ZCFE are larger than ZBEF & ZDFE Try more cases by folding rectangular sheets in different ways. Q.2. In each case, determine which angle is greater and why. a. ZAOB or ZXOY b. ZAOB or ZXOB c. ZXOB or ZXOC Discuss with your friends on how you decided which one is greater. Ans. (a)- ZAOB; ZXOY is an acute angle and ZAOB = ZAOX + ZXOY+ZYOB (b)- ZAOB (c) None. ZXOB = ZXOC Q.3. Which angle is greater: ZXOY or ZAOB? Give reasons. Ans. By looking at the figure we cannot say. Superimposition or measurement is necessary here. Section 2.8 Page 28 > Q. Is it possible to draw OC such that the two angles are equal to each other in size? ~> 72 , . Ans. Yes, when OA and OB overlap each other on folding the Vidya s notebook, the crease OC will divide ZAOB in two equal sized angles. Page 29 Q. If a straight angle is formed by half of a full turn, how much of a full turn will form a right angle? Ans. - of a full turn. [5] Section 2.8 Page No. 29 Figure it Out Q.4. Get a slanting crease on the paper. Now, try to get another crease that is perpendicular to the slanting crease. a. How many right angles do you have now? Justify why the angles are exact right angles. b. Describe how you folded the paper so that any other person who doesn t know the process can simply follow your description to get the right angle. Ans. a. Four right angle. Each angle is 4 the of the complete angle. b. Explore different ways of doing it. Page 31 Figure it Out Q.2. Make a few acute angles and a few obtuse angles. Draw them in different orientations. Ans. Acute angle /\ hk, > _\ a Obtuse angle Nn VGN, Q.3. Do you know what the words acute and obtuse mean? Acute means sharp and obtuse means blunt. Why do you think these words have been chosen? Ans. In acute angles the opening of the edges is lesser than the obtuse angle which have larger openings. Q.4. Find out the number of acute angles in each of the figures below. What will be the next figure and how many acute angles will it have? Do you notice any pattern in the numbers? Ans. (i) three (11) Twelve (111) Twenty-one The next figure will have thirty acute angles. Yes, the pattern is3 x 04+1,3*14+1,3x2+1,3x3+1,... The number 0,1,2,3,4,..... are number of inner triangles. [6] Section 2.9 Page No. 35 Figure it out Q.1. Write the measures