at the points where the arms of the angle pass through the circle. Can we use this to find out if this angle is greater than, or equal to or smaller than the angle made by the second crane? Let us place it on the angle made by the second crane so that the vertex coincides with the centre of the circle and one of the arms passes through OA. X Can you now tell which angle is bigger? Lines and Angles Which crane was making the bigger angle? If you can make a circular piece of transparent paper, try this method to compare the angles in Fig. 2.10 with each other. pm Teacher s Note *------------->> , A teacher needs to check the understanding of the students around | the notion of an angle. Sometimes students might think that : ! increasing the length of the arms of the angle increases the angle. ! | For this, various situations should be posed to the students to check ! ! their understanding on the same. ! ee 2.7 Making Rotating Arms Let us make rotating arms using two paper straws and a paper clip by following these steps: 1. Take two paper straws and a paper clip. 2. Insert the straws into the arms of the paper clip. 3. Your rotating arm is ready! Make several rotating arms with different angles between the arms. Arrange the angles you have made from smallest to largest by comparing and using superimposition. Passing through a slit: Collect anumber of rotating arms with different angles; do not rotate any of the rotating arms during this activity. Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Take a cardboard and make an angle-shaped slit as shown below by tracing and cutting out the shape of one of the rotating arms. \ /~) Now, shuffle and mix up all the rotating arms. Can you identify which of the rotating arms will pass through the slit? The correct one can be found by placing each of the rotating arms over the slit. Let us do this for some of the rotating arms: Slit angle is greater than Slit angle is less than the Slit angle is equal to the the arms angle. Thearms arms angle. The arms arms angle. The arms will will not go through the will not go through the go through the slit. slit. slit. Only the pair of rotating arms where the angle is equal to that of the slit passes through the slit. Note that the possibility of passing through the slit depends only on the angle between the rotating arms and not on their lengths (as long as they are shorter than the length of the slit). Lines and Angles Challenge: Reduce this angle. Angle The angle is still reduced. ; the same! 2.8 Special Types of Angles Let us go hack to Vidya s notebook and observe her opening the cover of the book in different scenarios. She makes a full turn of the