Yan , ee 0970CHO4 Overview e Food security means availability, accessibility and affordability of food to all people at all times. The poor households are more vulnerable to food insecurity whenever there is a problem of production or distribution of food crops. Food security depends on the Public Distribution System (PDS) and government vigilance and action at times, when this security is threatened. What is food security? Food is as essential for living as air is for breathing. But food security means something more than getting two square meals. Food security has following dimensions (a) availability of food means food production within the country, food imports and the previous years stock stored in government granaries. (b) accessibility means food is within reach of every person. (c) affordability implies that an individual has enough money to buy sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet one's dietary needs. Thus, food security is ensured in a country only if (1) enough food is available for all the persons (2) all persons have the capacity to buy food of acceptable quality and (3) there is no barrier on access to food. Why food security? The poorest section of the society might be food insecure most of the times while persons above the poverty line might also be food insecure when the country faces ", 42 Economics = iil Food Security in India In the 1970s, food security was understood as the availability at all times of adequate supply of basic foodstuffs (UN, 1975). Amartya Sen added a new dimension to food security and emphasised the access to food through what he called entitlements a combination of what one can produce, exchange in the market alongwith state or other socially provided supplies. Accordingly, there has been a substantial shift in the understanding of food security. The 1995 World Food Summit declared, Food security at the individual, household, regional, national and global levels exists when all people, at all times, have physical and economic access to sufficient, safe and nutritious food to meet their dietary needs and food preferences for an active and healthy life (FAO, 1996, p.3). The declaration further recognises that poverty eradication is essential to improve access to food . & a national disaster/calamity like earthquake, drought, flood, tsunami, widespread failure of crops causing famine, etc. How is food security affected during a calamity? Due to a natural calamity, say drought, total production of foodgrains decreases. It creates a shortage of food in the affected areas. Due to shortage of food, the prices goes up. At the high prices, some people cannot afford to buy food. If such calamity happens in a very wide spread area or is stretched over a longer time period, it may cause a situation of starvation. A massive starvation might take a turn of famine. A Famine is characterised by wide spread deaths due to starvation and Reprint 2025-26 epidemics caused by forced use of contaminated water or decaying food and loss of body resistance due to weakening