goes up. At the high prices, some people cannot afford to buy food. If such calamity happens in a very wide spread area or is stretched over a longer time period, it may cause a situation of starvation. A massive starvation might take a turn of famine. A Famine is characterised by wide spread deaths due to starvation and Reprint 2025-26 epidemics caused by forced use of contaminated water or decaying food and loss of body resistance due to weakening from starvation. The most devastating famine that occurred in India was the FAMINE OF BENGAL in 1943. This famine killed thirty lakh people in the province of Bengal. Table 4.1: Production of Rice in the Province of Bengal Production Imports Exports Total Availability (Lakh tonnes) (Lakh tonnes) (Lakh tonnes) (Lakh tonnes) Source: Sen, A.K, 1981 Page 61 SS Let s Discuss 1. Some people say that the Bengal famine happened because there was a shortage of rice. Study the table and find out whether you agree with the statement? 2. Which year shows a drastic decline in food availability? Picture 4.1 Starvation victims arriving ata Picture 4.2 During the Bengal Famine of relief centre, 1945. 1943, a family leaves its village in Chittagong district in Bengal. 9 Food Security in India 43 Cate Reprint 2025-26 r iY ge ig ae Suggested Activity (a) What do you see in Picture 4.1? (b) Which age group is seen in the first picture? (c) Can you say that the family shown in the Picture 4.2 is a poor family? why? (d)Can you imagine the source of livelihood of the people, (shown in two Pictures) before the occurrence of famine? (In the context of a village) (e) Find out what type of help is given to the victims of a natural calamity at a relief camp. (f) Have you ever helped such victims (in the form of money, food, clothes, medicines etc.) PROJECT WORK: Gather more information about famines in India. Nothing like Bengal famine has happened in India again. It is, however, disturbing to note that even today, famine like conditions exist in many parts of the country, leading to starvation deaths at times. Natural calamities and pandemics may also lead to food shortage. For example Covid-19 pandemic had an adverse impact upon the food security. Restriction on movement of people and goods and services impacted economic activity. Therefore food security is needed in a country to ensure food at all times, including calamities and pandemics Who are food-insecure? Although a large section of people suffer from food and nutrition insecurity in India, the worst affected groups are landless people with little or no land to depend upon, traditional artisans, providers of traditional services, petty selfemployed workers and _ destitutes including beggars. In the urban areas, the food insecure families are those whose working members are generally employed in ill-paid occupations and casual labour market. These workers are largely 44 Economics engaged in seasonal activities and are paid very low wages that just