different parts of the country ensuring food security of different sections of society. Similarly, in Maharashtra, Academy of Development Science (ADS) has facilitated a network of NGOs for setting up grain banks in different regions. ADS organises training and capacity building programmes on food security for NGOs. Grain Banks are now slowly taking shape in different parts of Maharashtra. ADS efforts to set up Grain Banks, to facilitate replication through other NGOs and to influence the Government s policy on food security are thus paying rich dividends. The ADS Grain Bank programme is acknowledged as a successful and innovative food security intervention. Reprint 2025-26 ab | Summary Food security of a nation is ensured if all of its citizens have enough nutritious food available, all persons have the capacity to buy food of acceptable quality and there is no barrier on access to food. The people living below the poverty line might be food insecure all the time while better off people might also turn food insecure due to calamity or disaster. Although a large section of people suffer from food and nutrition insecurity in India, the worst affected groups are landless or land poor households in rural areas and people employed in ill paid occupations and casual labourers engaged in seasonal activities in the urban areas. The food insecure people are disproportionately large in some regions of the country, such as economically backward states with high incidence of poverty, tribal and remote areas, regions more prone to natural disasters etc. To ensure availability of food to all sections of the society the Indian government carefully designed food security system, which is composed of two components: (a) buffer stock and (b) public distribution system. In addition to PDS, various poverty alleviation programmes were also started which comprised a component of food security. Some of these programmes are: Integrated Child Development Services (ICDS); Food-for- Work (FFW); Mid-Day Meals; Antyodaya Anna Yojana (AAY) etc. In addition to the role of the government in ensuring food security, there are various cooperatives and NGOs also working intensively towards this direction. a Exercises . Howis food security ensured in India? . Which are the people more prone to food insecurity? Which states are more food insecure in India? kwon Do you believe that green revolution has made India self-sufficient in food grains? How? . Asection of people in India are still without food. Explain? What happens to the supply of food when there is a disaster or a calamity? . Differentiate between seasonal hunger and chronic hunger? oN ou What has our government done to provide food security to the poor? Discuss any two schemes launched by the government? 9. Why buffer stock is created by the government? 10. Write notes on: (a) Minimum support price (b) Buffer stock (c) Issue price (d) Fair price shops 11. What are the problems of the functioning of ration shops? 12. Write a note on the role of cooperatives in providing food and related items. SSS SOOO Food