Security in India Since the advent of the Green Revolution in the early-1970s, the country has avoided famine even during adverse weather conditions. India has become self-sufficient in foodgrains during the last 30 years because of a variety of crops grown all over the country. The availability of foodgrains (even in adverse weather conditions or otherwise) at the country Reprint 2025-26 Graph 4.1: Production of Foodgrains in India (Million Tonnes) 259 257 D oO is is fe} Pp is AS) & is aS) am) 1S) =) ue} fe) HH A, NS AN gS SS & s ss Ss PP oD S wd wall ill 329 328 3190 315 276 277 281 252 252 Source: AS & E Division, Department of Agriculture & Farmers Welfare in Economic Survey 2023-24, Statistical Appendix. * Third Estimate Za? Let's Discuss Study Graph 4.1 and answer the following questions: (a) In which year did our country cross the 200 Million tonne per year mark in foodgrain production? (b) In which decade did India experience the highest decadal increase in foodgrain production? (c) Is production increase consistent in India since 2000-01? level has further been ensured with a carefully designed food security system by the government. This system has two components: (a) buffer stock, and (b) public distribution system. What is Buffer stock? Buffer Stock is the stock of foodgrains, namely wheat and rice, procured by the government through the Food Corporation of India (FCI). The FCI purchases wheat and rice from the farmers in states where there is surplus production. The farmers are paid a pre announced price for their crops. This price is called Minimum Support Price (MSP). The MSP is declared by the government every year before the sowing season to provide incentives to farmers for raising the production of these crops. The purchased foodgrains are stored in granaries. Do you know why this buffer stock is created by the government? This is done to distribute foodgrains in the deficit areas and among the poorer strata of the society at a price lower than the market price also known as Issue Price. This also helps resolve the problem of shortage of food during adverse weather conditions or during the periods of calamity. What is the Public Distribution System? The food procured by the FCI is distributed through government regulated ration shops among the poorer section of the society. This is called the Public Distribution System (PDS). Ration shops are now present in most localities, Food Security in India 47 Reprint 2025-26 > o villages, towns and cities. There are about 5.5 lakh ration shops all over the country. Ration shops also, known as Fair Price Shops, keep stock of foodgrains, sugar, and kerosene for cooking. These items are sold to people at a price lower than the market price. Any family with a ration card* can buy a stipulated amount of these items (e.g. 35 kg of grains, 5 litres of kerosene, 5 kgs of sugar etc.) every month from the nearby ration