your pet otter? You would need to find a place with lots of water, for example. What other points should you think about? The information about Iraq and London given below may help you. Iraq has mostly broad plains and marshes along the Iranian border in the south, with large flooded areas. A large part of Iraq s land area is desert, so it has cool winters and dry, hot and cloudless summers. The mountain areas near Iran and Turkey have cold winters. There is heavy snowfall there, and when the snow melts in spring, it causes floods in central and southern Iraq. London London has a _ large population and is a very busy city. In addition to multistoreyed buildings, however, it has many open spaces or parks. It has a temperate climate (i.e. it is neither very hot, nor very cold), with regular but generally light rainfall or snow throughout the year. The warmest month is July, and the coolest month is January. February is the driest month. Snow is not very common in London. Reprint 2025-26 = E = z z = ie) = = ic) = First Flight w I Earty in the New Year of 1956 I travelled to Southern Iraq. By then it had crossed my mind that I should crossed my mind like to keep an otter instead of a dog, and that (4 thought) came Camusfearna, ringed by water a stone s throw from ite y mind its door, would be an eminently suitable spot for stone's throw this experiment. a very short distance When I casually mentioned this to a friend, he as casually replied that I had better get one in the Tigris marshes, for there they were as common as mosquitoes, and were often tamed by the Arabs. We were going to Basra to the Consulate-General to collect and answer our mail from Europe. At the Consulate-General we found that my friend s mail had arrived but that mine had not. I cabled to England, and when, three days later, cabled nothing had happened, I tried to telephone. The call sent a message by had to be booked twenty-four hours in advance. On elegraph the first day the line was out of order; on the second the exchange was closed for a religious holiday. On the third day there was another breakdown. My friend left, and I arranged to meet him in a week s time. Five days later, my mail arrived. I carried it to my bedroom to read, and there, squatting on the floor, were two Arabs; beside them lay a sack that squirmed from time to time. They squirmed handed me a note from my friend: Here is your otter... twisted about Il With the opening of that sack began a phase of my _thraldom (old life that has not yet ended, and may, for all I know, fashioned) not end before I do. It is, in effect, a thraldom to being under the otters, an