secrets = E = z z = ie) = = ic) = First Flight baal / lo Mij was out of the box in a flash. He disappeared at high speed down the aircraft. There were squawks and shrieks, and a woman stood up on her seat screaming out, A rat! A rat! I caught sight of Mij s tail disappearing beneath the legs of a portly white- portly turbaned Indian. Diving for it, I missed, but found stout my face covered in curry. Perhaps, said the air hostess with the most charming smile, it would be better if you resumed your seat, and I will find the animal and bring it to you. I returned to my seat. I was craning my neck bounded on to trying to follow the hunt when suddenly I heard climbed up quickly from my feet a distressed chitter of recognition and ,...0), welcome, and Mij bounded on to my knee and began to rub gently with to nuzzle my face and my neck. the nose Oral Comprehension Check 1. How was Mij to be transported to England? 2. What did Mij do to the box? Reprint 2025-26 3. Why did Maxwell put the otter back in the box? How do you think he felt when he did this? 4. Why does Maxwell say the airhostess was the very queen of her kind ? 5. What happened when the box was opened? IV After an eventful journey, Maxwell and his otter reach London, where he has a flat. Mij and I remained in London for nearly a month. He would play for hours with a selection of toys, ping-pong balls, marbles, rubber fruit, and a terrapin shell that I had brought back from his native terrapin shell marshes. With the ping-pong ball he invented a_ the shell of small game of his own which could keep him engrossed turtle found in pin for up to half an hour at a time. A suitcase that I had taken to Iraq had become damaged on the journey home, so that the lid, when closed, remained at a slope from one end to the other. Mij discovered that if he placed the ball on the high end it would run down the length of the suitcase. He would dash around to the other end to ambush ambush its arrival, hide from it, crouching, to spring up _ te attack suddenly and take it by surprise, grab it and trot off with it from a hidden to the high end once more. position Outside the house I exercised him on a lead, precisely as if he had been a dog. Mij quickly developed certain compulsive habits on these walks in the compulsive habits London streets, like the rituals of children who on habits impossible to their way to and from school must place their feet "? squarely on the centre of each paving block; must touch every seventh upright of the iron railings, or upright pass to the