read, and there, squatting on the floor, were two Arabs; beside them lay a sack that squirmed from time to time. They squirmed handed me a note from my friend: Here is your otter... twisted about Il With the opening of that sack began a phase of my _thraldom (old life that has not yet ended, and may, for all I know, fashioned) not end before I do. It is, in effect, a thraldom to being under the otters, an otter fixation, that I have since found to control of be shared by most other people, who have ever [ix tion owned one. avery strong The creature that emerged from this sack on to attachment or feeling the spacious tiled floor of the Consulate bedroom medievally resembled most of all a very small, medievally- gn imagination of conceived, dragon. From the head to the tip of the the Middle Ages Reprint 2025-26 tail he was coated with symmetrical pointed scales of mud armour, between whose tips was visible a soft velvet fur like that of a chocolate-brown mole. He shook himself, and I half expected a cloud of dust, but in fact it was not for another month that I managed to remove the last of the mud and see the otter, as it were, in his true colours. Mijbil, as I called the otter, was, in fact, of a race previously unknown to science, and was at length christened by zoologists Lutrogale perspicillata maxwelli, or Maxwell s otter. For the first twentyfour hours Mijbil was neither hostile nor friendly; he was simply aloof and indifferent, choosing to sleep on the floor as far from my bed as possible. The second night Mijbil came on to my bed in the small hours and remained asleep in the crook of my knees until the servant brought tea in the morning, and during the day he began to lose his apathy and take a keen, much too keen, interest in his surroundings. I made a body-belt for him and took him on a lead to the bathroom, where for half an hour he went wild with joy in the water, plunging and rolling in it, shooting up and down the length of the bathtub underwater, and making enough slosh and splash for a hippo. This, I was to learn, is a characteristic of otters; every drop of water must be, so to speak, extended and spread about the place; a bowl must at once be overturned, or, if it will not be overturned, be sat in and sploshed in until it overflows. Water must be kept on the move and made to do things; when static it is wasted and provoking. christened named hostile unfriendly aloof and indifferent keeping a distance apathy absence of interest so to speak as it were (one could say this) provoking causing anger or some other reaction Reprint 2025-26 = o = a S = First Flight Two days later, Mijbil escaped from my bedroom as I