high end once more. position Outside the house I exercised him on a lead, precisely as if he had been a dog. Mij quickly developed certain compulsive habits on these walks in the compulsive habits London streets, like the rituals of children who on habits impossible to their way to and from school must place their feet "? squarely on the centre of each paving block; must touch every seventh upright of the iron railings, or upright pass to the outside of every second lamp post. Opposite (here) post or rod to my flat was a single-storied primary school, along !9 e straight up whose frontage ran a low wall some two feet high. On his way home, but never on his way out, Mij would something that tug me to this wall, jump on to it, and gallop the full 44... away one s length of its thirty yards, to the hopeless distraction attention from what both of pupils and of staff within. one is doing engrossed completely interested in HO TEN distraction Reprint 2025-26 First Flight oo It is not, I suppose, in any way strange that the average Londoner should not recognise an otter, but the variety of guesses as to what kind of animal this might be came as a surprise to me. Otters belong to a comparatively small group of animals called Mustellines, shared by the badger, mongoose, weasel, stoat, mink and others. I faced a continuous barrage barrage of of conjectural questions that sprayed all the conjectural Mustellines but the otter; more random guesses hit ae on a baby seal and a squirrel. Is that a walrus, questions filled with mister? reduced me to giggles, and outside a dog guesses show I heard a hippo . A beaver, a bear cub, a leopard one, apparently, that had changed its spots and a brontosaur ; Mij was anything but an otter. But the question for which I awarded the highest score came from a labourer digging a hole in the street. I was still far from him when he laid down his tool, put his hands on his hips, and began to stare. As I drew nearer I saw his expression of surprise and affront, as though he would have me know that he was not one upon whom to play jokes. I came abreast of him; he spat, glared, and then growled out, Here, Mister what is that supposed to be? Oral Comprehension Check 1. What game had Mij invented? 2. What are compulsive habits ? What does Maxwell say are the compulsive habits of fi) school children (ii) Mij? 3. What group of animals do otters belong to? 4. What guesses did the Londoners make about what Mij was? Thinkin about the Text 1. What things does Mij do which tell you that he is an intelligent, friendly and fun-loving animal who needs love? 2. What are some of the things we come to know about otters from this text? 3. Why is