habits ? What does Maxwell say are the compulsive habits of fi) school children (ii) Mij? 3. What group of animals do otters belong to? 4. What guesses did the Londoners make about what Mij was? Thinkin about the Text 1. What things does Mij do which tell you that he is an intelligent, friendly and fun-loving animal who needs love? 2. What are some of the things we come to know about otters from this text? 3. Why is Mij s species now known to the world as Maxwell s otter? Reprint 2025-26 \la 4. Maxwell in the story speaks for the otter, Mij. He tells us what the otter feels rd and thinks on different occasions. Given below are some things the otter does. Complete the column on the right to say what Maxwell says about what Mij feels and thinks. What Mij does How Mij feels or thinks Nuzzles Maxwell s face and neck in the aeroplane 5. Read the story and find the sentences where Maxwell describes his pet otter. Then choose and arrange your sentences to illustrate those statements below that you think are true. Maxwell s description (i = makes Mij seem almost human, like a small boy. shows that he is often irritated with what Mij does. shows that he is often surprised by what Mij does. i) ) (iv) of Mij s antics is comical. 9 (v) shows that he observes the antics of Mij very carefully. (vi) shows that he thinks Mij is a very ordinary otter. (vii) shows that he thinks the otter is very unusual. Thinking about 2 I. Describing a Repeated Action in the Past a To talk about something that happened regularly in the past, but does not = happen any longer, we use would or used to. Both would and used to can a describe repeated actions in the past. =) (a) Mij would follow me without a lead and come to me when I called his = name. (b) He would play for hours with a selection of toys. (c) On his way home... Mij would tug me to this wall. (d) When I was five years old, I used to follow my brother all over the place. He used to tease me when Mother was not around. ~~ (e To describe repeated states or situations in the past, however, we use only used to. (We cannot use would for states or situations in the past.) So we do Reprint 2025-26 First Flight I _ not use would with verbs like be, have, believe, etc. Look at the following sentences. (a) When we were young, we used to believe there were ghosts in school. (Note: believe shows a state of mind.) (b) Thirty years ago, more women used to be housewives than now. (Note: be here describes a situation.) From the table below, make as many correct sentences as you can using would and/or used to, as appropriate. (Hint: First decide whether the words in