not use would with verbs like be, have, believe, etc. Look at the following sentences. (a) When we were young, we used to believe there were ghosts in school. (Note: believe shows a state of mind.) (b) Thirty years ago, more women used to be housewives than now. (Note: be here describes a situation.) From the table below, make as many correct sentences as you can using would and/or used to, as appropriate. (Hint: First decide whether the words in italics show an action, or a state or situation, in the past.) Then add two or three sentences of your own to it. Emperor Akbar be fond of musical evenings. would | take long walks on the beach. Till the 1980s, Shanghai used to | have very dirty streets. . Noun Modifiers To describe or give more information about a noun (or to modify a noun), we use adjectives or adjectival phrases. Look at these examples from the text: (c) Symmetrical pointed scales (d) A ricocheting bullet (a) An eminently suitable spot (b) His wide, flat belly Nouns can also be used as modifiers: (a) The dinner party (b) A designer dress (c) The car keys We can use more than one noun as modifier. Proper nouns can also be used: (a) The Christmas dinner party (b) A silk designer dress (c) The Maruti car keys In the examples below, there is an adjectival phrase in front of a noun modifier: (a) The Jovely Christmas party (b) A trendy silk designer dress (c) The frightfully expensive golden Maruti car keys Look at these examples from the text, and say whether the modifiers (in-italics) are nouns, proper nouns, or adjective plus noun. (i) An otter fixation (iv) The London streets (ii) The iron railings (v) soft velvet fur (iii) The Tigris marshes (vi) A four-footed soccer player Reprint 2025-26 \la 2. Given below are some nouns, and a set of modifiers (in the box). Combine xs the nouns and modifiers to make as many appropriate phrases as you can. (Hint: The nouns and modifiers are all from the texts in this book.) temple girls triangle dresses person thoughts boys roar gifts scream farewell expression time subject landscape handkerchief crossing flight chatterbox profession physique coffee view celebration college rough hundred stone ordinary love uncomfortable white slang slack bare railroad termendous family marriage plump invigorating panoramic heartbreaking birthday incorrigible ridiculous loud first three Ill. Read this sentence: He shook himself, and I half expected a cloud of dust. The author uses a cloud of dust to give a picture of a large quantity of dust. Phrases like this indicate a particular quantity of something that is not 91 usually countable. For example: a bit of land, a drop of blood, a pinch of salt, a piece of paper. 1. Match the words on the left with a word on the right. Some words on the left can go with more than one word on the right. (i) a portion of blood (ii) a