of dust to give a picture of a large quantity of dust. Phrases like this indicate a particular quantity of something that is not 91 usually countable. For example: a bit of land, a drop of blood, a pinch of salt, a piece of paper. 1. Match the words on the left with a word on the right. Some words on the left can go with more than one word on the right. (i) a portion of blood (ii) a pool of cotton z (iii) flakes of stones = (iv) a huge heap of gold = (v) a gust of fried fish = (vi) little drops of snow = (vii) a piece of water cy (viii) a pot of wind 2. Use a bit offa piece of/a bunch of/a cloud of/a Iump of with the italicised nouns in the following sentences. The first has been done for you.as an example. (i) My teacher gave me some My teacher gave me a bit of advice. advice. (ii) Can you give me some clay, please. Reprint 2025-26 First Flight Xe) NS) (iii) The information you gave was very useful. (iv) Because of these factories, smoke hangs over the city. (v) Two stones rubbed together can produce sparks of fire. (vi) He gave me some flowers on my birthday. e Speaking You have seen how Maxwell describes Mij the otter s feelings and thoughts by watching him. Play the game of dumb charades. Take turns to express a feeling or thought silently, through gestures. Let the class speak out their guesses about the feelings or thoughts you are trying to express. Writing 4 Write a description of a person or an animal (such as a pet) that you know very well and love very much. Questions (4) and (5) in Thinking about the Text will have given you some idea about how to do this. Mention some things the person or animal does, what you think the person or animal feels, etc. Tn This Lesson Wuat WE Have Done Narrated a story about an interesting and unusual pet. What You Can Do 1. The events narrated in this text took place over half-a-century ago. Discuss with your class what changes have taken place over these years in (i) what animals we can keep as pets (some species are protected under the laws for wildlife preservation) (ii) the laws for exporting and importing or trading in animals (iii) rules for transporting goods, pets, etc. on aircraft. The class might wish to do their own research on these questions and report their findings in class. Ask students if they know of other examples of unusual pets or of wild animals which are trained to work for or amuse humans (eg dancing bears, lions and tigers in a circus, elephants trained to work or take part in ceremonies). Then lead students into a discussion about the ethics of keeping wild animals as pets: What are the difficulties these may entail? According to the students, what will