overturned, be sat in and sploshed in until it overflows. Water must be kept on the move and made to do things; when static it is wasted and provoking. christened named hostile unfriendly aloof and indifferent keeping a distance apathy absence of interest so to speak as it were (one could say this) provoking causing anger or some other reaction Reprint 2025-26 = o = a S = First Flight Two days later, Mijbil escaped from my bedroom as I entered it, and I turned to see his tail disappearing round the bend of the corridor that led to the bathroom. By the time I got there he was up on the end of the bathtub and fumbling at the chromium taps with his paws. I watched, amazed; in less than a minute he had turned the tap far enough to produce a trickle of water, and after a moment or two achieved the full flow. (He had been lucky to turn the tap the right way; on later occasions he would sometimes screw it up still tighter, chittering with irritation and disappointment at the tap s failure to cooperate.) Very soon Mij would follow me without a lead and come to me when I called his name. He spent most of his time in play. He spent hours shuffling a rubber ball round the room like a four-footed soccer player using all four feet to dribble the ball, and he could also throw it, with a powerful flick of the neck, to a surprising height and distance. But the real play of an otter is when he lies on his back and juggles with small objects between his paws. Marbles were Mij s favourite toys for this pastime: he would lie on his back rolling two or more of them up and down his wide, flat belly without ever dropping one to the floor. Oral Comprehension: Check fumbling trying to do something in a clumsy manner flick a quick, light movement 1. What experiment did Maxwell think Camusfearna would be suitable for? 2. Why does he go to Basra? How long does he wait there, and why? 3. How does he get the otter? Does he like it? Pick out the words that tell you this. 4. Why was the otter named Maxwell's otter ? 5. Tick the right answer. In the beginning, the otter was e aloofand indifferent e friendly e hostile 6. What happened when Maxwell took Mijbil to the bathroom? What did it do two days after that? Reprint 2025-26 Ill The days passed peacefully at Basra, but I dreaded the prospect of transporting Mij to England, and to Camusfearna. The British airline to London would not fly animals, so I booked a flight to Paris on another airline, and from there to London. The airline insisted that Mij should be packed into a box not more than eighteen inches square, to be carried on the floor at my feet. I had a box made, and