crops, do business, set up small-scale industries etc. They could set up new industries or trade in goods. Cheap and affordable credit is crucial for the country s development. Formal and Informal Credit: Who gets what? Graph 2 shows the importance of formal and informal sources of credit for people in urban areas. The people are divided into four groups, from poor to rich, as shown in the figure. You can see that 54 per cent of the loans taken by poor households in the urban areas are from informal sources. Compare this with the rich urban households. What do you find? Only 17 per cent of their loans are from informal sources, while 83 per cent are from formal sources. A similar pattern is also found in rural areas. The rich households are availing cheap credit from formal lenders whereas the poor households have to pay a large amount for borrowing. What does all this suggest? First, the formal sector still meets only about half of the total credit needs of the rural people. The remaining credit needs are met from informal sources. Graph 2 : Of all the loans taken by urban households, what percentage was formal and what percentage was informal? Poor Households Households with afew assets Households Well-off Rich Households Money AND CRED TI? Do Reprint 2025-26 Most loans from informal lenders carry a very high interest rate and do little to increase the income of the borrowers. Thus, it is necessary that banks and cooperatives increase their lending particularly in the rural areas, so that the dependence on informal sources of credit reduces. Secondly, while formal sector loans need to expand, it is also necessary that everyone receives these loans. At present, it is the richer households who receive formal credit whereas the poor have to depend on the informal sources. It is important that the formal credit is distributed more equally so that the poor can benefit from the cheaper loans. LET S WORK THESE OUT 1. What are the differences between formal and informal sources of credit? 2. Why should credit at reasonable rates be available for all? 3. Should there be a supervisor, such as the Reserve Bank of India, that looks into the loan activities of informal lenders? Why would its task be quite difficult? 4. Why do you think that the share of formal sector credit is higher for the richer households compared to the poorer households? A worker DO YOU THINK A BANK WILL GIVE ME A LOAN? In the previous section we have seen that poor households are still dependent on informal sources of credit. Why is it so? Banks are not present everywhere in rural India. Even when they are present, getting a loan from a bank is much more difficult than taking a loan from informal sources. As we saw for Megha, bank loans require proper Reprint 2025-26 La = oo : bs > ey . es SELF-HELP GROUPS FOR THE POOR documents and collateral. Absence