own words. What are the reasons why the banks might not be willing to lend to certain borrowers? important for development. UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Reprint 2025-26 In what ways does the Reserve Bank of India supervise the functioning of banks? Why is this necessary? Analyse the role of credit for development. Manav needs a loan to set up a small business. On what basis will Manav decide whether to borrow from the bank or the moneylender? Discuss. In India, about 80 per cent of farmers are small farmers, who need credit for cultivation. (a) Why might banks be unwilling to lend to small farmers? (ob) What are the other sources from which the small farmers can borrow? (c) Explain with an example how the terms of credit can be unfavourable for the small farmer. (d) Suggest some ways by which small farmers can get cheap credit. Fill in the blanks: (i) Majority of the credit needs of the households are met from informal sources. (ii) costs of borrowing increase the debt-burden. (iii) issues currency notes on behalf of the Central Government. (iv) Banks charge a higher interest rate on loans than what they offer on (v) is an asset that the borrower owns and uses as a guarantee until the loan is repaid to the lender. Choose the most appropriate answer. (i) In a SHG most of the decisions regarding savings and loan activities are taken by (a) Bank. ) (ob) Members. (c) Non-government organisation. (ii) Formal sources of credit does not include a) Banks. (a) (b) Cooperatives. (c) Employers. ADDITIONAL PROJECT / ACTIVITY The following table shows people in a variety of occupations in urban areas. What are the purposes for which the following people might need loans? Fill in the column. Construction worker Graduate student who is computer literate A person employed in government service Migrant labourer in Delhi Household maid Small trader Autorickshaw driver A worker whose factory has closed down Next, classify the people into two groups based on whom you think might get a bank loan and those who might not. What is the criterion that you have used for classification? MONEY AND CrepIT Reprint 2025-26