into a debt trap. To repay her loan she has to sell a portion of her land. She is clearly much worse off than before. Whether credit would be useful or not, therefore, depends on the risks in the situation and whether there is some support, in case of loss. repayment of the principal. In addition, lenders may demand collateral (security) against loans. Collateral is an asset that the borrower owns (such as land, building, vehicle, livestocks, deposits with banks) and uses this as a guarantee to a lender until the loan is repaid. If the borrower fails to repay the loan, the lender has the right to sell the asset or collateral to obtain payment. Property such as land titles, deposits with banks, livestock are some common examples of collateral used for borrowing. A Howe Loaw Megha has taken a loan of Rs 5 lakhs from the bank to purchase a house. The annual interest rate on the loan is 12 per cent and the loan is to be repaid in 10 years in monthly instalments. Megha had to submit to the bank, documents showing her employment records and salary before the bank agreed to give her the loan. The bank retained as collateral the papers of the new house, which will be returned to Megha only jig : when she repays the entire loan with interest. > Fill the following details of Megha s housing loan. i a 3 SEES S hal Ht Loan amount (in Rupees) asenscesees rere Duration of loan Documents required Interest rate Mode of repayment Collateral Interest rate, collateral and documentation requirement, and the mode of repayment together comprise what is called the terms of credit. The terms of credit vary substantially from one credit arrangement to another. They may vary depending on the nature of the lender and the borrower. The next section will provide examples of the varying terms of credit in different credit arrangements. LET S WORK THESE OUT 1. Why do lenders ask for collateral while lending? 2. Given that a large number of people in our country are poor, does it in any way affect their capacity to borrow? 3. Fill in the blanks choosing the correct option from the brackets. While taking a loan, borrowers look for easy terms of credit. This means (low/high) interest rate, (easy/ tough) conditions for repayment, (less/more) collateral and documentation requirements. MoneY AND CRED TE? ie Reprint 2025-26 Example of a Village Rohit and Ranjan had finished reading about the terms of credit in class. They were eager to know the various credit arrangements that existed in their area: who were the people who provided credit? Who were the borrowers? What were the terms of credit? They decided to talk to some people in their village. Read what they record... farmers and O19. ; he directly for t a the ourere would ve vr oreo meet Shyamal, a small a 3. ith potato crop ; are plenieee en A gmall irrigated village: farmer