transactions but not all of them money per se. Credit is a crucial element in economic life and it is, therefore, important to first understand this in a conceptual manner. What are the aspects that one looks at in any credit arrangement and how this affects people is the main focus of the second part of the chapter. The world around us offers a tremendous variety of such arrangements and it would be ideal to explain these aspects of credit from situations that are familiar to your students. The other crucial issue of credit is its availability to all, especially the poor, and on reasonable terms. We need to emphasise that this is a right of the people and without which a large section of them would be kept out of the development process. There are many innovative interventions, such as that of Grameen Bank, of which students may be made familiar with but it is important to realise that we don t have answers to all questions. We need to find new ways and this is one of the social challenges that developing countries face. Sources for Information The data on formal and informal sector credit used in this chapter is drawn from the survey on rural debt by the National Sample Survey Organisation (All India Debt and Investment Survey, 77 Round 2019, conducted by NSSO) now known as National Statistical Office (NSO). The information and data on Grameen Bank is taken from newspaper reports and websites. In order to get the details of bank-related statistics or a particular detail of a bank, you can log on to the websites of the Reserve Bank of India (www.rbi.org) and the concerned banks. Data on self-help groups is provided on the website of the National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD) (www.nabard.org). ee}: Meee) NDERSTANDING EConomic DEVELOPMENT Reprint 2025-26 MONEY AS A MEDIUM OF EXCHANGE The use of money spans a very large part of our everyday life. Look around you and you would easily be able to identify several transactions involving money in any single day. Can you make a list of these? In many of these transactions, goods are being bought and sold with the use of money. In some of these transactions, services are being exchanged with money. For some, there might not be any actual transfer of money taking place now but a promise to pay money later. Have you ever wondered why transactions are made in money? The reason is simple. A person holding money can easily exchange it for any commodity or service that he or she might want. Thus everyone prefers to receive payments in money and then exchange the money for things that they want. Take the case of a shoe manufacturer. He wants to sell shoes in the market and buy wheat. The shoe manufacturer will first exchange shoes that he has produced for money, and then exchange the money for wheat. Imagine how much more difficult it would be if