are willing to lend to the poor women when organised in SHGs, even though they have no collateral as such. Thus, the SHGs help borrowers overcome the problem of lack of collateral. They can get timely loans for a variety of purposes and at a reasonable interest rate. Moreover, SHGs are the building blocks of organisation of the rural poor. Not only does it help women to become financially self-reliant, the regular meetings of the group provide a platform to discuss and act on a variety of social issues such as health, nutrition, domestic violence, etc. A women s self-help group meeting in Gujarat Money AND CreD 1H) ie Reprint 2025-26 If credit can be made available to the poor people on terms and conditions that are appropriate and reasonable these millions of small people with their millions of small pursuits can add up to create the biggest development wonder. Professor Muhammad Yunus, the founder of Grameen Bank, and recipient of 2006 Nobel Prize for Peace In this chapter we have looked atthe credit vary substantially between modern forms of money and how they formal and informal lenders. At are linked with the banking system. On one side are the depositors who keep their money in the banks and on the other side are the borrowers who take loans from these banks. Economic activities require loans or credit. Credit, as we saw can have a positive impact, or in certain situations make the borrower worse off. Credit is available from a variety of sources. These can be either formal present, it is the richer households who receive credit from formal sources whereas the poor have to depend on the informal sources. It is essential that the total formal sector credit increases so that the dependence on the more expensive informal credit becomes less. Also, the poor should get a much greater share of formal loans from banks, cooperative societies etc. Both these steps are sources or informal sources. Terms of EXERCISES In situations with high risks, credit might create further problems for the borrower. Explain. How does money solve the problem of double coincidence of wants? Explain with an example of your own. How do banks mediate between those who have surplus money and those who need money? Look at a 10 rupee note. What is written on top? Can you explain this statement? Why do we need to expand formal sources of credit in India? What is the basic idea behind the SHGs for the poor? Explain in your own words. What are the reasons why the banks might not be willing to lend to certain borrowers? important for development. UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Reprint 2025-26 In what ways does the Reserve Bank of India supervise the functioning of banks? Why is this necessary? Analyse the role of credit for development. Manav needs a loan to set up a small business. On what basis will Manav decide whether to borrow from the bank or the moneylender? Discuss. In India, about