can easily exchange it for any commodity or service that he or she might want. Thus everyone prefers to receive payments in money and then exchange the money for things that they want. Take the case of a shoe manufacturer. He wants to sell shoes in the market and buy wheat. The shoe manufacturer will first exchange shoes that he has produced for money, and then exchange the money for wheat. Imagine how much more difficult it would be if the shoe manufacturer had to directly exchange shoes for wheat without the use of money. He would have to look for a wheat growing farmer who not only wants to sell wheat but also wants to buy the shoes in exchange. That is, both parties have to agree to sell and buy each others commodities. This is known as double coincidence of wants. What a person desires to sell is exactly what the other wishes to buy. In a barter system where goods are directly exchanged without the use of money, double coincidence of wants is an essential feature. In contrast, in an economy where money is in use, money by providing the crucial intermediate step eliminates the need for double coincidence of wants. It is no longer necessary for the shoe manufacturer to look for a farmer who will buy his shoes and at the same time sell him Money AND Crev THY Reprint 2025-26 | DON T NEED SHOES. | NEED CLOTHES. | WANT SHOES. BUT | DON T HAVE WHEAT. wheat. All he has to do is finda buyer for his shoes. Once he has exchanged his shoes for money, he can purchase wheat or any other commodity in the market. Since money acts as an intermediate in the exchange process, it is called a medium of exchange. LET S WORK THESE OUT 1. How does the use of money make it easier to exchange things? 2. Can you think of some examples of goods / services being exchanged or wages being paid through barter? We have seen that money is something that can act as a medium WY of exchange in transactions. Before Early punch- the introduction of coins, a variety of marked coins | 9% objects was used as money. For (may be 2500 \% years old) example, since the very early ages, Indians used grains and cattle as money. Thereafter came the use of metallic coins gold, silver, copper coins a phase which continued well into the last century. Currency Modern forms of money include currency paper notes and coins. Unlike the things that were used as money earlier, modern currency is not made of precious metal such as gold, silver and copper. And unlike grain and cattle, they are neither of everyday use. The modern currency is without any use of its own. Then, why is it accepted as a medium of exchange? It is accepted as a medium of exchange because the currency is authorised by the government of the country. In