for a specific amount. This means that the shoe manufacturer instructs his bank to pay this amount to the leather supplier. The leather supplier takes this cheque, and deposits it in his own account in the bank. The money is transferred from one bank account to another bank account in a couple of days. The transaction is complete without any payment of cash. State Bank of India 690) NCERT (NEW DELHI) Shi AUROBINGO MARG, Bank branch. New DELHI 110016 code mw3Ge2e2e5S Cheque number Thus we see that demand deposits share the essential features of money. The facility of cheques against demand deposits makes it possible to directly settle payments without the use of cash. Since demand deposits are accepted widely as a means of payment, along with currency, they constitute money in the modern economy. Check Card ice Guarante bank. . ; 4O1SPRY) 9 - rep 44000 cO 7S feares/Date \9/ 6 /2016. Hae a Or Bearer 000323" 10 Coding used by banks You must remember the role that the banks play here. But for the banks, there would be no demand deposits and no payments by cheques against these deposits. The modern forms of money currency and deposits are closely linked to the working of the modern banking system. UTHORIZED SIGNATURE oa1285H 0/04 CHCON Money AND Creo TH 5 NOT VALID UNLESS SIGNED BN EIitaneenseast a) ROE F.* SD, ee alee seunal in Por LET S WORK THESE OUT 1. M. Salim wants to withdraw Rs 20,000 in cash for making payments. How would he write a cheque to withdraw money? 2. Tick the correct answer. After the transaction between Salim and Prem, (i) Salim s balance in his bank account increases, and Prem s balance increases. (ii) Salim s balance in his bank account decreases and Prem s balance increases. (iii) Salim s balance in his bank account increases and Prem s balance decreases. 3. Why are demand deposits considered as money? LOAN ACTIVITIES OF BANKS Let us take the story of banks further. What do the banks do with the deposits which they accept from the public? There is an interesting mechanism at work here. Banks keep only a small proportion of their deposits as cash with themselves. For example, banks in India these days hold about 5 per cent of their deposits as cash. This is kept as provision to pay the depositors who might come to withdraw money from the bank on any given day. Since, on any particular day, only some of its many depositors come to withdraw cash, the bank is able to manage with this cash. Banks use the major portion of the deposits to extend loans. There isa a & 2.2% ree v ,9 O75 o ,*, x J AH > n4 a > BS a of +. 4 o* & > @ a". @ People make withdrawals and get interest x ey \| . ee 1% Reprint 2025-26 huge demand for loans for various economic activities. We shall read more