situation. (2) Swapnwy Problew Swapna, a small farmer, grows groundnut on her three acres of land. She takes a loan from the moneylender to meet the expenses of cultivation, hoping that her harvest would help repay the loan. Midway through the season the crop is hit by pests and the crop fails. Though Swapna sprays her crops with expensive pesticides, it makes little difference. She is unable to repay the moneylender and the debt grows over the year into a large amount. Next year, Swapna takes a fresh loan for cultivation. It is a normal crop this year. But the earnings are not enough to cover the old loan. She is caught in debt. She has to sell { a part of the land to pay off the debt. materials. To meet these expenses, Salim obtains loans from two sources. First, he asks the leather supplier to supply leather MoneY AND CreD TH? 5 Reprint 2025-26 In rural areas, the main demand for credit is for crop production. Crop production involves considerable costs on seeds, fertilisers, pesticides, water, electricity, repair of equipment, etc. There is a minimum stretch of three to four months between the time when the farmers buy these inputs and when they sell the crop. Farmers usually take crop loans at the beginning of the season and repay the loan after harvest. Repayment of the loan is crucially dependent on the income from farming. LET S WORK THESE OUT 1. Fill the following table. Why did they need credit? What was the risk? What was the outcome? his position after 6 years? . Supposing Salim continues to get orders from traders. What would be . What are the reasons that make Swapna s situation so risky? Discuss factors pesticides; role of moneylenders; climate. TERMS OF CREDIT Every loan agreement specifies an interest rate which the borrower must pay to the lender along with the Make your dreams come true with our Fast Money Personal Loans In Swapna s case, the failure of the crop made loan repayment impossible. She had to sell part of the land to repay the loan. Credit, instead of helping Swapna improve her earnings, left her worse off. This is an example of what is commonly called debt-trap. Credit in this case pushes the borrower into a situation from which recovery is very painful. In one situation credit helps to increase earnings and therefore the person is better off than before. In another situation, because of the crop failure, credit pushes the person into a debt trap. To repay her loan she has to sell a portion of her land. She is clearly much worse off than before. Whether credit would be useful or not, therefore, depends on the risks in the situation and whether there is some support, in case of loss. repayment of the principal. In addition, lenders may demand collateral (security) against loans. Collateral is an asset that the borrower owns (such as land, building, vehicle, livestocks, deposits with banks)