in class. They were eager to know the various credit arrangements that existed in their area: who were the people who provided credit? Who were the borrowers? What were the terms of credit? They decided to talk to some people in their village. Read what they record... farmers and O19. ; he directly for t a the ourere would ve vr oreo meet Shyamal, a small a 3. ith potato crop ; are plenieee en A gmall irrigated village: farmer in QONPUt We next meet Arun who is supervising the Shyamal tells us that every season he needs loans for cultivation on his 1.5 acres of land. Till a few years back, he would borrow money from the village moneylender at an interest rate of five per cent per month (60% per annum). For the last few years, Shyamal has been borrowing from an agricultural trader in the village at an interest rate of three per cent per month. At the beginning of the cropping season, the trader supplies the farm inputs on credit, which is to be repaid when the crops are ready for harvest. Besides the interest charge on the loan, the trader also makes the farmers promise to sell the crop to him. This way the trader can ensure that the money is repaid promptly. Also, since the crop prices are low after the harvest, the trader is able to make a profit from buying the crop at a low price from the farmers and then gelling it later when the price has rigen. a medium landowner Le landowner charges an interest rate of per cent per month, Rama repays the money by working for the landowner. Most work of one farm labourer. Arun has seven acres of land. He is one of the few persons in Sonpur to receive bank loan for cultivation. The interest rate on the loan is 6.5 per cent per annum, and can be repaid anytime in the next three years. Arun plans to repay the loan after harvest by selling a part of the crop. He then intends to store the rest of the potatoes in a cold storage and apply for a fresh loan from the bank against the cold storage receipt. The bank offers this facility to farmers who have taken crop loan from them. Rama is working in a neighbouring field. She works a6 an agricultural labourer. There are several months in the year when Rama has No work, and needs credit to meet the daily p venses. Expenses on Sudden illnesses or unctions in the family are also met through loans. Rama has to depend on her alien in Sonpur, for credit. 7 pre time, Rama has to take a fresh loan a ore the previous loan has been repaid. t present, she owes the landowner treat her well, she continues to work for hit sific she can get loans from him when in need. Kama tells us that the only source of credit for the landless