not of the same size as the one you want to remove. Obviously, if the two refills are identical or congruent, the new refill fits. So, you can find numerous examples where congruence of objects is applied in daily life situations. Can you think of some more examples of congruent figures? Now, which of the following figures are not congruent to the square in Fig 7.3 (i): ost LIC (ii) (iii) (iv) Fig. 7.3 The large squares in Fig. 7.3 (11) and (111) are obviously not congruent to the one in Fig 7.3 (i), but the square in Fig 7.3 (iv) is congruent to the one given in Fig 7.3 (1). Let us now discuss the congruence of two triangles. You already know that two triangles are congruent if the sides and angles of one triangle are equal to the corresponding sides and angles of the other triangle. Reprint 2025-26 TRIANGLES 85 Now, which of the triangles given below are congruent to triangle ABC in Fig. 7.4 (1)? 4.5 Cm E (iii) Jo & a % + ie u om R T (v) (iv) Fig. 7.4 Cut out each of these triangles from Fig. 7.4 (ii) to (v) and turn them around and try to cover A ABC. Observe that triangles in Fig. 7.4 (ii), (111) and (iv) are congruent to A ABC while A TSU of Fig 7.4 (v) is not congruent to A ABC. If A PQR is congruent to A ABC, we write A PQR = A ABC. Notice that when A PQR = A ABC, then sides of A PQR fall on corresponding equal sides of A ABC and so is the case for the angles. That is, PQ covers AB, QR covers BC and RP covers CA; Z P covers Z A, Z Qcovers Z B and Z R covers 7 C. Also, there is a one-one correspondence between the vertices. That is, P corresponds to A, Q to B, R to C and so on which is written as POA,QOB,ROC Note that under this correspondence, A PQR = A ABC; but it will not be correct to write AQRP = A ABC. Similarly, for Fig. 7.4 (iii), Reprint 2025-26 86 MATHEMATICS FD AB, DE BC and EF CA and FoOA,DOB andEOC So, A FDE = A ABC but writing A DEF = A ABC is not correct. Give the correspondence between the triangle in Fig. 7.4 (iv) and A ABC. So, it is necessary to write the correspondence of vertices correctly for writing of congruence of triangles in symbolic form. Note that in congruent triangles corresponding parts are equal and we write in short CPCT for corresponding parts of congruent triangles. 7.3 Criteria for Congruence of Triangles In earlier classes, you have learnt four criteria for congruence of triangles. Let us recall them. Draw two triangles with one side 3 cm. Are these triangles congruent? Observe that they are not congruent (see Fig. 7.5). D A 3.cm 1.8 cm B C E F 2.4cm