D such that DM = CM. Point D is joined to point B (see Fig. 7.23). Show that: Ga) AAMC =A BMD (ii) Z DBC is a right angle. B C (iit) A DBC = A ACB Fig. 7.23 (iv) CM = > AB 7.4 Some Properties of a Triangle In the above section you have studied two criteria for congruence of triangles. Let us now apply these results to study some properties related to a triangle whose two sides are equal. Reprint 2025-26 TRIANGLES 95 Perform the activity given below: A Construct a triangle in which two sides are equal, say each equal to 3.5 cm and the third side 3.5 cm 3.5 cm equal to 5 cm (see Fig. 7.24). You have done such constructions in earlier classes. Do you remember what is such a triangle 5cm called? A triangle in which two sides are equal is called an isosceles triangle. So, A ABC of Fig. 7.24 is an isosceles triangle with AB = AC. Now, measure 7 B and 7 C. What do you observe? Repeat this activity with other isosceles triangles with different sides. You may observe that in each such triangle, the angles opposite to the equal sides are equal. This is a very important result and is indeed true for any isosceles triangle. It can be proved as shown below. Theorem 7.2 : Angles opposite to equal sides of an isosceles triangle are equal. This result can be proved in many ways. One of A the proofs is given here. Proof : We are given an isosceles triangle ABC in which AB = AC. We need to prove that ZB=ZC. Let us draw the bisector of Z A and let Dbe D C the point of intersection of this bisector of Fig. 7.25 Z A and BC (see Fig. 7.25). In A BAD and A CAD, AB=AC (Given) Z BAD = Z CAD (By construction) AD = AD (Common) So, A BAD = A CAD (By SAS rule) So, Z ABD = Z ACD, since they are corresponding angles of congruent triangles. So, ZB=ZC Reprint 2025-26 96 MATHEMATICS Is the converse also true? That is: If two angles of any triangle are equal, can we conclude that the sides opposite to them are also equal? Perform the following activity. Construct a triangle ABC with BC of any length and 7 B= Z C = 50 . Draw the bisector of Z A and let it intersect BC at D (see Fig. 7.26). Cut out the triangle from the sheet of paper and fold it along AD so that vertex C falls on vertex B. A What can you say about sides AC and AB? Observe that AC covers AB completely So, AC = AB Repeat this activity with some more triangles. VA /\ Each time you will observe that the sides opposite 8 D C to equal angles are equal. So we have the Fig. 7.26 following: Theorem 7.3 : The sides opposite to