an isosceles triangle in which altitudes A BE and CF are drawn to equal sides AC and AB respectively (see Fig. 7.31). Show that these F E altitudes are equal. B C Fig. 7.31 ABC is a triangle in which altitudes BE and CF to sides AC and AB are equal (see Fig. 7.32). Show A that () AABE=AACF F E (i) AB=AC,1i.e., ABC is an isosceles triangle. B Cc Fig. 7.32 ABC and DBC are two isosceles triangles on the A same base BC (see Fig. 7.33). Show that Z ABD= Z ACD. B C D Fig. 7.33 AABC is an isosceles triangle in which AB =AC. Side BA is produced to D such that AD = AB D (see Fig. 7.34). Show that 7 BCD is a right angle. ABC is aright angled triangle in which Z A= 90 and AB=AC. Find 2 Band 2 C. A Show that the angles of an equilateral triangle are 60 each. B C Fig. 7.34 Reprint 2025-26 TRIANGLES 99 7.5 Some More Criteria for Congruence of Triangles You have seen earlier in this chapter that equality of three angles of one triangle to three angles of the other is not sufficient for the congruence of the two triangles. You may wonder whether equality of three sides of one triangle to three sides of another triangle is enough for congruence of the two triangles. You have already verified in earlier classes that this is indeed true. To be sure, construct two triangles with sides 4 cm, 3.5 cm and 4.5 cm (see Fig. 7.35). Cut them out and place them on each other. What do you observe? They cover each other completely, if the equal sides are placed on each other. So, the triangles are congruent. 4cm 3.5cm 4.5 cm 4.5 cm 3.5 cm Fig. 7.35 Repeat this activity with some more triangles. We arrive at another rule for congruence. Theorem 7.4 (SSS congruence rule) : Jf three sides of one triangle are equal to the three sides of another triangle, then the two triangles are congruent. This theorem can be proved using a suitable construction. You have already seen that in the SAS congruence rule, the pair of equal angles has to be the included angle between the pairs of corresponding pair of equal sides and if this is not so, the two triangles may not be congruent. Perform this activity: Construct two right angled triangles with hypotenuse equal to 5 cm and one side equal to 4 cm each (see Fig. 7.36). Reprint 2025-26 100 MATHEMATICS Fig. 7.36 Cut them out and place one triangle over the other with equal side placed on each other. Turn the triangles, if necessary. What do you observe? The two triangles cover each other completely and so they are congruent. Repeat this activity with other pairs of right triangles. What do you observe? You will find that two right triangles are congruent if one pair of sides and the hypotenuse are equal. You have