congruence of triangles in symbolic form. Note that in congruent triangles corresponding parts are equal and we write in short CPCT for corresponding parts of congruent triangles. 7.3 Criteria for Congruence of Triangles In earlier classes, you have learnt four criteria for congruence of triangles. Let us recall them. Draw two triangles with one side 3 cm. Are these triangles congruent? Observe that they are not congruent (see Fig. 7.5). D A 3.cm 1.8 cm B C E F 2.4cm (i) (ii) Fig. 7.5 Now, draw two triangles with one side 4 cm and one angle 50 (see Fig. 7.6). Are they congruent? P Reprint 2025-26 TRIANGLES 87 See that these two triangles are not congruent. Repeat this activity with some more pairs of triangles. So, equality of one pair of sides or one pair of sides and one pair of angles is not sufficient to give us congruent triangles. What would happen if the other pair of arms (sides) of the equal angles are also equal? In Fig 7.7, BC = QR, Z B= Z Q and also, AB = PQ. Now, what can you say about congruence of A ABC and A PQR? Recall from your earlier classes that, in this case, the two triangles are congruent. Verify this for A ABC and A PQR in Fig. 7.7. Repeat this activity with other pairs of triangles. Do you observe that the equality of two sides and the included angle is enough for the congruence of triangles? Yes, it is enough. Fig. 7.7 This is the first criterion for congruence of triangles. Axiom 7.1 (SAS congruence rule) : 7wo triangles are congruent if two sides and the included angle of one triangle are equal to the two sides and the included angle of the other triangle. This result cannot be proved with the help of previously known results and so it is accepted true as an axiom (see Appendix 1). Let us now take some examples. C B Example 1 : In Fig. 7.8, OA = OB and OD = OC. Show that (i) A AOD = A BOC and_ (ii) AD || BC. Solution : (1) You may observe that in A AOD and A BOC, OA = OB (Given) iven OD = OC A D Fig. 7.8 Reprint 2025-26 88 MATHEMATICS Also, since Z AOD and 7 BOC form a pair of vertically opposite angles, we have ZAOD= Z BOC. So, A AOD = A BOC (by the SAS congruence rule) (ii) In congruent triangles AOD and BOC, the other corresponding parts are also equal. So, ZOAD= Z OBC and these form a pair of alternate angles for line segments AD and BC. Therefore, AD || BC. Example 2 : AB is a line segment and line / is its perpendicular bisector. If a point P lies on /, show that P is equidistant from A and B. Solution : Line / L AB and passes through C which is the mid-point of AB (see Fig. 7.9).