z a [mi] [lS 0962CHO07 CHAPTER 7 TRIANGLES ee 7.1 Introduction You have studied about triangles and their various properties in your earlier classes. You know that a closed figure formed by three intersecting lines is called a triangle. ( Tri means three ). A triangle has three sides, three angles and three vertices. For example, in triangle ABC, denoted as A ABC (see Fig. 7.1); AB, BC, CA are the three sides, Z A, Z B, Z C are the three angles and A, B, C are three vertices. In Chapter 6, you have also studied some properties A of triangles. In this chapter, you will study in details about the congruence of triangles, rules of congruence, some more properties of triangles and inequalities in a triangle. You have already verified most of these properties in earlier classes. We will now prove some of them. B C 7.2 Congruence of Triangles Fig. 7.1 You must have observed that two copies of your photographs of the same size are identical. Similarly, two bangles of the same size, two ATM cards issued by the same bank are identical. You may recall that on placing a one rupee coin on another minted in the same year, they cover each other completely. Do you remember what such figures are called? Indeed they are called congruent figures ( congruent means equal in all respects or figures whose shapes and sizes are both the same). Now, draw two circles of the same radius and place one on the other. What do you observe? They cover each other completely and we call them as congruent circles. Reprint 2025-26 84 MATHEMATICS Repeat this activity by placing one square on the other with sides of the same measure (see Fig. 7.2) or by placing two equilateral triangles of equal sides on each other. You will observe that the squares are congruent to each other and so are the equilateral triangles. Fig. 7.2 You may wonder why we are studying congruence. You all must have seen the ice tray in your refrigerator. Observe that the moulds for making ice are all congruent. The cast used for moulding in the tray also has congruent depressions (may be all are rectangular or all circular or all triangular). So, whenever identical objects have to be produced, the concept of congruence is used in making the cast. Sometimes, you may find it difficult to replace the refill in your pen by a new one and this is so when the new refill is not of the same size as the one you want to remove. Obviously, if the two refills are identical or congruent, the new refill fits. So, you can find numerous examples where congruence of objects is applied in daily life situations. Can you think of some more examples of congruent figures? Now, which of the following figures are not congruent to the square in Fig 7.3 (i): ost LIC (ii) (iii) (iv) Fig. 7.3 The large squares in Fig. 7.3