ingredients in the making of a scientist. Start with a first-rate mind, add curiosity, and mix in the will to win for the right reasons. Ebright has these qualities. From the time the book, The Travels of Monarch X, opened the world of science to him, Richard Ebright has never lost his scientific curiosity. ROBERT W. PETERSON The Making of 2 Scienbigh 37 Reprint 2025-26 \ r\ GLOSSARY leagues: groups of sports clubs or teams playing matches among themselves county: region starling: common European bird (with black, brown-spotted plumage) which nests near buildings and is a good mimic entomology: the study of insects eureka: a cry of triumph at a discovery (originally attributed to Archimedes) canoeist: a person who paddles a canoe, a light boat How can one become a scientist, an economist, a historian... ? Does it simply involve reading many books on the subject? Does it involve observing, thinking and doing experiments? You must have read about cells and DNA in your science books. Discuss Richard Ebright s work in the light of what you have studied. If you get an opportunity to work like Richard Ebright on projects and experiments, which field would you like to work on and why? Talk lk abot iL 1. Children everywhere wonder about the world around them. The questions they ask are the beginning of scientific inquiry. Given below are some questions that children in India have asked Professor Yash Pal and Dr Rahul Pal as reported in their book, Discovered Questions (NCERT, 2006). (i) What is DNA fingerprinting? What are its uses? (ii) How do honeybees identify their own honeycombs? (iii) Why does rain fall in drops? Can you answer these questions? You will find Professor Yash Pal s and Dr Rahul Pal s answers (as given in Discovered Questions) on page 75. 2. You also must have wondered about certain things around you. Share these questions with your class, and try and answer them. gas ad pisding e Journey by Night by Norah Burke Children Who Made It Big by Thangamani e School Days by Tom Brown 5 e Footprints without Feat Reprint 2025-26