Number Collected Eventually I began to lose interest in tagging butterflies. It s tedious and there s not much feedback, Ebright said. In all the time I did it, he laughed, only two butterflies I had tagged were recaptured and they were not more than seventy-five miles from where I lived. READ AND FIND OUT What lesson does Ebright learn when he does not win anything at a science fair? What experiments and projects does he then undertake? What are the qualities that go into the making of a scientist? 54 Footprints without Feat Reprint 2025-26 Then in the seventh grade he got a hint of what real science is when he entered a county science fair and lost. It was really a sad feeling to sit there and not get anything while everybody else had won something, Ebright said. His entry was slides of frog tissues, which he showed under a microscope. He realised the winners had tried to do real experiments, not simply make a neat display. Already the competitive spirit that drives Richard Ebright was appearing. I knew that for the next year s fair I would have to do a real experiment, he said. The subject I knew most about was the insect work I'd been doing in the past several years. So he wrote to Dr Urquhart for ideas, and back came a stack of suggestions for experiments. Those kept Ebright busy all through high school and led to prize projects in county and international science fairs. For his eighth grade project, Ebright tried to find the cause of a viral disease that kills nearly all monarch caterpillars every few years. Ebright thought the disease might be carried by a beetle. He tried raising caterpillars in the presence of beetles. I didn t get any real results, he said. But I went ahead and showed that I had tried the experiment. This time I won. The next year his science fair project was testing the theory that viceroy butterflies copy monarchs. The theory was that viceroys look like monarchs because monarchs don t taste good to birds. Viceroys, on the other hand, do taste good to birds. So the more they look like monarchs, the less likely they are to become a bird s dinner. Ebright s project was to see whether, in fact, birds would eat monarchs. He found that a starling would not eat ordinary bird food. It would eat all the monarchs it could get. (Ebright said later research by other people showed that viceroys probably do copy the monarch.) This project was placed first in the zoology division and third overall in the How is the monarch butterfly (top) county science fair. different from the viceroy butterfly (bottom)? Reprint 2025-26 In his second year in high school, Richard Ebright began the research that led to his discovery of an unknown insect hormone. Indirectly, it also led to his new theory on the life of cells. The question he tried to answer