her son spent almost every evening at the dining room table. If he didn t have things to do, I found work for him not physical work, but learning things, his mother said. He liked it. He wanted to learn. And learn he did. He earned top grades in school. On everyday things he was just like every other kid, his mother said. By the time he was in the second grade, Ebright had collected all twentyfive species of butterflies found around his hometown. (See following box.) Species and Sub-species of Butterflies Collected in Six Weeks in Reading, Pennsylvania Gossamer-Winged Wood Nymphs Brush-footed Butterflies and Satyrs Butterflies white M hairstreak eyed brown variegated fritillary acadian hairstreak wood nymph (grayling) * Harris s checkerspot bronze copper Monarchs pearl crescent bog copper * monarch or milkweed * Mourning cloak purplish copper painted lady Whites and Sulphurs e eastern-tailed blue ; olympia melissa blue viceroy silvery blue * PRudless sulphur white admiral vy European cabbage Snout Butterfly ere purple hackberry buckeye That probably would have been the end of my butterfly collecting, he said. But then my mother got me a children s book called The Travels of Monarch X. That book, which told how monarch butterflies migrate to Central America, opened the world of science to the eager young collector. The Making of 2 Scientist 3S Reprint 2025-26 At the end of the book, readers were invited to help study butterfly migrations. They were asked to tag butterflies for research by Dr Frederick A. Urquhart of the University of Toronto, Canada. Ebright s mother wrote to Dr Urquhart, and soon Ebright was attaching light adhesive tags to the wings of monarchs. Anyone who found a tagged butterfly was asked to send the tag to Dr Urquhart. The butterfly collecting season around Reading lasts six weeks in late summer. (See graph below.) If you re going to chase them one by one, you won't catch very many. So the next step for Ebright was to raise a flock of butterflies. He would catch a female monarch, take her eggs, and raise them in his basement through their life cycle, from egg to caterpillar to pupa to adult butterfly. Then he would tag the butterflies wings and let them go. For several years his basement was home to thousands of monarchs in different stages of development. Number and Kinds of Butterflies Collected in Six Weeks Gossamer-Winged Wood Nymphs and Satyrs Brush-Footed Whites and Sulphurs Monarch Snout 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Number Collected Eventually I began to lose interest in tagging butterflies. It s tedious and there s not much feedback, Ebright said. In all the time I did it, he laughed, only two butterflies I had tagged were recaptured and they were not more than seventy-five miles from where I lived. READ AND FIND OUT What lesson does Ebright learn when he does not win anything at a science fair? What experiments and projects does he then undertake? What are