A TALE OF VALOUR
MAJOR SOMNATH SHARMA AND THE BATTLE OF BADGAM [fm]

0873CHO2

Let us do these activities before we read.

I Work in pairs. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher.
1. What do you think about the Republic Day Parade on 26 January?
2. What are the highlights of this parade?

3. What bravery awards are given on this day, and who receives them?

II Work in groups of four and discuss.
1. What qualities do you think a soldier should have?

2. If you had to share a message with a soldier, what would it be?

 
=
 _
> a
_

POORVI

etched:
permanently
fixed in
someone s
memory

beacon: a
source of
inspiration

valour: courage

 

Mera desh, mera desh re
Mera desh hua re roshan,
le qurban kiya tujh hee pe ye tan man...

o- 
Azadi xa
Amrit Wahotsav

This is a tribute to the valiant Major Somnath Sharma, India s
first recipient of the Param Vir Chakra, whose name is etched
in the annals of history. His bravery and sacrifice stand as a
beacon of inspiration for generations. At every intersection
of patriotism whether through the National War Memorial,
soul stirring patriotic songs, books, and stories recounting acts
of valour, or the celebrations of Azadi ka Amrit Mahotsav 
his memory is honoured. Major Somnath Sharma s legacy of
courage and devotion to the nation remains forever alive,
forever alive... reminding us of the ultimate price paid for
our freedom.

The serene Kashmir valley in the shadows of the majestic
Himalayas witnessed a tale of extraordinary heroism and

el un a ON

a =

ee ae
ae? 5 as ama gus AND DISPOSITIONS. 
Ric * 4 ot ij
: : =

sacrifice to protect the integrity of Indian borders. The day
began with the silence of a cold November dawn but ended
with echoes of courage that served as an inspiration for
generations to come.

This is the story of Major Somnath Sharma and the brave

men that he led on a mission to protect the Srinagar airport

from falling into the hands of a guerrilla force trained and

backed by Pakistan. This is a story of how 90 men managed to

foil the plan of some 500 infiltrators who wanted to capture j veiirators:
Srinagar and the Kashmir Valley and deliver a blow to _ people who
newly-independent India. secretly invade

The events that led to the Battle of Badgam started in August

1947, when Pakistan launched Operation Gulmargtoannexthe annex: to take
Kashmir Valley. This was in violation of an existing agreement Possession of
with Hari Singh, the Maharaja of Jammu and Kashmir,

who had committed Pakistan not to attack the state.

However, instead of honouring the commitment, the
Pakistani Army trained and equipped around 1000 invaders
who possessed deep knowledge of mountain passes and the
local terrain to enter Kashmir and take control of strategic
locations, including the Srinagar airport. The ultimate goal of
POORVI

=

+ 

combat: a
battle

unfounded: not
based on reason
or facts

 

=A
 _
> a

eerily: in
a strange,
frightening and
mysterious way

their plan was to engineer a revolt in Kashmir, overthrow the
government, and capture the territory. If they had succeeded,
it would have allowed them to control strategic mountain
passes, peaks, and rivers. On 22 October, Operation Gulmarg
was launched and these infiltrators invaded Kashmir,
which led to the Princely State becoming a part of India on
26 October 1947.

In response to this invasion, the Government of India sent its
troops to defend the people of Kashmir and India s borders on
27 October 1947. A contingent of troops posted to Jammu and
Kashmir was airlifted into Srinagar because the land route
through Pathankot was not in a good condition.

On 31 October, the D Company of the 4th Battalion of Kumaon
Regiment, under the command of Major Somnath Sharma,
was also flown into Srinagar. At that time, Major Somnath
Sharma s left hand was in plaster, but he insisted on being with
his company while in combat. He knew that this mission would
be very challenging and told his senior officers, I know my
men better than anyone else, and if they are going into action,
they are not going in without me. These words highlighted
his commitment to his men and his country.

Before their arrival in Srinagar, there had been unfounded
rumours of tribal movement towards the village of Badgam,
less than 5 kilometres away from the Srinagar airport. The
village was on a higher altitude than the airfield, and access
was through the village. Hence, it was important for Indian
forces to retain control of the area in order to protect troops
and facilitate supplies arriving via air.

In reality, the enemy had started arriving in Badgam in small
groups to avoid detection. On 03 November 1947, several
companies, including Major Somnath Sharma s D Company,
were sent to patrol and assess emerging threats in and around
the village. Throughout the day, the valley was eerily silent.
Around afternoon, the companies were ordered to return one
by one. D company with 90 soldiers was the last, and they
were expected to return by 2:00 p.m.

When the enemy (tribal guerrilla invaders), under the
command of the Pakistani army, saw that only a small group

VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS

of Indian soldiers were left behind in Badgam, they attacked
them. Their initial attack was met with stiffresistance by Major
Somnath and his men. However, Major Somnath correctly
visualised that the first attack was just a distraction. Shortly
thereafter, a major attack came from another side. By then,
Major Somnath Sharma and his 90 soldiers were facing about
500 invaders.

The Pakistani invaders sought to capture the Srinagar airfield
and its surrounding areas. It was clear to Major Somnath
Sharma that defending Srinagar town, the airfield, and the
wider valley was indeed difficult until reinforcements arrived.

After assessing the situation, he requested air strikes. He
bravely laid out ground panels to guide the aircraft towards
their target. The aerial attacks were successful in hitting the
tribal invaders, but they still outnumbered D Company by
almost seven to one, the attack on the positions occupied by
Major Somnath s men continued.

Vastly outnumbered and facing devastating fire, Major
Somnath Sharma and his men stood resolute. The air was
thick with the sound of gunfire and the cries of battle, but
Major Somnath Sharma s voice cut through the chaos, urging
his men to fight with tenacity and valour.

Despite heavy casualties and his own injuries, Major Somnath
Sharma displayed unparalleled bravery. He moved fearlessly
through the battlefield, directing fire, filling magazines for his
gunners, and encouraging his men to hold their ground.

cutnumberet
greater in

number
>

resolute:
determined

tenacity:
determination

unparalleled:
unmatched

magazines:
(here) containers
that hold
cartridges to be
fed into a gun

?

POORVI

ammunition:
a supply of
bullets, shells,
and explosives

crouched: sat
with knees bent

ON

conspicuous:
noticeable

posthumously:
after death
T shall not withdraw
an inch but will fight
to the last man and

the last round 

Major Somnath Sharma, PVC

However, as the battle progressed, D Company began running
out of ammunition. When Major Somnath Sharma informed
Brigade headquarters about this, he was asked to pull back.
Aware of the gravity of the situation, he responded with
the words, The enemy is only 50 yards from us. We are
heavily outnumbered. We are under devastating fire. I shall
not withdraw an inch but will fight to the last man and the
last round .

Just a few minutes later, when he was crouched in a trench
next to a machine gun operator, in order to help him load the
gun, his position was hit by a mortar shell, killing him instantly.

Despite losing their Major and faced with the overwhelming
numerical superiority of the enemy, the heroic actions of
late Major Somnath Sharma motivated his men to hold on to
their position for over six more hours before being overrun
by the enemy.

Their brave resistance provided time for reinforcements to
arrive, including flying in soldiers from the Punjab regiment
to Srinagar. The heroic deeds of Major Somnath and his men
thoroughly demotivated the enemy, causing more than 300
casualties, including injuring their leader.

In many significant ways, D Company s sacrifice and
Major Somnath s leadership saved Srinagar for India. The
4 KUMAON battalion was awarded the Battle Honour,
Srinagar. Major Somnath laid down his life for the nation at
the young age of 24. For this act of conspicuous bravery, Major
Somnath Sharma was awarded the Param Vir Chakra (PVC).
His citation reflects his heroism, patriotism, and courage. He
was the first recipient of the PVC, awarded posthumously for
gallantry and supreme sacrifice.

VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS

) MAJ SOMNATH SHARMA, PVC

Subject 1- HONOURS AMD AWARDS.

Herewith I am forwerding the following names for an
immediate award for person*l courage 4nd bravery :
i. No, Bank Nepe Unit Sprointment
IC-S21 T/PAJOR SOM-NATH SHARMA 4 KUMAON .C.'D' CO .

os a
2. HONOUR RECOMMENDED FoR = Iemecdate award of m.C.

GAR sirfielad Major &.N.Shar

Ly. view to

>
was despe to village, with a

fr infiltrating and attacking
: Airfield. jor Sherma's Coy wes involved
in action g*inst pproximately 1000 enemy strong.

M Jor Seren 8 leadership and personal cour ge
 na Foran fam f . by mov Som Dom to post

er ble ons eh ab os noises g@inst an overmajor near 4 hours and
inflic over 300 Soavatbaun on th s Net

even after his death his z
St iikeats enthusiasm made the Coy eo raene Poo st
how nd only withdrew in an orderly fashion when
ered by the re-inforcement Commander. But for this
offrr'*s oe ph aie sacrifice of his own life it is
: mead over run by th pet nd epaardnad Sat
e - op+rdised
KASHMIR operations. seni ba

a. Pataca act :- 3 Nov 47. BADGAM VILLAGE.
2 _a
Rye C02.

Com 4 Kur on Regt.
(CM .M. KHANNa )

POORVI

legacy: life
experiences,
values, beliefs,
and traditions
passed down
from generation

a? to generation

testament:
strong evidence
or proof

despatches:
official reports
on military
affairs

forged: shaped
or strengthened,
often through
hardship

We have delved into how the events of 03 November 1947,
played out. It is also worth knowing more about the early life
of Major Somnath and the events that led him to make the
ultimate sacrifice for the nation.

Born on 31 January 1923, in the picturesque town of Dadh in
Kangra, Himachal Pradesh, Somnath Sharma belonged to a
family with a rich military legacy. His father, Major General
Amar Nath Sharma, had served the nation with distinction.
Young Somnath was also deeply inspired by the valorous tales
of the Mahabharata, imparted to him by his grandfather.

From his early education at Sherwood College, Nainital, to
his rigorous training at the Royal Military College, Sandhurst,
Major Somnath Sharma s life was a testament to discipline
and dedication. Commissioned into the 8th Battalion,
19th Hyderabad Regiment in 1942, he served with distinction
during World War II in the Arakan Campaign in Burma,
earning mentions in despatches for his bravery. However,
it was during the Indo- Pakistan War of 1947-1948, particulary
in the battle of Badgam, that the legacy of Major Somnath
Sharma was truly forged.

The life and sacrifice of Major Somnath Sharma embody the
highest ideals of duty, honour, and patriotism. He has been
a source of inspiration for soldiers and citizens alike. Most
importantly, his story is a reminder of the sacrifices made by
countless men and women in defence of the motherland and
highlights the profound sense of duty that inspired them.

MAJOR
SOM WATH SHARMA PVC | FR
1923-1847 Ld

ca\
4 ; -_
g FPO No6n Ss

S--76 o>
We nat

WSR Ae 6s)

PVC SERIES-1 ISSUED BY THE ARMY POSTAL SERVICE

VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS

MINISTRY OF
&) gz i DEFENCE

CITATION IN RESPECT OF IC-521 MAJOR SOMNATH SHARMA

CITATION

On 03 Nov 1947, Major Somnath Sharma's company was ordered on a fighting patrol to
Badgam in the Kashmir Valley. He reached his objective at first light on 03 Nov and took up
a position south of Badgam at 1100 hours. The enemy, estimated at 500, attacked his company
position with three sides, the company began to sustain heavy casualties.

Fully realizing the gravity of the situation and the direct threat that would result to both the
aerodrome and Srinagar if the enemy attack was not held until reinforcements could
be rushed to close the gap leading to Srinagar via Humhama, Major Sharma urged his
company to fight the enemy tenaciously. With extreme bravery, he kept rushing across
the open ground to his sections exposing himself to heavy and accurate fire to urge them to
hold on. Keeping his nerve, he skillfully directed the fire of his section into the everadvancing enemy. He repeatedly exposed himself to the full fury of enemy fire and laid out
cloth strips to guide our aircraft onto their target in full view of the enemy.

Realising that casualties had affected the effectiveness of his light automatics, this officer,
whose left hand was in plaster, personally commenced filling magazines and issuing them
to light machine gunners. A mortar shell landing right in the middle of the ammunition
resulted in an explosion that killed him.

Major Sharma's company held onto its position and the remnants withdrew only when almost
completely surrounded. His inspiring example resulted in the enemy being delayed for
six hours. Thus, gaining time for our reinforcements to get into position at Humhama to
stem the tide of the enemy advance. His leadership, gallantry and tenacious defence were such
that his men were inspired to fight the enemy by seven to one for six hours, one hour which
was after this gallant officer had been killed.

He has set an example of courage and qualities seldom equaled in the history of the Indian
Army.

POORVI

In the quiet of the Kashmir Valley, where the echoes of
~ D Company s battle with infiltrators have long since faded,
the story of Major Somnath Sharma remains a beacon of

courage and sacrifice. His valour ensured that the tricolour

would continue to fly over Srinagar, and his name is forever

etched in the golden pages of India s military history. The life

poignant: and legacy of Major Somnath Sharma stands as a poignant

emotlonalland reminder of the price of freedom and the enduring spirit

sad of those who fought to protect it. His story, marked by

: selflessness and bravery, will continue to inspire and guide

a? generations to come, ensuring that his sacrifice is never to

- be forgotten. His name is etched on the Honour Wall of the
- National War Memorial.

N
a ) \
Y : SEP PARTAP:SINGH LINK RATTAN SINGH SEF
KUMAON WWADN,

pyc }LNK BHAGY

MA SOMNATH SHARMA: f ve
|

\F

j 10.28 OHAN siNGr
sUB MY

RIF

Honour Wall with Names of Bravehearts at the National War Memorial

Medal of Honour

N @ eo .
4 Let us discuss

Let us salute this braveheart.

Vande Mataram, vande mataram
Sujalam suphalam malayaja shitalam,
Shasya shyamalam mataram!

Vande Mataram, vande mataram
vande mataram...

Jai Hind

I Arrange the following events in chronological order. The first and the
last events have been marked for you. Share your answers with your
classmates and teacher.

1.

Major Somnath Sharma was born in 1923 in Kangra,
Himachal Pradesh. (1)

. Even after losing Major Somnath Sharma, the soldiers fought bravely

to save Srinagar for India.

. The D Company, under the command of Major Somnath Sharma, was

flown into Srinagar.

. Major Somnath Sharma underwent training at the Royal Military

College, Sandhurst.

. Major Somnath Sharma requested air strikes to combat the enemy

at Badgam.

. Major Somnath Sharma was commissioned into the 19th Hyderabad

Regiment in 1942.

. Major Somnath Sharma was killed immediately after a mortar shell

hit him.

. Major Somnath Sharma was the first recipient of the Param

Vir Chakra. (8)

- Let us think and reflect

I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow.

1.

Vastly outnumbered and facing devastating fire, Major Somnath
Sharma and his men stood resolute. The air was thick with the sound
of gunfire and the cries of battle, but Major Somnath Sharma s voice
cut through the chaos, urging his men to fight with tenacity and valour.

VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS
POORVI

Fart area erat erat aH
MAJOR SOMNATH SHARMA,PVC
200:

Despite heavy casualties and his own injuries, Major Somnath
Sharma displayed unparalleled bravery. He moved fearlessly through
the battlefield, directing fire, filling magazines for his gunners, and
encouraging his men to hold their ground.

(ij) Whatcan be inferred about the conditions from the line: The air
was thick with gunfire... 

A. The gunshots had stopped for a while.
B. There was intense fighting on the battlefield.
C. The invaders were retreating from the fight.
D. The Indian soldiers had achieved victory.

(ii) Complete the sentence with a suitable reason.

Despite heavy casualties, Major Somnath Sharma continued to
lead his men because

(iii) Select the correct option for both Assertion (A) and Reason (R)
given below:
(A): Major Somnath Sharma moved fearlessly through the
battlefield, even though he was injured.
(R): He believed his courage was important to motivate
the soldiers.

A. Both (A) and (R) are true, and (R) is the correct explanation
of (A).

B. Both (A) and (R) are true, but (R) is not the correct explanation
of (A).

C. (A) is true, but (R) is false.
D. (A) is false, but (R) is true.

(iv) Fill in the blank with the correct word from those given in the
brackets:

Major Somnath Sharma was filling magazines, and encouraging
his men to hold their ground despite
(injuries/worry)

. Born on 31 January 1923, in the picturesque town of Dadh in Kangra,

Himachal Pradesh, Somnath Sharma belonged to a family with a rich
military legacy. His father, Major General Amar Nath Sharma, had
served the nation with distinction, and young Somnath was deeply
inspired by the valorous tales of the Mahabharata, imparted to him by
his grandfather.

VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS

(i) What can be inferred about Somnath Sharma s early influences
on his career?

A. He was primarily influenced by his father s achievements in
the military.

B. Hisinspiration came solely from the tales of the Mahabharata.
C. His family and heritage inspired his bravery and sense of
duty.
D. He decided to join the military out of necessity rather than
passion.
(ii) Identify whether the following statement is true or false:
Somnath Sharma belonged to a wealthy family.

(iii) What does the phrase served the nation with distinction tell us
about Major General Amar Nath Sharma?

(He performed his duties with exceptional dedication, honour,
and excellence./He was highly respected for his contributions to
the country.)

(iv) Replace the underlined phrase with a word from the extract that
has a similar meaning.

My family and I visited a popular hill station and stayed in an
old but visually charming house surrounded by trees.

II Answer the following questions.

1.

 Major Somnath s legacy of courage and devotion to the nation remains
forever alive, forever alive... What is the significance of the repetition
in this line?

. Why do you think Major Somnath s leadership was critical during

the Battle of Badgam?

. What were Major Somnath s last words? What do they reflect about

his sense of duty?

. What might have been the outcome of the Battle of Badgam if Major

Somnath and his company had not held their ground?

. Why do you think Major Somnath s story continues to inspire soldiers

and civilians today?

. How can the values demonstrated by Major Somnath Sharma 

courage, duty, and self-sacrifice be applied in our daily lives?
POORVI

I

 

Let us learn

I Match the expressions from the text in Column 1 with the most suitable

situations given in Column 2.

Now, complete the following sentences using the expressions from
Column 1.

A.

The detective managed to by finding the hidden
evidence before the culprit could get rid of it.

. Thecompany s new advertising campaign was meant to

to their competitors sales.

. The hikers chose to despite the heavy rain, refusing to

turn back on their journey.

. Despite being heavily outnumbered, the soldiers vowed to defend

their homeland and , refusing to surrender to the
enemy forces.

Read the highlighted words in the following sentence from the text.

A contingent of troops posted to Jammu and Kashmir was air-lifted
into Srinagar...

There are many such collective nouns used in the context of armed forces.

Match the collective nouns in Column 1 to their meanings in Column 2.

You may refer to a dictionary.

VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS

 

1. regiment (i) a large body of troops ready :
for battle, especially an
infantry unit

2. squadron a permanent unit of an army
typically commanded by a
lieutenant _colonel/colonel
and divided into several
companies

3. fleet a small unit, typically
comprising 12-24 aircrafts
and their crews used in air
force, naval, or army aviation
services.

4. battalion a group of ships sailing
together, engaged in the
same activity, or under the
same ownership

Now, fill in the blanks suitably with words from Column 1 in the table.

A. The commanding officer addressed the entire of soldiers
during the morning assembly.

B. The admiral ordered the entire to set sail for battle.
C. The of infantry advanced slowly through the dense forest.

D. A of fighter jets was sent to intercept the enemy planes.

POORVI

III Read the following words from the text and fill in the blanks with the
& correct words by taking clues from the meanings given below in the box.

Meanings

1. To take and seize control:

2. To invade or occupy an area in large numbers:

3. To flood or overpower someone or something emotionally:
Now, create a list of at least five other verbs that begin with over and
frame sentences of your own.

7 IV In the following pairs of words, c is used for nouns, while s is used
a J for verbs.

* advice (noun) and advise (verb)
* practice (noun) and practise (verb)
 device (noun) and devise (verb)

* council (noun) and counsel (verb)

Now, fill in the blanks correctly with the words given in the brackets.

1. The teacher s (i) is always helpful, and she continues to

(ii) students on their career choices. (advice/advise)

2. The musician believes that daily (i)_ helps a lot, so she is
always ready to (ii) her harmonium lessons.
(practice/practise)

3. The scientist uses a strange (i) _ for experiments and plans
to (ii) new methods for his analysis. (device/devise)

4. The village (i) met to discuss issues and decided to
Gi) the villagers on important matters. (council/counsel)

Read the highlighted word in the following sentence from the text.
Most importantly, his story is a reminder of the sacrifices made by
countless men and women in defence of the motherland.

In terms of meaning, there is no difference between the two words
(defence, defense). In American English the word is spelt with an s ,
whereas in British English it is spelt with a c , which is the preferred
spelling. The word has several different meanings, but it is mostly
used to mean the act of protecting someone or something against
attack or criticism .

VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS

V Read the highlighted words in the following sentences from the text.
e ...ended with echoes of courage that serve as an inspiration... %

 A contingent of troops posted to Jammu and Kashmir was airlifted Py
into Srinagar... '

* D Company with 90 soldiers was the last and they were expected to
return by 2:00 p.m.

 The life and sacrifice of Major Somnath Sharma embody the highest
ideals of duty, honour, and patriotism. .

The highlighted words are either singular verbs or plural verbs.
They are in agreement with the subject of the sentence. This is called
Subject-Verb Agreement.

Now, fill in the blanks for the following sentences by choosing the correct |
verb given within brackets. YU,
1. The bouquet of flowers (is/are) beautiful. 7
+
2. Neither the teacher nor the students (was/were) aware of

the change in the schedule.

3. Each of the participants (has/have) submitted their projects
on time.
4. The data collected by the researchers (shows/show)

significant trends.

5. One of the players (was/were) injured during the match.

6. Either the children or their guardian __ (has/have) to attend
the meeting.

7. A pair of shoes (is/are) missing from the rack.
8. Neither of the statements (is/are) true.
9. The members of the jury (has deliver/have delivered) their

verdict to the court.
10. Mathematics (is/are) an interesting subject for
many students.

VI Read the following passage and correct the incorrect usage of verbs. One
example has been done for you.

A battalion of soldiers stand at attention as the National flag are raised.

A battalion of soldiers stands at attention as the National flag is raised.

POORVI

Each soldier salute with pride while the commander and his assistants
inspects the parade. The sound of marching feet echo through the air as
a group of cadets prepare for their drill. Meanwhile, a convoy of military
vehicles pass by, drawing cheers from the gathered crowd.

Let us listen

I You will listen to a talk about the Param Vir Chakra. As you listen,
complete the sentences by filling in the blanks with one or two exact

words or phrases you hear. (Transcript for teacher on page 98)
 1. TheParam Vir Chakra signifies the Wheelofthe Ultimate ,

2. The Param Vir Chakra is awarded to someone who shows exemplary
bravery while fighting with the

3. The Param Vir Chakra was introduced as a Gallantry Medal in 1947
by the

4. The design of the Param Vir Chakra is inspired by Sage Dadhichi, who

was a
5. The state emblem in the centre of the Param Vir Chakra is surrounded
by the Vajra and

Let us speak

I As the citizens of a nation, we all must fulfil our duty. In groups of 4-5,
speak about how you propose to serve your nation.

You can choose from the themes given below:

 Saving the environment
 Health and well-being
 Helping others

 Righteous conduct

Wii ft

You may use the sentence prompts given below to organise
what you speak about.

* I believe one of the best ways to serve the nation is by...
 Asmall change we can make is... and it will have a big impact because...
 If everyone contributes by... it can lead to...

* One of the biggest challenges we face is... and I propose we address
it by...

VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS

 We can make a difference by working together as a team, if we...

 Serving the nation is not just about big actions; even small efforts like...
matter.

Let us write

I A letter of enquiry is a formal letter written to seek detailed information
about something the writer wants to know. For example, it can be used
for joining a course, organising an event, knowing details about a trip,
etc. The language used is formal and specific, with relevant queries.

Now, write a letter of enquiry. Your school wishes to organise a visit to
a Memorial in your state/region. Write the letter to the incharge of that
memorial requesting for information regarding available dates for visits,
the duration of the tour, any entry fees, and guidelines for student groups.

* Follow the given layout.

* Use the cues given below to draft the letter.

(Sender s address)

(Date)

(Receiver s address)

Subject: Enquiry about a School Visit to a Memorial

Dear Sir,

(Body of the letter)

Yours sincerely,

(Name)
POORVI

SS

| Body of the Letter |! Prompts for Enquiry
F------------------ 4------------------------------------------- 4d
| Paragraph 1: State | Thisis to enquire about...
| the purpose of =: vy Could you please provide details about...? |
| writing 1 }
Fo------------------ 4#--------------- eee -- -- - - e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e eee 4
| Paragraph 2: Ask iv Firstly, I request you to share...
| for more details ' v Secondly, I would appreciate it if you |
could explain...
; I would also be grateful to get further |
; details on...
: iv Lastly, could you clarify if... ?
Fe--------- ee eee eee F---- -- eee er ee er ee ee er ee er er er er er ee ee ee ee ee eer rrr 4d
) Paragraph 3: | An early reply will be greatly appreciated,
| Request anearly | asit will help...
; Tesponse ' Ilook forward to your guidance and support |
1 I I
1 for making this trip meaningful. :

Let us explore

I

Out of twenty-one PVC awardees, Major Somnath Sharma was the first
recipient of the PVC, and Captain Vikram Batra was the last recipient of
the PVC, the highest gallantry award.

Captain Vikram Batra, is popularly
remembered as the Shershah of
Kargil . His iconic success signal was
6 Yeh Dil Mange More . Captain Vikram
-/ Batra, the D Company commander
was tasked to capture Point 5140 on
20 June 1999, which he did with
exemplary courage. After Point 5140
was captured, 13 JAK RIF was tasked
to capture Point 4875. On 07 July 1999,

~ . Captain Batra led the assault from the
A bust of Param Vir Chakra Awardee Captain Vikram

Batra at the National War Memorial in Delhi. front and engaged m a physical fight
(Source: National War Memorial) with the enemy. He killed five enemy

soldiers at point blank range and himself sustained serious injuries.
Despite his injuries, his dauntless determination inspired his men to
clear the enemy from a dominating position. Later, he succumbed to
his injuries. His fearless determination and leadership encouraged his
company men to avenge his death and finally captured Point 4875.

 
if PF aie \

eS
j
ite rere |poRemesitos Jiven

VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS

His inspiring leadership, dedication to duty, and steadfast love for
his country continue to be an inspiration for the younger generation. ,
He attended the call of duty with absolute disregard for his personal

safety. He was awarded the Param Vir Chakra, (Posthumously). bs
II Gallantry awards in India are given to military personnel and others for
displaying extraordinary courage in the line of duty.
Some of the gallantry awards in India are:
 Param Vir Chakra: The highest military award in India, awarded for
the most conspicuous bravery in the presence of the enemy. , pe
 Maha Vir Chakra: The second-highest military award in India, : .
awarded for acts of gallantry in the presence of the enemy. . |
 Vir Chakra: Awarded for acts of gallantry in the presence of the enemy. =
Find out more about gallantry awards. 4
LJ
III The Indian government has been steadfast in its initiatives to boost the .
representation of women in the Indian Armed Forces. These women ss

have been serving the nation selflessly and with pride. Find out the key
roles of women in the Indian Army. Share the information with your
classmates and teacher.

IV Birsa Munda: A Saga of Courage and Sacrifice

Birsa Munda, a revered tribal freedom fighter, spiritual leader, oe
and folk hero, belonged to the Munda tribe. Celebrated as a ch
valiant warrior and a charismatic figure, he emerged as a
powerful symbol of tribal resistance against British colonial
rule. Among the people of Jharkhand, he is affectionately
known as Dharti Aaba Father of the Land and is honoured :

Pazar aor aft 150d oreicht

as a divine figure for his selfless dedication to his people. 1S00 BRTH ANNIVERSARY OF IRSA MUNDA

A commemorative stamp designed by Shri Sankha Samanta captures his
powerful presence. It features Birsa Munda addressing his followers,
with a determined expression that reflects his unwavering vision of
tribal unity, empowerment, and self-governance. This stamp serves as
a lasting tribute to his pivotal role in India s freedom struggle and his
relentless commitment to protecting tribal rights.

Source: https://pib.gov.in/PressReleasePage.aspx?PRID=2073652

V Make a list of the patriotic songs in any language, including songs from
your region. Share the songs with your classmates and teacher.

SOMEBODY S MOTHER

Let us do these activities before we read.

I Recall a time you helped someone.

Write two words describing:

1. What were your feelings after you
did so?

2. What might have been the feelings of
the person whom you helped?

Share your answers with your

classmates and teacher.

II Work in pairs. Read the words given below. Circle the words you would
associate with an elderly person and underline the words you would
associate with a school student. Share the reasons for your choices with
your classmates and teacher.

! strong worried trembling hastening !
firm bent merry grey |
| slow guide helpful
( 1

III Read the lines.

The woman was old and ragged and grey
And bent with the chill of the Winter s day.

Select the suitable meaning of ragged as used in these lines. There are
other four meanings given below. Discuss with your classmates and
teacher.

1. (of clothes) old and torn; synonym: shabby
* aragged jacket

2. Having an outline, an edge, or a surface that is not straight or even
* aragged coastline

3. Not smooth or regular; not showing control or careful preparation
 I could hear the sound of his ragged breathing.
 Their performance was still very ragged.

4. (Informal) very tired, especially after physical effort
 The elderly man was ragged after climbing the stairs.

Sa, Let us read

The woman was old and ragged and grey
And bent with the chill of the Winter s day.

The street was wet with a recent snow
And the woman s feet were aged and slow.

She stood at the crossing and waited long,
Alone, uncared for, amid the throng (

Of human beings who passed her by rai
Nor heeded the glance of her anxious eyes.

Down the street, with laughter and shout,
Glad in the freedom of school let out, 

ey

Came the boys like a flock of sheep,
Hailing the snow piled white and deep.

Past the woman so old and grey he

Hastened the children on their wayy ~

oe

Nor offered a helping hand to her =ae d
So meek, so timid, afraid to stir (\

te
Lest the carriage wheels or the horses feet &
Should crowd her down in the slippery street.

At last came one of the merry troop,
The gayest laddie of all the 0 ea
He paused beside her and whispered low,

 T ll help you cross, if you wish to go. 

Her aged hand on his strong young arm
She placed, and so, without hurt or harm,

He guided the trembling feet along,
Proud that his own were firm and strong.

Then back again to his friends he went,
His young heart happy and well content.

 She s somebody s mother, boys, you know, \
For all she s aged and poor and slow ,

 And I hope some fellow will lend a hand .
To help my mother, you understand , Tj

 If ever she s poor and old and grey, . aad
When her own dear boy is far away. 

And somebody s mother bowed low her head
In her home that night, and the prayer she said

Was God be kind to the noble boy,
Who is somebody s son, and pride and joy! 

nA '
e Mary Dow BRINE my

\Y 3 * \ c *: .* ah a : * a ;

VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS

Let us discuss ~(%

I Arrange the events of the poem in the correct order of occurrence. 7
Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. P|

. The boy returned to his friends, feeling proud of what he had done.
. The old woman stood alone at the crossing, hesitant to move.

. A group of schoolboys passed by, playing, and laughing.

. The boy offered to help the old woman cross the street.

. The woman prayed for the boy who helped her.

. The children hurried past the old woman without offering help.

Nn uu FP WwW DY &

. The woman placed her hand on the boy s arm, and he guided her
safely across the street. \ / 
8. The boy thought about his own mother and hoped someone would ]
help her one day. - 

II Fill in the blanks by choosing the correct answer from the options given
in the brackets. .

1. The central theme of the poem is . (kindness and empathy/
adventure and courage)

2.The tone of the poem is . (humorous and playful/
sympathetic and hopeful)

3. The poem is written in couplets with __ lines in each stanza.
(four/two)

4. The structure of the poem gives a rhythmic flow that reflects both the
. (narrative and emotions/story s pace and message)

5. The poem follows a rhyme scheme of __ . (AABB/ABAB)

III Pick examples from the poem for the following poetic devices.
1. Simile Gi
2. Alliteration 7 ~
3. Repetition

IV Complete the following sentences appropriately explaining the imagery.

1.The poem uses imagery to describe scenes of a bustling street.
We know this by the phrase

2.The line The street was wet with a recent snow suggests
a cold and weather, emphasising the
woman s helplessness.

POORVI

V Complete the following sentence with a suitable reason.
The poet repeats the phrase Somebody s mother because it
VI Complete the analogy:

The old woman: vulnerable and neglected :: The young boy:

_"

+? | 1. The woman was old and ragged and grey

k# And bent with the chill of the Winter s day.
= A The street was wet with a recent snow

And the woman s feet were aged and slow.
(i) What does the phrase ragged and grey refer to ?
A. The woman s emotional state that day.
B. The woman s old and worn-out appearance.
C. The weather conditions of the particular day.
D. The colour of the street and the surroundings.
(ii) Complete the following sentence with a suitable reason:

The woman was bent with the chill of the Winter s day because
she was

(iii) Identify the fact and opinion from the following sentences:
A. The street was wet with recent snow. _

B. The woman was too weak to cross the street on her own.

2. He guided the trembling feet along,
Proud that his own were firm and strong.

(iii)

(iv) Why do you think the woman s feet were described as aged and -(*
slow ?

Then back again to his friends he went,

His young heart happy and well content.

(i) What does the contrast between the
 trembling feet of the old woman and
the firm and strong feet of the boy
emphasise?

(ii) Fill in the blank given below by selecting
the correct option from the brackets.

VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS

The poem tells us that the boy was proud that his feet were
strong. 
This tells us that the boy was . (arrogant about being
strong/grateful for his ability to help)

What is the boy most likely to tell his friends on getting back?
A.
B.
Cc.
D.

I m so glad I could help her.

I m worried about her safety.

I m surprised she forgot to thank me.
I m thankful for all your support.

(iv) Rectify the false sentence given below.

The young boy s actions were driven by a logical decision.

II Answer the following questions.

1.

What might be the old woman s fears as she waited for a long time at
the crossing?

. How does the poet show the helplessness of the old woman? Support \)
your answer with evidence from the poem. ~ (Gp
. Why does the boy decide to help the old woman? What does this tell | \ 5

us about him?

. How was the boy s approach towards the old woman different from
that of the other boys in the group?

. Justify the appropriateness of the title of the poem.

. What does the poem suggest about the role of empathy and humanity
in society?

POORVI

Let us learn

I The grid given below has the antonyms of the words from the text.
i o, Locate these words in the grid horizontally, vertically, and diagonally.
One example has been done for you. You may refer to a dictionary.

II Match the words from the text given in Column 1 with the underlined
phrases in Column 2.

N

1. hastened | (i) The mother heard the baby move slightly in the
cradle at night.

2. heeded (ii) It is our duty to give support to the poor.

3. stir (iii) The students worked quickly to complete the
project and submit it on time.

(iv) All the boxes were kept in a heap at one place.

5. piled (v) They came forward to help us when we were
in need.

6. offered (vi) The stranded people were brought to safety
because they paid attention to our advice.

VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS

III In the poem, the poet uses the idiom lend a hand which means help
somebody . Some more idioms using hand are given in Column 1. 2
Match these idioms with their meanings in Column 2. You may refer to
a dictionary. bd

4. give somebody a big hand (iv) become difficult to control 
5. work hand in hand (v) be very busy 
6. have your hands full (vi) allow somebody to do _
something with full freedom A

IV Complete the following analogy by filling in the blanks with the correct
words from the poem.

1. __ 1! winter :: heat : summer
. hurt: :: old: aged

. whispered : shouted :: humble: _
3

4. eyes: :: legs : walk
5. having a lot of money: wealthy :: densely packed people: _

Read the lines from the poem given below.
Lest the carriage wheels or the horses feet
Should crowd her down in the slippery street.

 Lest is a conjunction that means to prevent something bad or
unpleasant from happening. To better understand its usage in a
sentence, we can replace lest with just in case .

For example, in the sentence She showed all the documents lest we
doubt her , the word lest can be replaced with just in case to mean
that she showed the documents to prevent any doubt.
POORVI
Fo
J e
Let us listen
& . I You will listen to a woman read the special broadcast of the news. As
\

you listen, arrange the pictures in the correct sequence of the events that
took place. (Transcript for teacher on page 99)

II You will once again listen to the special broadcast of the news. As you
listen, complete the following sentences with one to three exact words.

: 1. The woman was having a difficult time staying afloat due to the

; 2. Rohan leapt into the river to save the woman without any

> a 3. Rohan s act of bravery was witnessed by

4. Rohan was honoured at the Vigyan Bhawan for his incredible courage
and

5. Rohan proved that when it comes to saving lives, age is

VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS

fp Let us speak

I Read aloud the list of words from the poem that end in -ed . As you read, 
focus on the final sound of each word and place them in the appropriate AF
columns. One example has been done for you.

ragged aged waited heeded

offered paused guided whispered

Note: Adjectives that come before a noun and end with ed have /id/as =
=
5]
a
at

the final sound.

I

-_

Work in pairs. Narrate an incident where you helped someone in the
past. Take turns to speak and use the cue cards given below.

at school in the neighbourhood
classmate explaining a concept cleanliness campaign

at the market place in the playground
elderly carrying bags a friend gets injured

You may use the following prompts.
Beginning the Story Describing the Experience

 It all started when... At that moment, I realised...
 The day began like any other... | * I was completely taken by
 I still remember... surprise...
+ At that moment, I realised... * The next few hours were...
* I couldn t believe my eyes when

I saw...
Beginning the Story Describing the Experience

 Iwas overjoyed/thrilled/ From that day on...
extremely satisfied * This memory reminds me to
 A wave of relief/joy/excitement always...
washed over me... * This experience taught me the
 I felt a mixture of emotions... value of...
 I have never felt... In the end, I realised...
POORVI

Let us write

I Write a diary entry of a day you helped someone in need.
 

Remember to include the following points while writing it.

 Start with a sentence describing the day.
 Mention whom you helped.
v Explain the situation in which the other person needed help.
v Add the place and time of the day when the situation arose.
 Describe how you helped the other person.
ay? v Describe the reaction of the person you helped.
 Mention how you felt during and after helping the person.
x Conclude by mentioning why you would do something like this again.
' You may begin like this:
P 26 April 20xx, Saturday 8:00 p.m.
Dear Diary,
\\/- Today, I feel was a special day...

g ssl
S

 Let us explore

I Did you know that even Earth has been referred to as mother in the
ancient scriptures of India? In section 12.1.12 of Prthvi-Suikta (hymn-tothe-earth) of Atharva Veda, Earth is referred to as mother and us as her
children by stating:

It can be translated as Earth is my mother and I am her child .

II Work in groups of four. Find out the names of countries that refer to
their country as motherland and a few others as fatherland . Share
your findings with your classmates and teacher.

VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS

III Read the poem and enjoy.

A Nation s Strength

Not gold, but only men can make
A people great and strong...
Men who for truth and honour s sake
Stand fast and suffer long.

Brave men who work while others sleep,
Who dare while others fly...
They build a nation s pillars deep
And lift them to the sky.

RALPH WALDO EMERSON
(Note: Here, men refers to both men and women)

IV Make a gratitude card for your mother/grandmother to thank her for
at least five things that she does for you. Also write two things that you
would do regularly to help them. Use recycled material to make and
decorate the card.

*: Write your own message

:

VERGHESE KURIEN I TOO HAD A DREAM

Let us do these activities before we read.

I Arrange the worldwide means of communication given below in the
timeline provided. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher.

 _

4S

1. telephone 3. postcard

&

4. telegraph 5. mobile phone 6. carrier pigeons

old new

II Workin pairs and discuss the following things. Share your answers with
your classmates and teacher.

1. The reasons for change in the means of communication over
the years.

2. The means of communication that you prefer to use and the reason
for your choice.

3. Communication through social media: its benefits and precautions
that one should take against its misuse.

VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS

Let us read

V KURIEN
ANAND 388001 INDIA

TO MY GRANDSON

Anand, 2005
My dear Siddharth,

When did I write to you last? I have trouble even remembering! In today s
fast-paced world we have become so addicted to instant communication
that we prefer to use a telephone. But speaking on the telephone only
gives us an immediate but fleeting joy. Writing is different. Writing 
even if it is a letter not only conveys our present concerns and views of
the events taking place around us but it becomes a possession that can be
treasured and re-read over the years, with great, abiding pleasure.

You may not wish to read it all right away but, perhaps, a couple of
decades or more from now, you will pick up these jottings of mine again
and they will give you a deeper understanding of what I have done, and
the reasons I pursued a life of service to our nation s farmers. You will
then discover in them a valuable reminder of the days just before the
world entered the twenty-first century. And you may want to share my
memories with those of your generation, or even younger, to provide a
glimpse of the world your grandparents lived in and knew.

I started my working life soon after our country became independent.
The noblest task in those days was to contribute in whatever way we
could towards building an India of our dreams a nation where our
people would not only hold their heads high in freedom but would be
free from hunger and poverty. A nation where our people could live with
equal respect and love for one another. A nation that would eventually
be counted among the foremost nations of the world. It was then that I
realised, in humility, that choosing to lead one kind of life means putting
aside the desire to pursue other options. This transformation took place
within me fifty years ago, when I agreed to work for a small cooperative
of dairy farmers who were trying to gain control over their lives.

To be quite honest, service to our nation s farmers was not the career I
had envisioned for myself. But somehow, a series of events swept me
along and put me in a certain time with a choice that would transform
my life. I could have pursued a career in metallurgy and become the

addicted:
dependent on
something

fleeting:
momentary or
short-lived

abiding
pleasure:

a feeling of
happiness that
continues for a
long time

jottings: brief
notes

foremost:
leading

humility:
modesty/
quality of being
humble
pursue: follow

envisioned:
imagined

or expected
something to
happen ina
particular way
fill

POORVI

ardently: ina
way that shows
strong feelings

poise: ina calm
and confident
manner

adhered: to
continue to
support

integrity:
honest and
strong moral
principles

correlation:

a connection
between two or
more things
V KURIEN
ANAND 388001 INDIA

chief executive of a large company. Or, opted for a commission in the
Indian Army and maybe retired as a general. Or, I could have left for
the US and gone on to become a highly successful NRI. Yet, I chose none
of these because somewhere, deep down, I knew I could make a more
meaningful contribution by working here in Anand, Gujarat.

Your grandmother too made an important choice. She knew, in those
days, life in Anand could not offer even the simple comforts that we take
for granted today. However, she ardently supported my choice to live
and work in Anand. That choice of your grandmother to stand by me has
given me an everlasting strength, always ensuring that I shouldered my
responsibilities with poise.

Whenever I have received any recognition for my contributions towards
the progress of our country, I always emphasised that it is a recognition
of the achievements of many people with whom I had a privilege to
be associated with. I would like to stress even more strongly that my
contributions have been possible only because I have consistently
adhered to certain values. Values that I have inherited from my parents
and other family elders; values that I saw in my mentor and supporter
here in Anand Tribhuvandas Patel. I have often spoken of integrity as
the most important of these values, realising that integrity and personal
integrity, at that is being honest to yourself. If you are always honest to
yourself, it does not take much effort in always being honest with others.

I have also learnt what I am sure you, too, will find out some day. Life
is a privilege and to waste it would be wrong. In living this privilege
called life , you must accept responsibility for yourself, always use your
talents to the best of your ability and contribute somehow to the common
good. That common good will present itself to you in many forms every
day. If you look around you, you will find there is a lot waiting to be
done: your friend may need some help, your teacher could be looking
for a volunteer, or the community you live in will need you to make a
contribution. I hope that you, too, will discover, as I did, that failure is not
about not succeeding. Rather, it is about not putting in your best effort
and not contributing, however modestly, to the common good.

In life you, too, will discover as I did, that anything can go wrong atany time
and mostly does. Yet, there is little correlation between the circumstances
of people s lives and how happy they are. Most of us compare ourselves
with someone we think is happier a relative, an acquaintance, or often,
someone we barely know. But when we start looking closely we realise
that what we saw were only images of perfection. And that will help us
understand and cherish what we have, rather than what we don t have.

VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS

V KURIEN
ANAND 388001 INDIA

Do youremember when you accompanied me atthe magnificent ceremony
in Delhi where our President awarded me the Padma Vibhushan in 1999?
With great pride, you slipped the medal around your neck, looked at it in
awe and asked me very innocently if you could keep it. Do you remember
the answer your grandmother and I gave you? We told you that of course,
this medal was yours as much as it was mine but that you should not be
satisfied in merely keeping my award the challenge before you was to
earn your own reward for the work that you did in your lifetime.

And in the end, if we are brave enough to love, strong enough to rejoice in
another s happiness and wise enough to know that there is enough to go
around for all, then we would have lived our lives to the fullest.

I would like to dedicate these musings to you, Siddharth, and to the
millions of other children of your generation in our country, in the hope
that upon reading them you will be inspired enough to go bravely out
into the world and work tirelessly in your chosen field for the larger good
of the country, for the larger good of humanity. Remember, rewards that
come to you then are the only true rewards for a life well-spent.

With my fondest love,

awe ff
Matta

(V KURIEN)

Who says one man
cannot make a change?

Let us discuss

A fact is something that can be proven true or false. A fact is not based
on people s beliefs. An opinion on the other hand is a belief, feeling or
judgement, and can vary from one person to another. An opinion cannot
be proven.

 musings 2
_ thoughts on /

something

one has been
thinking about
carefully for a
long time

/)

/

POORVI

I Identify which of the following statements are facts and which are
& _ opinions. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher.
 \

1. But speaking on the telephone only gives us an immediate but
fleeting joy.

2. Istarted my working life soon after our country became independent.

3. To be quite honest, service to our nation s farmers was not the career
I had envisioned for myself.

. I knew I could make a more meaningful contribution by working
here in Anand, Gujarat.

. ... values that I saw in my mentor and supporter here in Anand 
Tribhuvandas Patel.

. Life is a privilege, and to waste it would be wrong.

. [hope that you, too, will discover, as I did, that failure is not about
not succeeding.

. ... the magnificent ceremony in which the President awarded me the
Padma Vibhushan in 1999?

 Let us think and reflect

I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow.

1. In today s fast-paced world we have become so addicted to instant
communication that we prefer to use a telephone. But speaking on the
telephone only gives us an immediate but fleeting joy.

y Writing is different. Writing even if it is a letter not
only conveys our present concerns and views of the events
_ taking place around us but it becomes a possession that
<> can be treasured and re-read over the years, with great,
Pe abiding pleasure.

(i) Fill in the blank given below by selecting the correct option

\ 7 from the brackets.
PD 4 When the writer refers to a fast-paced world , he is speaking ofa
\ world where . (communication happens quickly

but lacks depth/people have more time to write and reflect)

(ii) Select the option that applies correctly to both Assertion (A) and
Reason (R).

(A): Writing letters can be treasured and re-read over the years.

(R): Speaking on the telephone provides long lasting joy.

(iii)

(iv)

VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS

A. Both (A) and (R) are true, and (R) is the correct explanation
of (A).

B. Both (A) and (R) are true, but (R) is not the correct explanation
of (A).

C. (A) is true, but (R) is false.
D. Both (A) and (R) are false.
Identify whether the statement given below is true or false.

The writer feels that letter-writing is a class apart from other
kinds of writing.

Which of the following is the most appropriate title for the given
extract?

A. The Rise of Instant Communication

B. The Fleeting Delight of Phone Calls

C. The Lasting Joy of Written Words

D. Living in a Fast-paced World

. Your grandmother too made an important choice. She knew, in those
early days, life in Anand could not offer even the simple comforts that
we take for granted today. However, she ardently supported my choice
to live and work in Anand. That choice of your grandmother to stand
by me has given me an everlasting strength, always ensuring that I
shouldered my responsibilities with poise.

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

How can we Say that the grandmother shared her husband s
dedication to a greater cause?

Complete the following with the correct option from the two
given in brackets.

The fact that the writer (grandfather) praises his wife tells us
that he (truly values/quietly accepts) her
role in his life.

Complete the following sentence with the correct option from
those given below.

Based on the information in the extract, we can infer that the
grandmother had all of the following traits EXCEPT

A. encouraging B. understanding

C. comforting D. thoughtful

Select the phrase that conveys showed grace under pressure
and carried out my duties with dignity and confidence .
POORVI

II Answer the following questions.

 1.

What event does Dr. Kurien refer to when he mentions receiving the
Padma Vibhushan?

. How did Dr. Kurien s decision to join the cooperative in Anand affect

his life?

. Dr. Kurien s decision to work in Anand reveals his values and sense

of duty. Explain.

. Why did Dr. Kurien write the letter to his grandson?

. According to Dr. Kurien life is a privilege and it is wrong to waste it .

What is your opinion on this?

. What message does Dr. Kurien want to convey about selfless service

and its long-term impact on the society?

. I Replace the underlined words in each sentence with the correct synonym
from the box. You may refer to a dictionary.

essential swift lifelong
momentary useful splendid

. He received the award in a magnificent ceremony.
. I felt a fleeting joy when I received the appreciation for my song.

. With today s instant communication, we can share information

across the world in seconds.

. Our school focuses on the core values collaboration, innovation,

and unity.

. My teacher s advice on time management is a valuable reminder of

the importance of planning.

. Reading books and listening to music can give abiding pleasure that

will last forever.

VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS

II Match the expressions from the text in Column 1 with their meanings in
Column 2.

1. in all humility (i) to speak in a truthful way

2. hold their heads high (ii) doing something using all your
skills, talents, and knowledge

3. to be quite honest (iii) observed with great respect and
wonder

4. to the best of your ability | (iv) being humble and having no
feeling of self-importance

5. looked at in awe (v) in the innermost part of the self

6. somewhere deep down _ | (vi) be confident and have a positive
feeling

III Make as many words as you can out of the following words. One example
has been done for you.

1. community city, toy, tune, unity, mutiny, cot
. important

. magnificent

. Satisfied

. generation

rn wT FP WwW ND

. achievement

IV Let us play a word game antakshari.
1. Write the synonym of the word according to the clues given below.

2. For example, the synonym of the first word, IMPORTANT ends with the
letter T . The synonym of the second word begins with T , TROUBLE .
Then write the synonym of the third word starting with the letter E .

3. Now, continue with the word game.

(i) major (synonym) (ii) problem (synonym)
(iii) uneven (antonym) (iv) related to post office
(v) our moral duty (vi) related to time

(vii) prosperous (synonym) (viii) related to being alive

*
- bel
ad
POORVI

V Study the highlighted punctuation marks in the following sentences

VI

from the text.

1. ... but that you should not be satisfied in merely keeping my awards 
the challenge before you was to earn your own rewards for the work
that you did in your lifetime.

2. Writing even if it is a letter not only conveys our present concerns
and views of the events taking place around us, but it becomes
a possession.

The highlighted punctuation is a long dash that can be used to link words
or numbers or to create a pause in a sentence. There are two main types:
the shorter en dash (-) and the longer em dash ( ).

The en dash (-) represents a span or range in numbers or dates.

For example, it can indicate time periods, like train operates JuneSeptember or page numbers, such as refer to pages 50-75 or to show
scores, India won the series 2-1 .

The em dash ( ) is used to add extra information or to show a change
in thought within a sentence. For example, The exhibition held in
the main hall features local artists. Or I bumped into someone
unexpected my old teacher. 

Note: Do not add spaces around the dash and avoid overusing them.

Read the sentences below and insert either an em dash ( ) or an
en dash (-) suitably.

Gi) Theconference will be held from March 15 March 20.
(ii) Ihave lived in Kanpur Raipur for five years now.

(iii) The artist known for her vibrant paintings will be showcasing her
work in Guwahati.

(iv) The scores for the final match were 2 3.
(v) Myfavourite snacks samosas, pakoras, and jalebis are all from India.

(vi) The train journey from Belagavi Bengaluru takes less than ten
hours.

(vii) I just finished reading the book it was absolutely amazing!

(viii) The event will take place on September 1 September 5.

Study the highlighted words in the following sentences from the text.

1. We told you that of course, this medal was yours as much as it
was mine...

2. ...who were trying to gain control over their lives.

3. I have always emphasised that it s a recognition of the achievements
of many people...

VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS

In the given sentences, yours and theirs indicate possession 
something belonging to you and them, respectively. But, it s does not 6,
indicate possession rather is the contracted form of it is .
Note the following differences
It s: is the contraction of it is or it has 
 It s getting dark outside.
Its: indicates that something belongs to you.
 The dog wagged its tail.
You're: is the contraction of you are %0, > 
* You re going to love this book. 7 |
Your: indicates that something belongs to you.
 Can I have one of your books? |
They re: is the contraction of they are 7
* They re coming to the field trip.
Their: indicates possession
 We should contact their manager.

Fill in the blanks by choosing the correct word from the options given in
the brackets.

(i) Please remember to bring ___(your/you re) assignment book.

(ii) The team celebrated __ (their/they re) victory after the
match.

(iii) (its/it s) important to stay hydrated during the hot
summer days.

(iv) I can t believe (your/you re) going to the mango
festival today.

(v) The students said (they re/their) excited for the field
trip tomorrow.

(vi) The tree lost (its/it s) leaves in the winter.

VII Read the following phrases from the text.

1. In today s fast-paced world
2. On the telephone
3. With great, abiding pleasure
4. In the chapters that follow
POORVI

5. Ata certain time
6. With equal respect and love
The given phrases are Prepositional Phrases.

Prepositional phrases are groups of words that begin with a
preposition and include a noun or pronoun as the object of the
preposition. These phrases provide additional information about
time, place, manner, cause, direction, or relationship.

Now, complete the following sentences with _ suitable
* prepositional phrases.

(i) The children played happily in

(ii) Nisha placed the vase on

(iii) We discussed the project in

(iv) Preethi found the lost book under

(v) The cat slept on

VilIRearrange the following jumbled words and phrases _ into
meaningful sentences.

1. barked/at the strangers/the dog/loudly/the house/walking by
2. wrote/my classmate/during the/a story/summer vacations

3. enjoyed/under the trees/they/by the lake/a picnic

4. in his/grandfather s room/hung/he/the painting
. studied/with great determination/for/students/the/exam

I

II

Ill

VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS

Let us listen

You will listen to the passage about Evelyn Glennie s journey in
overcoming her hearing loss through music and turning a physical
disability into a success story. (Transcript for teacher on page 100)

After listening, match the words given in Column 1 with their meanings
given in Column 2.

Listen to the passage once again and state whether the statements given
below are true or false.

1. Evelyn Glennie became deaf suddenly.

2. Her headmistress ignored the signs of her hearing loss.
3. Ron Forbes was a percussionist who helped Evelyn.

4, Evelyn used her skin and bones to sense music.

5. She gave up on music after her diagnosis.

Answer the following questions in one or two words.
1. How did Evelyn turn her disability into strength?
2. What role did Ron Forbes play in her life?

3. What lessons can we learn from Evelyn s story about how to treat
others who have different abilities or challenges?

POORVI
Let us speak
, 7 I Read the highlighted word in the following sentence from the text.
*
That common good will present itself to you in many forms every day.
"

* The highlighted word is pronounced with the stress on the
i= second syllable.

PreSENT (verb) the stress is on the second syllable.
PREsent (noun) the stress is on the first syllable.

Now, read aloud the given words with the correct syllable stress
according to the part of speech given in the brackets.

PROduce (noun) proDUCE (verb)
conTRACT (verb) CONtract (noun)
e PROject (noun) proJECT (verb)
: conTENT (verb) CONtent (noun)
REfuse (noun) reFUSE (verb)
II Read the highlighted words in the following sentence from the text.
...but it becomes a possession that can be treasured and re-read over the
years, with great, abiding pleasure.

treasure [treh-Zhuh] pleasure [pleh-Zhuh]
In the highlighted words, -sure has a Zhuh sound.

There are some words which end in -sure, but have a shuh sound as in
pressure [preh-shuh].

Now, read aloud the words given below with the shuh or zhuh sound.

[
' measure leisure reassure enclosure exposure
| ensure seizure fissure composure unsure

III Pausing and chunking are techniques used when speaking, to organise
information for the listener. Speakers can split what they say into smaller
segments either individual words or groups of words to convey ideas
or emphasise key points clearly.

VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS

1. Read aloud the following lines from the poem.
Don t Quit
When things go wrong, as they sometimes will, @
when the road you re trudging seems all uphill,
when the funds are low and the debts are high,
and you want to smile but you have to sigh,
when care is pressing you down a bit rest if you must,

but don t you quit.
EDGAR ALBERT GUEST

Now, read the lines of the poem once again by taking a shorter pause (/) he
or a long pause (//). Notice which version is easier for a listener to follow
and understand.
When things go wrong,/as they sometimes will,// :
when the road youre trudging/seems all uphill,// .
when the funds are low/and the debts are high,//
and you want to smile/but you have to sigh,// :
when care is pressing you down a bit/ rest if you must,/ /
but don t you quit.//
Have you listened to this song in Hindi or in your language? Share with
your classmates and teacher.
2. Chunk the stanzas with (/) or (//) and read it aloud.
Life is queer with its twists and turns.
As everyone of us sometimes learns.
And many a fellow turns about when he might
have won had he stuck it out.
Don t give up though the pace seems slow 

you may succeed with another blow.
Often the goal is nearer than it seems to a faint and faltering man. JS

Let us.write

I Write a letter to your grandparents thanking them for the valuable
lessons they have taught you. Include how their wisdom has shaped
your values and behaviour in life.

1. Thank them for teaching you important lessons, sharing stories,
or helping others in the neighbourhood.

2. Share how their actions inspire you to contribute to the betterment of

the society.
y 95

POORVI

I The White Revolution led to a
increase in milk production in
India primarily due to the efforts of
Dr. Verghese Kurien. Therefore, he
is known as the Milkman of India .

The Green Revolution in _ India
introduced high-yielding varieties of
wheat and rice. It was initiated by
Dr. M.S. Swaminathan. He was awarded
the Padma Shri in 1967, Padma Bhushan
in 1972, Padma Vibushan in 1989, and
Bharat Ratna in 2024.

The Blue Revolution focused on

increasing fisheries production and
productivity in India. This initiative was
led by Dr. Hiralal Chaudhuri.

209 In groups of four, research more information about these revolutions.
Share your findings with your classmates and teacher.

II Vocational training for people in rural regions is provided by the Jan
Shikshan Sansthan (JSS), under the Ministry of Skill Development
and Entrepreneurship, Government of India. The objective of JSS is
to economically uplift the rural population by imparting essential
skill-based training. This enables local trades to grow and creates new
opportunities for the people in the region.

Find out more about JSS with the help of the link given below.
https://jss.gov.in/staticPages

VALUES AND DISPOSITIONS

III Financial Literacy

Read the passage and discuss the questions given below. 

Financial literacy is an essential lifelong skill that should be taught to .
children from an early age. Preparing children with financial literacy

skills is an investment for their future well-being. By imparting an |
understanding of money, saving, budgeting, and wise spending, we
empower them to navigate the financial world with confidence as they 7
grow up.

Whether it is managing a cooperative society, a start-up, or a household %
budget, financial literacy is an ongoing learning process that evolves

as children grow and their understanding deepens. An introduction

to concepts of saving, budgeting, investing, and responsible spending

equips them with essential life skills.

Children learn best through practical examples. Real-life situations help
them understand the value of money and the importance of making wise 2
financial choices. Thinking critically before spending helps cultivate
responsible habits. The concept of saving and investing can be explained
through relatable examples, such as planting seeds that grow into trees
bearing fruit.

As children grow older, they will learn to differentiate between needs
and wants, compare prices before making a purchase and understand
importance of financial literacy.

. . widens Bill pa ifient Discuss in groups. ee e- rat =
1. The importance of learning about money and __ sw i535 | Lor fers ar
saving from a young age. Share one example ==> Sh E- ; Budgeting - - :
. = 8 {6 ETAL .wis pending Loans; iE 00 
of it. S80 Dy Fig~ Net bankingMoney,
; , ; Sel CS tng = Money =,
2. Imagine you received some money as a gift. ke eet le=bankir ng,
How would you decide whether to save it, ;2 Siz aa Payeenes =~ latex
spend it, or invest it? What factors would you = Bi =Wal |

i!

consider? = g, etl Ng 
UC Financial literacy

3. If you were in charge of planning a small event : Fy ES avi na bo
at school with a limited budget, how would = =wise e pending
you manage the money? = Loafis ===
=Bill payment
4. Why is financial literacy important for Paym nits =
everyone?
Tax payitent =
investment
2
~

&)

TRANSCRIPTS
Let us listen (refer to page 66)

I You willlisten to a talk about the Param Vir Chakra. As you listen, complete
the sentences by filling in the blanks with one or two exact words or
phrases you hear.

Hello, everyone!

Let me tell you about the Param Vir Chakra. It is one of the
most prestigious awards in India and signifies the Wheel of the
Ultimate Brave. This award is granted for exemplary bravery in
the presence of the enemy. This means that this award is given to
someone who shows extraordinary courage and bravery while
fighting the enemy.

The medal was instituted as a Gallantry Medal with retrospective
effect from 15 August 1947 by Dr. Rajendra Prasad, the then
President of India. The medal was designed by Mrs. Savitri
Khanolkar, who drew inspiration from Sage Dadhichi, a Vedic
rishi, who made the ultimate sacrifice by giving up his body
so that the gods could create a deadly weapon called Vajra, or
Thunderbolt, from his spine.

The Param Vir Chakra is cast in bronze. At its centre, on a raised
circle, is the State Emblem of India. Surrounding it are four
replicas of Indra s Vajra, lined with lotus flowers.

That, my dear friends, is the Param Vir Chakra, a true symbol
of bravery.

Thank you.

 Let us listen (refer to page 78)

I You will listen to a woman read a special broadcast of the news. As
you listen, arrange the pictures in the correct sequence of events that
took place.

Now, for the special broadcast, we bring you the story of a
young hero whose courage has captured the nation s heart.

On a fateful morning in Rajouri, young Rohan Ramchandra
Bahir, a 15-year-old student, became a local hero when he
fearlessly saved the life of a woman who had fallen into the
Domri River while washing clothes. The 43-year-old woman
was struggling to stay afloat in the strong currents, when
Rohan, without a moment s hesitation, leapt into the river, _
putting his own life at risk. J "~

With great determination and courage, Rohan managed to
reach the woman and pullher to safety, despite the dangerous
conditions of the river. Onlookers who witnessed the incident
were in awe of the young boy s bravery.

Rohan s selfless act did not go unnoticed. His incredible
courage was recognised at Vigyan Bhawan, where he was
honoured with the prestigious Pradhan Mantri Rashtriya Bal
Puraskar 2023 by the President of India, Droupadi Murmu.

This remarkable young boy is now a symbol of heroism

in his community, and his story is an inspiration to all. We .
commend Rohan for his bravery and for showing that age is 
no barrier when it comes to saving lives. Vl,

(Adapted) & _
\

Courtesy: Times of India

Source: https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/delhi/they-know-nofear-childrens-acts-of-bravery-innovative-ideas-honoured/
articleshow/97261236.cms

II You will once again listen to a special broadcast of the news. As you
listen, complete the following sentences in one to three exact words.
~

 
! \

wy
Let us listen (refer to page 93)

I You will listen to the passage about Evelyn Glennie s journey in
overcoming her hearing loss through music and turning a physical
disability into a success story.

Evelyn Glennie s loss of hearing had been gradual. By the time
she was 11 her performance in school had deteriorated and her
headmistress urged her parents to take her to a specialist. It was
then discovered that her hearing was severely impaired as a
result of gradual nerve damage. Everything suddenly looked
black, says Evelyn. But Evelyn was not going to give up. She was
determined to lead a normal life and pursue her interest in music.
One day she noticed a girl playing a xylophone and decided that
she wanted to play it too. Most of the teachers discouraged her
but percussionist Ron Forbes spotted her potential. He began by
tuning two large drums to different notes. Don t listen through
your ears, he would say, try to sense it some other way. Says
Evelyn, Suddenly I realised I could feel the higher drum from
the waist up and the lower one from the waist down. Forbes
repeated the exercise, and soon Evelyn discovered that she
could sense certain notes in different parts of her body. I had
learnt to open my mind and body to sounds and vibrations. She
explains, It pours in through every part of my body. It tingles
in the skin, my cheekbones and even in my hair. The rest was
sheer determination and hard work. She never looked back
from that point onwards. And she got right to the top, the world s
most sought-after multi percussionist with a mastery of some
thousand instruments.