THE CHERRY TREE

Let us do these activities before we read.

0873CHO4
I Work in pairs and answer the questions that follow. Share your answers
with your classmates and teacher.

1. Have you ever used a seed or a sapling to grow a plant?
2. What kind of care did the plant need? Who helped you with it?
3. How did you feel when you saw the plant grow?

II What kind of trees do people plant in their homes? Why is it important
to plant trees?

III Name some fruit trees that grow in your region. What type of conditions
help these fruit trees to grow?

POORVI

stunted: stopped
(from growing to
the usual size)

outskirts: the
areas that form
the edge of a
town or city

a
aN

-@:

& 3 One day, when Rakesh was six, he walked home
from the Mussoorie bazaar eating cherries. They
were a little sweet, a little sour; small, bright red
cherries, which had come all the way from the
Kashmir Valley.

Here in the Himalayan foothills
where Rakesh lived, there were not
many fruit trees. The soil was stony,
and the dry cold winds stunted the
growth of most plants. But on the
more sheltered slopes there were
forests of oak and deodar.

Rakesh lived with his grandfather
on the outskirts of Mussoorie, just
where the forest began. His father
and mother lived in a small
village fifty miles away,
where they grew maize and
rice and barley in narrow
terraced fields on the lower
slopes of the mountain.

But there were no schools in the village, and Rakesh s parents
were keen that he should go to school. As soon as he was of
school-going age, they sent him to stay with his grandfather in
Mussoorie.

He had a little cottage outside the town.

Rakesh was on his way home from school when he bought the
cherries. He paid fifty paise for the bunch. It took him about
half-an-hour to walk home, and by the time he reached the
cottage there were only three cherries left.

 Have a cherry, Grandfather, he said, as soon as he saw his
grandfather in the garden.

Grandfather took one cherry and Rakesh promptly ate the
other two. He kept the last seed in his mouth for some time,

rolling it round and
round on his tongue until all
the tang had gone. Then he placed
the seed on the palm of his hand and
studied it.

 Are cherry seeds lucky? asked
Rakesh.

 Of course. 
 Then [ll keep it. 
 Nothing is lucky if you put it away.

some use. What can I
do with a seed? 

 Plant it 

So Rakesh found a small
space and began to dig
up a flowerbed.

 Hey, not there, said
Grandfather. I ve sown
mustard in that bed.
Plant it in that shady
corner, where it won t
be disturbed. 

Rakesh went to a corner
of the garden where the earth was soft and yielding. He did
not have to dig.

He pressed the seed into the soil with his thumb and it went
right in.

Then he had his lunch, and ran off to play cricket with his
friends, and forgot all about the cherry seed.

When it was winter in the hills, a cold wind blew down from
the snows and went whoo-whoo-whoo in the deodar trees,
and the garden was dry and bare.

In the evenings Grandfather and Rakesh sat over a charcoal
fire, and Grandfather told Rakesh stories stories about people

ENVIRONMENT

POORVI

Kade, o> who turned into animals, and ghosts who

lived in trees, and beans that jumped and stones

that wept and in turn, Rakesh would read to him

. from the newspaper, Grandfather s eyesight being

rather weak. Rakesh found the newspaper very dull 

eo, especially after the stories but Grandfather wanted all
the news...

They knew it was spring when the wild duck flew north
again, to Siberia. Early in the morning, when he got up
to chop wood and light a fire, Rakesh saw the V-shaped
formation streaming northward, the calls of the birds
carrying clearly through the thin mountain air.

Se One morning in the garden he
1 CO uN bent to pick up what he thought
| al was a small twig and found to his
surprise that it was well rooted.
He stared at it for a moment, then x
ran to fetch Grandfather, calling, . @

 Dada, come and look, the cherry *

tree has come up! 

 What cherry tree? asked
Grandfather, who had forgotten
about it. The seed we planted last
year look, it s come up! 
<4

Rakesh went down on_ his 
haunches, while Grandfather bent
almost double and peered down at the tiny tree. It was about
haunches: sit . .
; four inches high.
on the feet with

legs bent Yes, it s a cherry tree, said

peereddown: Grandfather. You should .
looked carefully Water it now and then. 

cu ee Rakesh ran indoors and came
difficulty back with a bucket of water.
 Don t drown it! said
Grandfather.

Rakesh gave it a sprinkling co) Wi y,
and circled it with NN i (/;
pebbles.

TRE S
{|

Eee v7

ENVIRONMENT

ry eer ye

 What are the pebbles for? asked Grandfather.
 For privacy, said Rakesh. y

He looked at the tree every morning but it did not seem to be ~
growing very fast, so he stopped looking at it except quickly,
out of the corner of his eye. And, after a week or two, when,
he allowed himself to look at it properly, he found that it had
grown at least an inch!

That year the monsoon rains came early and Rakesh plodded: walked
plodded to and from school in raincoat and chappals. slowly

Ferns sprang from the trunks of trees, strange-looking w =e
lilies came up in the long grass, and even when it ie! at Se
wasn t raining the trees dripped and mist came
curling up the valley. The cherry tree grew a J
quickly in this season.

It was about two feet high , os. "
when a goat entered the garden Kick is a n (
and ate all the leaves. Only the ae ae es af 
main stem and two thin
branches remained.

 Never mind, said Grandfather,
seeing that Rakesh was upset.
 Tt will grow again, cherry trees
are tough. 

Let us discuss

I Arrange the events in order of occurrence in the story.
Two have been done for you. Share your answers with your classmates
and the teacher.

1. Rakesh discovered that the small, well-rooted twig, had grown
into a cherry tree.

2. Rakesh was sent to live with his grandfather in Mussoorie.
3. Rakesh pressed the cherry seed into the soft soil with his thumb. (5)

4. The cherry tree grew quickly after the rains arrived early.

POORVI

scrambled:
moved quickly
and with
difficulty

cherry tree.

pebbles.

. Rakesh bought a bunch of cherries and ate most of them.

. A goat entered the garden and ate all the leaves of the young

. Rakesh s parents grew maize, rice, and barley in a village. (1)

. Rakesh sprinkled water on the cherry tree and surrounded it with

. Grandfather told Rakesh that cherry trees were tough.
. Rakesh kept rolling the last cherry seed in his mouth.

II Do you think the cherry tree would survive? Why do you think so?

Il

Towards the end of the rainy season new leaves
appeared on the tree. Then a woman cutting grass
scrambled down the hillside, her scythe swishing

through the heavy monsoon foliage. She did not

try to avoid the tree: one sweep,
and the cherry tree was cut in two.

When Grandfather saw what
had happened, he went after the
woman and scolded her; but the
damage could not be repaired.
 Maybe it will die now, said
Rakesh.

 Maybe, said Grandfather.

But the cherry tree had no
intention of dying.

By the time summer came round

again, it had sent out several new shoots with tender green
leaves.

he: a tool
sah . Tan < Rakesh had grown taller too. He was eight now, a sturdy boy
sharp, curved with curly black hair and deep black eyes. Blackberry eyes,

blade with a Grandfather called them.

long handle

leaves

yw
That monsoon Rakesh went home to his village, to help his
foliage: green = father and mother with the planting and ploughing and

sowing. He was thinner but stronger when he came back to
Grandfather s house at the end of the rains to find that the
cherry tree had grown another foot. It was now up to his chest.

Even when there was rain, Rakesh would sometimes water
the tree. He wanted it to know that he was there.

One day he found a bright green praying-mantis perched ona
branch, peering at him with bulging eyes. Rakesh let it remain
there; it was the cherry tree s first visitor.

The next visitor was a hairy caterpillar, who started making a
meal of the leaves. Rakesh removed it quickly and dropped it
ona heap of dry leaves.

 Come back when you re a butterfly, 
he said.

Winter came early. The cherry tree bent
low with the weight of snow. Field-mice
sought shelter in the roof of the cottage.
The road from the valley was blocked,
and for several days there was no
newspaper, and this made Grandfather
quite grumpy. His stories began to have
unhappy endings.

In February it was Rakesh s birthday.
He was nine and the tree was four, but
almost as tall as Rakesh.

One morning, when the sun came out,

Grandfather came into the garden to let

some warmth get into my bones, as he

put it. He stopped in front of the cherry tree, stared at it fora
few moments, and then called out, Rakesh! Come and look!
Come quickly before it falls! 

Rakesh and Grandfather gazed at the tree as though it had
performed a miracle. There was a pale pink blossom at the
end of a branch.

The following year there were more blossoms.

And suddenly the tree was taller than Rakesh, even though
it was less than half his age. And then it was taller than
Grandfather, who was older than some of the oak trees.

ENVIRONMENT

prayingmantis: an
insect

grumpy: badtempered
gazed: looked at
something for a

long time with
admiration
POORVI

flitted: flew
quickly

reclining: lying
back
But Rakesh had grown too. He could run and jump and climb
trees as well as most boys, and he read a lot of books, although
he still liked listening to Grandfather s tales.

In the cherry tree, bees came to feed on the nectar in the

blossoms, and tiny birds pecked at the blossoms and broke
them off. But the tree kept blossoming
right through the spring, and there
were always more blossoms than
birds.

That summer there were small
cherries on the tree. Rakesh tasted
one and spat it out.

 It s too sour, he said.

 They'll be better next year, said
Grandfather.

But the birds liked them especially
the bigger birds, such as the bulbuls
and scarlet minivets and they flitted
in and out of the foliage, feasting on
the cherries.

On a warm sunny afternoon, when
even the bees looked sleepy, Rakesh
was looking for Grandfather without
finding him in any of his favourite
places around the house. Then he
looked out of the bedroom window
and saw Grandfather reclining on a cane chair under the
cherry tree.

 There s just the right amount of shade here, said Grandfather.
 And I like looking at the leaves. 

 They re pretty leaves, said Rakesh. And they are always
ready to dance, if there s a breeze. 

After Grandfather had come indoors, Rakesh went into the
garden and lay down on the grass beneath the tree. He gazed
up through the leaves at the great blue sky; and turning on his
side, he could see the mountains striding away into the clouds.

He was still lying beneath the tree when the evening shadows
crept across the garden. Grandfather came back and sat down
beside Rakesh, and they waited in silence until the stars came
out and the nightjar began to call. In the forest below, the
crickets and cicadas began tuning up; and suddenly the trees
were full of the sound of insects.

 There are so many trees in the forest, said Rakesh. What s so
special about this tree? Why do we like it so much? 

 We planted it ourselves, said Grandfather. That s why it s
special. 

 Just one small seed, said Rakesh, and he touched the smooth
bark of the tree that he had grown. He ran his hand along
the trunk of the tree and put his finger to the tip of a leaf. I
wonder, he whispered. Is this what it feels to be God? 

RUSKIN BOND

ENVIRONMENT

pod

ae 9 ay) Le nae el

Whe

nightjar: a bird

cicadas: insects
known for their
loud distinctive
calls, especially
during evenings
POORVI
\1 Let us discuss
 &: I Complete the table given below based on your understanding of
e \

Part II of the story. One example has been done for you. Share your
answers with your classmates and teacher.

1. A woman cut the cherry tree| (i) Grandfather scolded _ the
while cutting grass. woman.

2. (ii) Rakesh was thinner but

stronger when he came back.

3. A hairy caterpillar started | (iii)
eating the leaves of the

cherry tree.

(iv) Rakesh and Grandfather
gazed at the tree as though it
was a miracle.

5. Rakesh tasted one of the small| (v)
cherries during summer.

Let._us think and reflect

I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow.

1. Have acherry, Grandfather, he said, as soon as he saw his grandfather
in the garden.

Grandfather took one cherry and Rakesh promptly ate the other two.
He kept the last seed in his mouth for some time, rolling it round and
round on his tongue until all the tang had gone. Then he placed the seed
on the palm of his hand and studied it.

 Are cherry seeds lucky? asked Rakesh.
 Of course. 
 Then I'll keep it. 

 Nothing is lucky if you put it away. If you want luck, you must put it to
some use. 
(i)

(ii)

(iii)

(iv)

Substitute the underlined phrase with a correct word from the
extract.

The Kho-kho captain changed her strategy quickly and without
delay when a new player came in from the opposing team.

What does Rakesh s action of rolling the cherry seed in his mouth
most likely suggest about his mood at that moment?

A. He is feeling impatient and restless.
B. He is enjoying the taste and the moment.
C. He is bored and has nothing better to do.
D. He is thoughtful and feeling playful.

Complete the following sentence suitably with reference to
Rakesh and his grandfather.

Rakesh s decision to plant the seed shows that .
(he respects and values his grandfather s advice/he has a close
bond with his grandfather and a willingness to learn from him)

How does the grandfather s advice reflect his view about luck
and effort?

. Winter came early. The cherry tree bent low with the weight of snow.
Field-mice sought shelter in the roof of the cottage. The road from
the valley was blocked, and for several days there was no newspaper,
and this made Grandfather quite grumpy. His stories began to have
unhappy endings.

In February it was Rakesh s birthday. He was nine and the tree was
four, but almost as tall as Rakesh.

(i)

(ii)

(iii)

Complete the following sentence suitably.

The phrase field-mice sought shelter in the roof of the cottage 
suggests that

What can be inferred about the cherry tree s toughness from the
line, The cherry tree bent low with the weight of snow ?

A. The weight of the tree was more than the snow.
B. The tree could withstand harsh weather.

C. The tree was growing close to the ground.

D. The snow gave support to the tree.

How did the early winter affect Grandfather s mood and
storytelling?

a

ENVIRONMENT
\ cj
aC
~ 4 3
a)
-e
ae |
Ne,
- *
f] .
POORVI

1.

(iv) Complete the sentence by choosing the correct option.

The comparison of Rakesh s age to the cherry tree s age
symbolises . (the tree s growth paralleling
Rakesh s own development/the tree standing as a dear one on
Rakesh s birthday)

Why did Rakesh s parents send him to Mussoorie?

 ~ II Answer the following questions.
bl

2.

Why did Rakesh let the praying-mantis remain on the branch of the
cherry tree?

. How is life in the Himalayan foothills described in the story?

. What might Rakesh mean when he says, Is this what it feels to be

God? at the end of the story?

. How does the writer describe the relationship between Rakesh and

his grandfather?

. What can you infer about the connection between humans and

nature based on the story?

. Imagine Rakesh reflects on his wonderful experience of watching a

seed being transformed into a full-grown cherry tree. Write how he
must have felt.

Let us learn

I Each word list has one word that does not match with the other words.
Identify the odd word. One example has been done for you.

1.

an F&F WwW DN
chop, trim, slice, mince

( chop , slice and mince are words used for cutting with a knife;
whereas trim is to cut a part with a pair of scissors)

. plodded, galloped, scrambled, trudged
. tender, delicate, soft, smooth
. stared, peered, pecked, gazed

. growing, blossoming, progressing, planting

ENVIRONMENT

II Choose the most suitable taste words given in the box below and write
against the food items that follow.

sweet sour tangy bitter
spicy salty bland (tasteless)

[
i]
i]
U

. tamarind

. jaggery

. neem leaves

. paneer (cottage cheese)
. lemon

. pickle

ND UW FP Ww DY

. adish of vegetables

Now, use any five taste words and make sentences of your own.

III Choose the correct antonyms for the textual words given below from the .
box. There are two extra words that you will not need.

growing ordinary unprotected cheerful hard
wide fasting shaky fussing coldness

jt tender | | 5. feasting |
2. sturdy | | 6 grumpy |

3. narrow | 7. sheltered

/ 4 warmth | | 8. special |

IV Read the following lines from the text and underline all the verbs and
identify the form of tense.

1. Rakesh was on his way home from school when he bought the
cherries.

2. Rakesh was looking for Grandfather without finding him in any of
his favourite places around the house.

3. Rakesh and Grandfather gazed at the tree as though it had performed
a miracle.
The forms of tenses in the given statements are Simple Past Tense
(1 and 3), Past Progressive Tense (2), and Past Perfect Tense (3).

POORVI

Now, fill in the blanks with the correct form of Simple Past, Past
Progressive, or Past Perfect Tenses of the verbs given in brackets.
One example has been done for you.

(i) I was sitting (sit) with my grandparents in the
garden, sharing the wonderful memories from

my childhood. As we (ii) (talk),
I (iii) (realise) how much wisdom they
(iv) ____(impart)tomeovertheyears. While
I (v) (listen) to their stories for hours
together, I(vi)_ (remember)thetimeswe
(vii) ___ (spend) together planting flowers
and learning about life. By the time I left, the sun
(viii) (set), and I (ix)

(feel) a deep sense of gratitude for the bond we
(x) (nurture) through love, care,

and countless memories.

e V Study the punctuation marks in the following sentences from
the text.

 Hey, not there, said Grandfather, I've sown mustard in that bed.
Plant it in that shady corner, where it won t be disturbed. 

 When Grandfather saw what had happened, he went after the woman

and scolded her; but the damage could not be repaired.
 She did not try to avoid the tree: one sweep, and the cherry tree was
cut in two.

Punctuation refers to the symbols used in writing to clarify meaning
and separate sentences and their components. Proper punctuation
ensures the clarity and flow of a text, guiding readers through
its structure.

ee ee

Here are some of the most common punctuation marks:
 Full stop (.) ends a declarative sentence
For example: She went to the store.

* Comma (,) separates components in a list, clauses, or phrases
within a sentence

For example: We bought apples, oranges, and bananas.
* Question Mark (?) ends a direct question

For example: Where are you going?
 Exclamation Mark (!) indicates strong emotion or emphasis

 For example: Watch out!
168 P

ENVIRONMENT

 Colon (:) introduces a list, explanation or elaboration
For example: He had one goal: win the race. %

 Semicolon (;) connects closely related independent clauses or Py
separates complex list items

For example: She likes reading; he prefers writing.
 Apostrophe ( )
 Incontractions He s (He is), they ll (they will), I m (I am)
v To show possession Jagan s book, the girls toys
 If the noun ends in -s, add only the apostrophe Manas car

* Quotation Marks ( ) enclose direct speech or quotations

For example: She said, I m happy. 

 Dash (- or ) adds emphasis or separates related thoughts
I]
For example: He was late again. ey
* Capitalisation Rules .
+

v Names of people and places Priya, India

Y Days, months, festivals Monday, December, Diwali

 Titles with names Dr. Sneha, Mr. Patel

v Deities and holy books God, the Quran, the Bhagawad Gita

v First person pronoun I

v Adjectives from proper nouns Indian, American
v Geographical features, races, religions, languages the Himalayas,
Hindu, French

v Titles of books, poems, or plays Malgudi Days, The Road Not Taken,
Good Heavens, etc.

Now, punctuate the following paragraph appropriately.

every sunday roshni would visit her grandparents house on their farm
come sit grandpa would say patting the bench on their porch

roshni loved these moments where the world slowed down and stories
flowed like magic grandma would bring tea her eyes twinkling with joy
im excited to hear about your younger days the adventures the lessons
and the memories roshni said eagerly

grandpa smiled softly his wrinkled hands resting on the cane ah the old
days... when everything was simple and happiness was all we had
roshni could feel the warmth of those memories he sat in silence bound
not by words but by a timeless bond
POORVI

Let us listen

I You will listen to a conversation between a son and his
mother. As you listen, select four true statements from
1-7 given below. (Transcript for teacher on page 201)

1. The mother encouraged her son to deliver a
presentation on the Chipko Movement.

2. The son was surprised to know about the Appiko
Movement.

3. The son agreed that the Chipko Movement was
about people uniting to make an impact.

4. The mother expressed a desire to share more details about Saalumarada
Thimakka.

5. The mother was curious to hear about Saalumarada Thimakka.

6. The mother and son were in disagreement about the work of Jadav
Payeng.

7. The son found the information on Jadav Payeng wonderful.

Let us speak

A syllable is a single, unbroken vowel sound in a word. Some words
have only one syllable. Some have two and some more than two.
For example, the word tree has one syllable.

The word cherry has two syllables che-rry. (Here the hyphen is used
to mark the gap between the two syllables.)

A syllable can also be called a beat because you
can clap out the beats in the word.
~
-_

Work in pairs. Read aloud the following words from the text. Write
7 the number of syllables in each word. Check your answers with your
> 0 classmates and teacher.

t 1
' mountains grandfather tender disturbed
' caterpillar Himalayan performed intention
slope newspaper favourite
( 1

Now, read the words aloud again with the beats. Check if the number of
ws syllables matches with the number of beats.
ENVIRONMENT

II Speak about Van Mahotsav Diwas and its significance. Before you speak
in the class or assembly, prepare yourself on the following points:

 When is it celebrated?

 Who celebrates it?

 Why is it celebrated?

 How is it celebrated?

 What is the message it conveys?

Let us write

An article is a piece of writing on a specific topic. It showcases independent
opinions expressed by a writer. Articles are published in newspapers,
newsletters, magazines, journals, and online portals.

Let us understand how to draft an article for a school magazine.

Remember to
 write the heading or title at the top,
 write the name of the writer below it as a byline, and
 follow the correct layout.

v Paragraph 1: Give a brief introduction of the topic or issue.
Focus on the main idea of the paragraph.

v Paragraph 2: Elaborate by giving facts and advantages.
v Paragraph 3: Include consequences and disadvantages.

v Paragraph 4: Provide suggestions. End with a word of hope, a
word of caution or a call for action.

Now, complete the article for a magazine on Trees Our Lifeline . Use the
words and phrases given in the box below.

: absorb carbon dioxide Moreover, our planet reduces pollution !
, Additionally would stop existing ensures a better future |
: climate control Trees Our Lifeline To conclude !

If trees were not there

(i) -by (write your name and class)

Trees are essential for life on Earth. Without them, life as we know

(ii) . This is the reason why trees are our lifeline.
Trees provide us with food, shelter, and even medicine. Trees
(iii) and release oxygen, helping us breathe. This process also

(iv) and keeps the environment clean. (v)

)

POORVI

trees give us fruits, nuts, and other foods. Trees also help in (vi)

and prevention of soil erosion. (vii) , the air would be
polluted, and we would struggle to breathe. (viii) would be
barren, lacking food, shelter, and life-giving greenery. (ix) ,
trees are true friends. Protecting and planting trees (x) for

everyone on Earth. Therefore, we must act now to protect and plant more
trees, preserving Earth s green lifeline for future generations.

Let us explore

I Did you know that the banyan tree is the National Tree of India?
Our country has age-old banyan trees. Some of them are:

1. The Great Banyan, located in Shibpur, Howrah, near Kolkata.
2. Dodda Aalada Mara, located in Kethohalli village, near Bengaluru.

3. Thimmamma Marrimanu, in Anantapur District in Andhra Pradesh. It
was recorded as the largest tree specimen in the world in the Guinness
Book of World Records in 1989.

II Kailash Sankhala, The Tiger Man of India , was an Indian biologist and
conservationist. He carried out a census of the tigers in India in 1971.
Later, because of his studies, he was appointed the first director of
Project Tiger an initiative to prevent the extinction of the Indian Tiger.
He was awarded the Padma Shri in 1992.

Now, find more information about such Indian environmentalists and
share with your classmates.

Rakesh saw the V-shaped formation of wild ducks flying northward.
Did you know?

There is a reason that these birds fly in this V-shaped formation. j
The birds position themselves to fly just behind and to the side of the;
bird in front (V-shape), timing their wing beats to catch the uplifting 
wind currents. This helps them fly long distances easily and save their!
energy too.

=e ee =
HARVEST HYMN

Let us do these activities before we read.

I

I

-_

III

Work in pairs and share your responses with your classmates
and teacher.
1. India celebrates many harvest festivals. When is the harvest festival
celebrated in your region and how is it celebrated?
2. A hymn refers to a song of praise.
(i) To whom do we offer a hymn?
(ii) When and where do we sing a hymn?
(iii) Why do we offer it?
Some poets and authors use words that are no longer a part of common
usage. Such words are called archaic words.
Work in pairs. Read the sentences given below. Match the underlined
archaic words in Column 1 with their meanings in Column 2. Share your
answers with your classmates and teacher.

 Thou art my friend, and I trust thee. Thy kindness is great, and everything
that is mine is thine. 

Gi)_you (object)

Gii)_you (subject

Work in pairs. Read the paragraph and select the correct meaning for
each underlined word from the options given below. Share your answers
with your classmates and teacher.

Under the golden 1. radiance of the evening sun, the villagers gathered
to pay 2. tribute to their 3. cherished elder, who had dedicated his life
to their well-being. His wise 4. counsel had guided generations, steering
them through challenges. Known for his 5. munificent spirit, he never
hesitated to share his resources generously.

1. radiance : @ glow (ii) brilliance
2. tribute : @ respect (ii) gratitude
3. cherished : @ preserved (ii) loved

4. counsel : Wi advice (ii) decision
5. munificent : (i) rich (ii) generous

POORVI

Let us read aS

Men s Voices: | \

Lord of the lotus, lord of the harvest,

Bright and munificent lord of the morn!

Ly Thine is the bounty that prospered our sowing,
Thine is the bounty that nurtured our corn.

We bring thee our songs and our garlands for tribute,

The gold of our fields and the gold of our fruit;

O giver of mellowing radiance, we hail thee,
= We praise thee, O Surya, with cymbal and flute. i

Lord of the rainbow, lord of the harvest,
Great and beneficent lord of the main!

Thine is the mercy that cherished our furrows,
Nees Sj>-... Thine is the mercy that fostered our grain.
We bring thee our thanks and our garlands for tribute,
ss = The wealth of our valleys, new-garnered and ripe;
O sender of rain and the dewfall, we hail thee,

We praise thee, Varuna, with cymbal and pipe.

we \ ENVIRONMENT
=

Women s Voices: >

Queen of the gourd-flower, queen of the harvest,
Sweet and omnipotent mother, O Earth!

Thine-is the plentiful bosom that feeds us,

-Fhine istthe womb where our riches have birth. 7
We bring thee our love and our garlands for tribute,
With gifts of thy opulent giving we come;

-O source of our manifold gladness, we hail thee,

We praise thee, O Prithvi, with cymbal and drum.

All Voices:

Lord of the Universe, Lord of our being,

Father eternal, ineffable Om!

Thou art the Seed and the Scythe of our harvests,
Thou art our Hands and our Heart and our Home.
We bring thee our lives and our labours for tribute,
Grant us thy succour, thy counsel, thy care.

O Life of all life and all blessing, we hail thee,

We praise thee, O Bramha, with cymbal and prayer.

SAROJINI NAIDU

a Yh

oe

aN

i

04-08-2025 11:48:34 |

POORVI

 1 Let us discuss

 Zz
 & - I Write the stanza number for the main idea of each stanza given below.
| oe Share your answers with your classmates and teacher.

} 1. The speakers recognise the lord s kindness and
| praise him for nourishing the field.

2. The speakers praise the generosity of the
creator of the universe who ensures a rich
harvest.

3. The speakers devote their lives and work
as a mark of respect to the lord and seek his
support, wisdom, and care.

: a 4. The speakers pay homage to the Earth and
fal i appreciate her role in supporting life, by
S _ dedicating their harvest.

II Fill in the blanks by choosing the appropriate words or phrases from
within the brackets.

1. The setting of the poem is a rural landscape,
possibly during a
(harvest/religious) festival.

2. The tone of the poem is_ respectful

and celebratory because it praises

(the men and women/

nature and the Lord) with deep respect
and gratitude.

3. In the line Thou art our Hands and our Heart
and our Home , the letter h is capitalised
in Hands , Heart and Home because

. Git represents the hard

work of farmers/God resides in them)

III Identify the poetic device used in the following lines from the poem.
 Bright and munificent lord of the morn!
 We bring thee our lives and our labours for tribute

IV Match the lines from the poem in Column 1 with their expressions in
Column 2. Choose the appropriate poetic device from the box given
below and write in Column 3.

1. sweet and (i) creates a clear description
omnipotent of the scene and appeals to
mother the senses

. The wealth of implied comparison of
our valleys, growth and reaping with
new-garnered beginning and end of all
and ripe life

. Thou art the the earth is being given
Seed and the human-like qualities
Scythe
V Certain words or phrases are repeated in the same line of the poem.
For example, The gold of our fields and the gold of our fruit;
Find more such repetitions from the poem. What is the poet s purpose of

using repetition in the poem?

VI The poem uses symbolism to convey deeper meanings. Match the
symbols in Column 1 with the meanings they convey in Column 2.

1. Prithvi (the Earth) (i) light, energy, life representing the
giver of warmth and prosperity

2. Surya (the Sun) (ii) mercy and nourishment crucial for
agriculture and sustenance

3. Varuna (Rain) (iii) fertile land, motherhood, nurturing 
the source of all life

ENVIRONMENT

POORVI

Let us think and reflect

I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow.

1. We bring thee our songs and our garlands for tribute,
The gold of our fields and the gold of our fruit;
O giver of mellowing radiance, we hail thee,
We praise thee, O Surya, with cymbal and flute.

(i) What does the act of bringing songs and garlands as tribute
suggest about the people s relationship with the divine?

A. They fear the gods and wish to calm them in any
way possible.

B. They have a deep sense of reverence and gratitude towards
the divine.

C. They are forced to perform rituals without understanding
the divine.

D. They depend on the gods for their daily needs and activities.

(ii) Complete the following sentence suitably.

The word gold in the phrases the gold of our fields and the gold
of our fruit symbolises

(iii) How does the description O giver of mellowing radiance help us
understand Surya s role in the harvest?

(iv) Fillin the blank by selecting the correct option from those given
in the brackets.

The use of cymbal and flute signifies . Goy and
2 celebration/meditation and worship)

2. All Voices:
. Lord of the Universe, Lord of our being,
, Father eternal, ineffable Om!
Thou art the Seed and the Scythe of our harvests,

ey, Thou art our Hands and our Heart and our Home.
= (i) Inthe phrase Lord of our being, what does the word being most
> ~ likely refer to?

A. Our physical body
B. Our entire existence

C. Our spiritual practices

D. Our earthly possessions

(ii) Identify whether the following statement is true or false.

The imagery of the Seed and the Scythe symbolises the divine s
role as both the beginning (creation) and the end (harvest) of the
agricultural cycle.

(iii) Identify the phrases from the extract that mean the following:
A. The divine as a timeless, everlasting presence

B. Beyond human comprehension or description
(iv) How do we know that these lines from the extract are spoken as
a chorus?
II Answer the following questions.
1. Why do the farmers hail the God of rain?
2. What is being referred to as wealth of our valleys ? Why?

3. State one reason why the women refer to the Earth as a source of
manifold gladness .

4. Why does everyone in the poem offer their labours for tribute ?

5. Why has the poet presented the poem as voices of men, women, and
all voices?

6. How does the poet create the joyous atmosphere of rural India at
harvesting time?

. Why is the poem presented as a hymn?

 Let us learn

I Match the pictures of the farming implements given in Column 1 with
their use given in Column 2. Then, fill in the blanks in Column 3 to
complete the name of the implement.

ENVIRONMENT

POORVI

(i) A tool with a long handle |S
with metal teeth for
collecting hay or leaves.

\ CKL_

A small hand tool used
for digging and making
shallow furrows.

A hand-held tool with a
curved blade attached to a
short handle. It is used for
harvesting crops.

A tool pulled by oxen. It is
used for turning over the
soil in the field so that seeds
can be sown or planted.

A farm tool having a flat
rectangular blade attached
to a long wooden handle
used for digging the soil.

A hand-held tool with a
long-curved blade attached
to a long handle used for
cutting tall grass.

II Choose the correct synonyms for the underlined words in the given
sentences from the box below. Circle the words or phrases in the
sentences that helped you to infer the meanings. One example has been
done for you.

1. generous help brightness indescribable kind :
1. The king was beneficent to the poor because he@@ok good card of
them.
synonym: kind

2. He was munificent towards the needy and donated a lot for their
health care.

synonym:

ENVIRONMENT

3. When he lost his job, all his friends gave him succour by supporting
him with money.

synonym:
4, When the sun s rays came into the dark room, the whole room was
full of radiance.

synonym:
5. The little girl was speechless with ineffable joy when she got her
birthday gift from her aunt.

synonym:

III You have learnt about some archaic words. Some more archaic words
are given below. Refer to a dictionary to find commonly used words
which are similar in meaning.

1. morrow 2. hither 3. quoth
4. betwixt 5. yonder

Let us listen

I Listen to the talk about paddy cultivation. As you listen, at
number the events in the correct order in which they ( <i
ae

happen. (Transcript for teacher on page 203) ~

1. Transplanting of seedlings
2. Ploughing of soil
3. Threshing of grains
4. Puddling of land
5. Harvesting of paddy
6. Irrigating the field
7. Milling of rice
II Now, listen to the talk again. As you listen, choose the correct option to

answer the questions that follow.

1. What is the main step in preparing the soil for cultivation of rice?

(i) Ploughingthesoil (ii) Clearing the soil (iii) Puddling the soil

2. How long does it take for rice seeds to grow into seedlings before
being transplanted?

(i) 2-3 weeks (ii) 4-5 weeks (iii) 6-7 weeks

POORVI

3. Why is drying rice grains important after threshing?
(i) To get rice seeds for plantation
(ii) To separate the rice grains easily
(iii) To store the rice grains for longer

De Z
<

Let us speak

In English, some letters are not pronounced in certain words. For
example, in words like knife , knowledge , and know , the first letter k 
is not pronounced. Let us look at a few more such examples.

 In the words given below the letter n is silent when it appears with
 m at the end of the word.

hymn, column, autumn, solemn
Now, say these words aloud.
 In the words given below the letter b is silent when it appears with m .
womb, tomb, bomb, climb, comb

Now, say these words aloud.

In our country, harvest is celebrated with the preparation of delicious
dishes. Work in groups and make a presentation on any popular dish
made during the harvest festival in your region. Use the prompts given
in the box to make your presentation. Make sure that all the members
share their views.

Include the following:

 What is the dish called? Is it known by any other name in other parts
of India?

- What ingredients are used to make the dish?

 How is the dish prepared?
 How is the dish served?
 What does the dish taste like?
 What is the special ritual related to the preparation of this dish?

 Describe any special memory associated with the preparation of
this dish.
ENVIRONMENT

Good morning to all of you gathered here...

Introduce the members of |Todaywe,_,__ and____are here to tell
your group and your topic | you about...

Explain the structure of We will start off with...

your presentation * Following this, we will move on to...
 The next point we will deal with is...
 Finally, we will speak about...

Speak about the first point | Let s begin by...
 I d like to start by...

Describe the details Now Ill move on to...
Next...
I'd like to now discuss...
Let s now consider...
 Let me tell you about

Conclude your presentation | In conclusion, I d like to say...
 To summarise..
Thank the audience Thank you for listening.
 Thank you for your attention.

Let us write

Creative slogans are used to spread a message to capture the reader s
attention. Some examples are given below:

 Education is the Key, Unlock Your Destiny!

* Protect the Environment Today for a Better Tomorrow
 Learn, Grow, Succeed

 Go Green by Keeping the Planet Clean

Your school wishes to express gratitude to the farmers who play an important
role in providing us the food on our plates. Draft a creative slogan to be put
up on the school notice board.
POORVI

Remember to
 focus on the main idea to be expressed
* use simple language
 be concise express yourself in a few words

You may write the slogan on a chart paper and decorate it.

m - I Millets are a varied group of small-seeded grasses. They have more fibre
et and minerals than other cereals. Millets have been a part of the Indian
ie | cuisine for years. They have been rediscovered worldwide as superfoods.

1. Read the information on Pearl Millet given below.
se, e
P Pea rl Mi l | | et (Pennisetum glaucum (L.) R. Br.)
 

Common name: | Vernacular names: Cultivation areas:
00, Bajra Spiked millet or Pear! millet (English), Rajasthan,
Bajra (Bengali, Hindi, Oriya, Punjabi, Urdu), | Maharashtra,

Bajree (Rajasthani, Gujarati, Marathi), Gujarat,

Sajje (Kannada), Kambu (Tamil), Uttar Pradesh and

Sajja (Telugu) Haryana
Nutritional Profile:

Highest niacin content amongst It is the sixth major cereal in terms of area and production and has
all cereals; rich in protein and the highest drought tolerance potential of all millets. Pearl millet is
dietary fiber. the most widely cultivated cereal in India after rice and wheat.

NUTRIENTS VALUE PER _ Health benefits:
100 GRAMS

Energy (Kcal) 347
Protein (g) 10.9
Fat (g) 5.43
Carbohydrate (g) 61.8
Ca (mg) 27.4

Fe (mg) 6.4 Uses: Khichdi, Roti, Upma, Idli, Khakhra, Parathas
 oo Folic Acid (ug) 36.1

Use the link given below to know more about other kinds of millets.

Reduces cholesterol

Promotes bone health

Beneficial in treating stomach ulcers
Promotes heart health

Aids in weight loss

https://eatrightindia.gov.in/millets2023/assets/documents/Millets%20-%20
Nutritious%20Cereal%200f%20India.pdf

2. Work in groups of four and do the following activities.
(i) Find out if millets are a part of your cuisine.
(ii) Find recipes with millets and compile them into a booklet.
(iii) Create a recipe of your choice.
II Songs related to harvest season form a part of our culture and heritage.
Talk to the elders in your house and learn a song sung on a harvest

yy festival. Share it with your classmates and teacher. Then, compile all the
184 songs to create a songbook with the help of teacher.

WAITING FOR THE RAIN

Let us do these activities before we read.
I Have you ever waited for the rains? Why?
II How do you feel when it rains after a long time?
III Why do you think the farmers wait for the rains?

IV Discuss in groups what happens when you wait for something or someone
for a long period of time.
1. How do you spend the waiting period?
2. What do you think about?

3. How do you feel?

Share your answers with your classmates and teacher.

POORVI

 Let usread

I

 T hope it rains at least today, Velu thought, as he opened
his eyes.

Velu was a farmer. The sun was beginning to
rise, glowing crimson like fire. Velu scanned the
sky. There was not a cloud.

 It doesn t look encouraging, he muttered to
himself and got up.

Rain or no rain, a farmer wakes up early. Velu
worked hard. His piece of land never failed
him. Season after season he cultivated it,
harvesting jowar one season and dhal the next.
Throughout the year he worked, never thinking
of rest or taking a holiday. For nearly six years
it had been so, ever since he had got his own
piece of land.

But this year turned out to be
different. At the end of summer, \
the rains didn t come. Velu and *
his neighbours waited, but their os
waiting didn t end. Days, weeks
and months passed, and still
there was no rain.

The fields lay untended, the
earth hardened, crusted and
cracked. The barren land looked
forlorn and the farmers lived
entirely on hope. Every day =

ey hoped that the rains=
ENVIRONMENT

would come.

Someone said, We ought to talk to
some astrologers. They can tell us
what will please the heavens and the
heavens will send down rain. 

Velu didn t agree. He said, The rains
came all these years without any such
consultations; I can t see how talking
to astrologers will bring rain. 

\

/
\ } He decided to go to the weather office
 \ \ fin the city and talk to someone. But
\\ \ | the people at the weather office said
\ \) they couldn t really tell him when the
Q | sky would gather clouds and bring
\) \\ rain. We are at a loss ourselves! 
| \ they exclaimed. So many favourable

v | | conditions but still no rain. Very odd! 

Velu, too, was at a loss. He walked
backto the village, tired, and dejected.
He was thirsty and the dust made
him cough and sneeze. He decided to dejected:

rest for a while. sad and
disappointed

consultations:
discussions

He saw a large tree. Its shade was
cool and inviting. As he sat down, he
noticed that an old woman was also
sitting there, sheltering from the sun.
POORVI

 1 Let us discuss
~~ 7
: &: I Complete the table given below. One example has been done for you.
 Share your answers with your classmates and teacher.
*

1. It doesn t look Velu tohimself | He looked up
encouraging. at the sky.

2. The rains
came all these

years without
any such
consultations...

3. So many
favourable
conditions but
still no rain.

II Do you think the old woman would help Velu? If yes, why? If no, why not?

III Will Velu s wait continue or will it rain?

Il

Her skin was wrinkled, but her eyes sparkled
when she smiled. She looked at Velu and her
smile grew wider, her wrinkles deeper.

 What are you smiling at, Amma? Velu asked.
 Without the rains, there s nothing to smile
about. 

 Yes, yes, you're right, the old woman said,
the smile leaving her lips.

 I wonder what I have done to deserve this, 
Velu began. I have worked hard and honestly.
am being punished. Without the rains I
can t till the land. If I don t till the
land no crop will grow.

What will happen to me? How shall I
feed my family? he asked, somewhat
bitterly. He wasn t speaking to anyone
in particular, but the old lady thought
that he was opening his heart to her.

 Perhaps you have worked too hard, 
she said.

 What do you mean? Can anyone
work too hard? I have only done what
any hard-working farmer would do.
I shall work and never rest until Iam
too old. This is the first season in five,
no, six years that I have not sown, nor
ploughed.Oh, it is hard not to be able
to work... said Velu a little angrily.

 But my son, that is what I am talking about.
You have strength now. You can work without a
break. But have you thought about the land? The
earth works, too, when you plough, and sow, and
plant. The earth has worked for years, centuries,
in fact, thousands of years.
The soil, the land, the earth...

shouldn t someone let the land
rest a bit? the old woman said,
softly, smiling.

ENVIRONMENT

bitterly:
hurtfully

POORVI

ceaseless:
continuous
ree?

- Rest? Let the land rest? I don t
understand, Velu looked at her, a
little puzzled.

 Yes, my son, that is the difficulty.
You don t realise that the earth is
old... But Nature is a mother to all of
us. To you and to me. And to the trees,
the water and the soil. She takes care
to give her children the rest they
need... 

Velu began to understand.

 When the rains don t come,
you are dejected. But in _ that
way the land is left alone. The
land lies undisturbed, staring at |
the sky, resting... And when the
rains come, it will spring back into _ activity,
fresh and ready for your crop. Go home, my son, Nature
knows a thing or two... go home, she said, and
got up.

She walked away. After a while
Velu, too, got up and walked
home-ward. He thought about
the land, his beloved piece of
land, which, if he were to believe
the old woman, was perhaps (jp
breathing peacefully, taking
Suabkeak from the constant,
ceaselessyear-round cultivation.

- S ENVIRONMENT

 Perhaps she is right, he thought, as he
approached the village. It was already
evening. The sun was low in the sky. And...
what was that? Velu felt a cool breeze on
his back.

Then he felt a tiny drop on his shoulder. He ~,
looked up. Yes... the clouds were gathering ~
in the distance. It was growing dark. Soon
there would be lightning. And thunder.
And sweet, fragrant rain.

Velu ran home, laughing and happy.
AMAKSHI BALASUBRAMANIAN

Let us discuss

I Complete the following statements given below with suitable reasons.

1. Velu asked the old woman to stop smiling because

2. Velusaid thatit was hard not being able to worksince

3. Velu was confused when the old lady said that the land needed rest
because

4. The old lady said that it was good for the land when it didn t rain as

5. Velu ran home laughing and happy because

Let us think and reflect

I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow.
1. ..D. can t see how talking to astrologers will bring rain. 

He decided to go to the weather office in the city and talk
to someone. But the people at the weather office said
they couldn t really tell him when the sky would gather
clouds and bring rain. We are at a loss ourselves! they
exclaimed. So many favourable conditions but still no
rain. Very odd! 

POORVI

(i) What does the first line of the extract tell us about Velu s beliefs?
(ii) Complete the following sentence with a suitable reason.

Velu is determined to seek information about the rain because
. (he was at a loss of words/he wants to find a
practical solution to the drought affecting his farm)

(iii) Complete the table with reference to Velu s weather office visit.

(iv) Complete the following sentence with a suitable option.

The absence of rain despite favourable conditions, shows

A. lack of astrological knowledge
B. ineffectiveness of farmers like Velu
C. delay in understanding the weather

D. unpredictability of nature

* 2. The soil, the land, the earth... shouldn t someone let the land rest a
a a bit? the old woman said, softly, smiling.

 Rest? Let the land rest? I don t understand, Velu looked at her, a little
puzzled.

; Yes, my son, that is the difficulty. You don t realise that the earth is
= old... 

(i) The old woman s advice was accompanied with a soft tone anda
smile. What does that tell us about her?

v)

% (ii) Fillin the blank with the correct option from those given below.
The old woman s advice Velu, at that moment.
) "yi A. failed to impress B. confused
 - C. scared D. made sense to
>) on (iii) State one thing about the old woman when she referred to Velu
; as my son , while offering advice.
Ve, 7 (iv) Complete the following sentence with a suitable explanation.

The difficulty that the old woman mentions is due to the fact
that
ENVIRONMENT

II Answer the following questions.
1. How does the old woman convey Nature s wisdom to Velu? 0,

2. The writer says, The fields lay untended... Why couldn t the farmers |
tend to their fields in the absence of rain?

3. Support the old woman s perspective that the land needs rest just
like people do.

4. What can be inferred about Velu s character based on his reaction to
the drought? :

5. What does the story suggest about the life of farmers and their
relationship with nature?

6. How might the rest and care of land contribute to a balanced and

sustainable ecosystem? y : es . A .
Let us learn +

I

Solve a crossword using picture and word clues. All clues are related to
the words from the text that are connected to weather or agriculture.

Across

5. collected crops

{
|
|
, 2? |
Sa jd ! ' 9. prepare and use !
|
. |
|
|
|
it

land for crops |
10. turn up the field |
soil
11. plant seed/s

3. rumbling sound: = --------------with rain
4, grains etc. grown !
in large quantity |
in fields
POORVI
II The text uses words like piece, weather, son, and rain . These words

are the same as other words that are spelt differently peace, whether,
sun, and reign.

Words that are pronounced the same as other words but differ in
meaning or in spelling are called homophones.

Now, complete the paragraph by filling in the correct option of
homophones given in the brackets.

The farmer looked at the sky and wondered
1. (weather/whether) the clouds
would finally bring rain. He sat down on the

ground, breaking a small 2.

(piece/peace) of roti for his meal. The
3. (plain/plane) fields stretched

endlessly before him, completely dry. He thought
about how he could 4. (sell/cell)
his last sack of grain to buy some essentials for his
family. Without the rains, it didn t 5.
(seam/seem) possible to grow another crop this

season. Despite his worries, he smiled, knowing that
every farmer hopes for the next 6.

(rain/reign) by nature to bring life back to the land.

III Choose the correct meanings from the given options for the underlined

words or phrases in the following sentences.
1. Being annoyed, she muttered something which nobody heard.
(i) spoke in a low voice (ii) spoke slowly (iii) spoke angrily

2. At the new work place, Riya felt forlorn for a week.

(i) upset andirritated (ii) angryand bitter (iii) sad and neglected

3. When all his friends had gone, he was at_a loss because he did not
know what to do.

(i) confused (ii) shocked (iii) lonely
4. When the little child saw her father, her eyes sparkled.
(i) glowed dimly (ii) showed joy (iii) opened wide

ENVIRONMENT

IV Match each word (adjective) in Column 1 with a word (noun) that
collocates in Column 2. Write the adjective-noun collocation in Column 3. 6,
One example has been done for you.

a (Cr

V Underline the verbs and identify the forms of tenses for the following ~
sentences from the text.

1. Oh, it is hard not to be able to work...
2. ...1 am too old.
3. What are you smiling at, Amma?

4. But my son, that is what I am talking about.

5. The earth has worked for years, centuries...

6. I have worked hard and honestly.

The forms of tenses in the given statements are Simple Present Tense
(1 and 2), Present Progressive Tense (3 and 4) Present Perfect Tense
(5 and 6).

Now, fill in the blanks with the correct form of Simple Present, Present
Progressive or Present Perfect tenses of the verbs given in brackets.

Ravi (i) (be) a farmer who (ii) __ _-s (practtise) crop
rotation on his land. Each season, he (iii) _ (plant) different
crops to maintain the soil s health. This year, he (iv) (grow)
legumes, which help restore the nutrients in the soil. Over the years,
Ravi (v) (learn) that planting the same crop repeatedly
(vi) (deplete) the soil, making it less fertile. By rotating crops, he
(vii) _ (Keep) the land productive and fertile. He (viii) _

(see) a noticeable improvement in his yields since adopting this method.
Now, Ravi (ix) (share) his knowledge with other farmers,
explaining how crop rotation(x) (benefit) both the soil and
their harvests. 195

POORVI

VI Study the highlighted words in the following sentences from the text.
o& The rains came all these years without any such consultations.
. So many favourable conditions, but still no rain.
 Every day they hoped that the rains would come.
 But this year turned out to be different.

* This is the first season in five, no, six years that I have not sown,
*, nor ploughed.

 We ought to talk to some astrologers.

 I have only done what any hard-working farmer would do.
 Velu looked at her, a little puzzled.
 She takes care to give her children the rest they need...

e Velu felt a cool breeze on his back.

.
 La The highlighted words or phrases that come before a noun but do not
describe them are called determiners.

 Let us learn the use of some common determiners.
 Articles: a, an, the
These are used to introduce nouns.
 Demonstrative Determiners: this, that, these, those

These are used to point out specific items.
* Possessive Determiners: my, our, your, his, her, its, their, one s
These indicate ownership or relationship.
* Definite Numeral Determiners: one, two, three, etc.
These specify exact quantities.
* Indefinite Numeral Determiners: some, any, no, all, much, many, few,

less, several, little and few

v Some is used in affirmative sentences, while any and no are
used in negative and interrogative sentences.

v All refers to the entirety of a group.

 Much and many denote large quantities of uncountable and
countable nouns, respectively.

v Few indicates a small number, less refers to a smaller quantity,
and several means more than two but not many.

v Little means not much, few means not many. Use a little and a
few to convey a positive sense.
ENVIRONMENT

 Distributive Determiners: each, every, either, neither

Y Each refers to individual items or people, every refers to all items
or people collectively.

Y Either means one of two options and neither means not one of
the two options.

Now, fill in the blanks by choosing the correct determiner from those
given in the brackets.

It was 1. (a/an) rainy afternoon, and
2. (a/the) sky was thick with dark clouds.
Mala noticed a large puddle quickly forming in
front of 3. (her/their) house. Excited, she
called for her brother to join her, knowing that

both of them always loved playing in 4.
(a/the) rain. While jumping from 5.

(some/one) puddle to another, Mala spotted 6.

(few/a few) snails slowly creeping along the
wet sidewalk and pointed them out to her brother.
With 7. (each/every) jump, the sound of
both 8. _
heard through the soft patter of raindrops. Though

(her/their) squeals and laughter was

they were fully drenched 9. (either/neither)

siblings minded it. It had been a perfect rainy day.

6)
Let us listen
I Listen to the weather forecast. As you listen, fill in the blanks with the .
exact word you listen to. (Transcript for teacher on page 204) a
1. Delhi will mostly have a sky with light rain.
2. Moderate rain is likely to happen in

3. Kolkata is likely to have a maximum temperature of around

 C.
4. There is a chance ofa in Chennai.
5. Bengaluru will have a temperature of 29 C.

6. Taking an is advisable because of the weather conditions.

_.
~

2)

POORVI
I

I

-_

Let us speak

Here is a tongue twister about weather . Practice saying it as fast as

you can.

{
I
I
I
I
(

Whether the weather be fine, or whether the weather be not, whether
the weather be cold, or whether the weather be hot, we ll weather
the weather, whatever the weather, whether we like it or not.

i]
1
1
i]

Rain has arrived after a long dry spell on the Earth. Imagine the Rain and

the Earth have a conversation. Work in pairs and present the role-play.

You may use the hints in the table given below.

You may start the conversation in the following way.

Rain: Greetings, Earth! It s been a while since we ve met. How have

you been?

Earth: Hello Rain! Iam so glad to see you.

To continue the conversation, use the hints given below.

Rain

Ask about how the Earth
has been.

Speak about your long
journey from the Earth to
the sky and back again to
the Earth.

Ask about how the Earth
can use the gift you
brought rain water.

Elaborate how much you
enjoy being on the Earth.

Thank the Earth for the
invite. Promise to return
on time the next year.

Earth
iN

Respond and express relief at the
arrival of Rain.

Enquire why it took so long for
Rain to arrive.

Express gratitude for the gift of
water.

Speak about how important Rain
is to you for agriculture, for
plants and animals to survive.

Enquire how Rain feels about
being on Earth.

Invite Rain to join the celebration
of the rivers, forests, and people of
Earth.

ENVIRONMENT

Let us write

I You have observed the difficulties faced by the people in your
neighbourhood due to scarcity of water especially during the summer
months. Write a letter to the Councillor of your Municipal ward,
requesting her/him to set up a rain water harvesting unit. Provide
suggestions to address the issue.

Remember to
 use formal language
 keep sentences short and to the point
 state the purpose clearly and concisely
* give relevant details

Format and Layout:

Sender s address
Date
The Municipal Councillor (Receiver s designation and address)

Subject: Request to Install a Rainwater Harvesting Unit in Ward
No. 44

Dear Madam,
Paragraph 1: Drawing attention to the problem
Paragraph 2: Causes and Consequences
Body of the letter
Paragraph 3: Request and Suggestions
Paragraph 4: Conclusion
Yours sincerely,

Signature of the sender
(Sender s full name in brackets)
Let us explore

I Rest is very important for us to function in a proper manner. Even the
Earth needs rest. This is known as fallowing.
Read the facts given below related to fallowing:

 A fallow year refers to leaving the land without sowing for one, or
several vegetative cycles.

POORVI

 This is done to allow the land to recover its nutrients and
retain moisture. It also helps to avoid spreading of diseases and
controlling pests.

 The sustainable land management method has been applied for
centuries, wherein a field is divided into two halves one is planted
with crops while the other remains unplanted. Then, the process is
reversed in the following year.

II Find out from your Vocational Education teacher about Agriculture asa

vocation and other related vocations, such as horticulture, etc.

III India s rich tradition of meteorological knowledge includes indigenous

forecasting systems, grounded in ancient wisdom. These provide
sophisticated methods for predicting climate, calculating rainfall, and
issuing early warnings.

References to rain and weather are found in numerous ancient texts,
including the Rigveda, Shrimad Bhagavad, Parashara Samhita, Panini s
Ashtadhyayi, and Meghmala. These texts offer insights into rainfall
patterns and seasonal changes.

IV Meteorological Services for Agriculture in India

The primary objective ofthe Agricultural Meteorology
Division, India Meteorological Department (IMD) is
to minimise the impact of adverse weather on crops
and to leverage crop-weather relationships to boost
agricultural production.

In addition to forecasts and advisories, several other
weather related services are also provided.

For detailed information, please visit: https://mausam.

 

A

Z
imd.gov.in/responsive/servicesMetEnvironment.php Nx ay L

a
TRANSCRIPTS

THE CHERRY TREE

Let us listen (refer to page 170)

I You will listen to a conversation between a son and his mother. As you
listen, select four true statements from 1-7 given below.

SON
MOTHER
SON

MOTHER

SON

MOTHER

SON

MOTHER

SON

MOTHER

: Amma, could you help me with this project?
: Why not? What s the project about?
: Its about the Chipko Movement. I have to make a

PowerPoint presentation and talk about it in class.

: That s good! Chipko Movement was all about hugging

trees to prevent them from being cut, isn t it? Such
an inspiring movement it was!

: Yes, it was the first time that common people came

together for the noble cause of saving trees. It showed
how people can also make a difference. Have you
heard or read about something similar?

: Yes, of course. The success of the Chipko Movement

led to the Appiko Movement.

: Really? Doesn t appiko mean hugging in Kannada?

So, did they also hug trees to protect them?

: Yes they did. In this movement people not only

hugged trees to protect them but also regenerated
the forest areas in the Western Ghats.

: That s great! This reminds me of what my teacher

shared about Saalumarada Thimakka last week. She
is a Padma Shri awardee.

: What an amazing personality! ve heard about her

and I m interested to know what your teacher has
shared with you.
SON

MOTHER :

SON

MOTHER :

SON

MOTHER

SON

MOTHER :

: She is an Indian environmentalist who has been

planting trees since 1948. She has planted over 8000
trees in the area around her village.

Wonderful!

: What I admire about her is the commitment she has

towards conserving the environment.

Incredible! That is one superwoman! But do you
know who the Forest Man of India is?

: Yes, ve read about him. It is Jadav Payeng, from

Assam. He too is a Padma Shri awardee. Isn t he the
one who single-handedly turned a barren land of
around a thousand acres into a lush green forest? He
did so by planting nearly forty million trees.

: Yes, you re absolutely right. It was not something

that happened overnight. It took him thirty years
to achieve this. This forest has become a habitat for
different kinds of animals including migratory birds.

: Fascinating, isn t it? I ve read a book and watched a

documentary in school about him which has really
inspired me.

I m glad that you have begun to care about the
environment too.

HARVEST HYMN

Or
y, Let us listen (refer to page 181)

I Listen to this talk about paddy cultivation. As you listen, number the

 _

events in the correct order in which they happen.

Hello everyone!

Did you know that rice is actually a type of grass, and the
part we eat is its seed? Let me tell you about the process of
cultivating rice.

It all starts with preparing the land. First, the soil has to be
ploughed. Rice is typically grown in fertile soil that holds a lot
of water. The most important step in preparing the soil is to
soak it with plenty of water. This step is called puddling. Once
the nursery bed is prepared, the seeds can be planted. After
that, we sow the seeds on the soil s surface.

Paddy farmers have to ensure that their fields stay flooded
with water because irrigation is crucial. It takes around 4 to
5 weeks for the seeds to grow into seedlings. After this comes
the most important step transplanting. The seedlings that
were prepared in the nursery bed are uprooted and then
transplanted into the flooded field.

In around 120 days, the rice plants are fully grown. At this
point, the crops are harvested by cutting them. Following
this, the seeds are separated from the plant. This is called
threshing. To reduce the moisture content even more, the
separated grains are dried. This ensures that they can be
stored or processed further. Through a process called milling,
the rice is separated from the outer covering on it.

Finally, the rice reaches the market, and that s where we get
it to make all kinds of delicious foods. Whether it s Appam,
Pulao, Khichdi, or Daal Bhaat, rice is a big part of many meals.

Now listen to the talk again. As you listen, choose the correct option to
answer the questions that follow.
WAITING FOR THE RAIN

yo)
Let us listen (refer to page 197)

I Listen to the weather forecast. As you listen, fill in the blanks with the
exact word you listen to.

Hello and welcome to today s weather forecast.

Delhi is expected to have a generally cloudy sky with light rain.
The temperature will range between a minimum of 25 C anda
maximum of 36 C.

The sky will generally be cloudy with moderate rain in Mumbai.
The minimum temperature is 24 C and the maximum will be
around 30 C.

Moving eastwards, Kolkata will have a partly cloudy sky with
one or two spells of rain or thundershowers. The minimum
temperature will be 28 C and the maximum will be around 34 C.

Chennai is expected to have a partly cloudy sky with a possibility
of thunderstorm. The minimum temperature will be 27 C and
the maximum will be around 36 C.

Bengaluru will have a generally cloudy sky with light rain. The
minimum temperature will be 21 C and will rise to a maximum
of around 29 C.

Hyderabad is expected to have a generally cloudy sky with light
rain or drizzle. Temperature will be between a minimum of
23 C and a maximum of 33 C.
~

That s all from me today. Have a beautiful day ahead. Don t forget
to carry your umbrellas!

)
! \

https://www.newsonair.gov.in/weather-forecast-for-today/

 

204