FEATHERED FRIEND

Let us do these activities before we read.

I Work in pairs and discuss the questions given below. Share your
/ answers with your classmates and teacher.

1. Who can a feathered friend be?
2. Which feathered friend do you like? Why?

3. If you have a choice between a feathered and a furry friend, who
would you choose? Why?

4. Do you think a feathered or a furry friend can accompany astronauts
to space? If yes, why? If no, why not?

E/
ny es

POORVI

II Complete the words given below by inserting vowels. Refer to their

~ meanings given alongside. Share your answers with your classmates
and teacher.
 o

1. official rule that controls how something is done: R_G_L_T__N
2. to not allow something: F_RB_D

3. join or blend to form a single entity: F_S_

4.suddenly:_ BR_PTLY

5. admit one s mistake:C _NF_SS

6. a person who advises what to eat to keep healthy: D__T_T__N

ath SN pa: =
U

AN \

_\
SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY

I

To the best of my knowledge, there s never been a regulation
that forbids one to keep pets in a space station. No one ever
thought it was necessary and even had such a rule existed,
I am quite certain that Sven Olsen would have ignored it.

Actually he was a wiry little fellow, like most of the early
spacers, and managed to qualify easily for the 150-pound
bonus that kept so many of us on a reducing diet. Had he been
built otherwise, his chances of getting a job in space would
have been very slim.

Sven was one of our best construction men, and excelled at
the tricky and specialised work of collecting assorted girders
as they floated around in free fall, making them do the
slow-motion, three-dimensional ballet that would get them
into their right positions, and fusing the pieces together when
they were precisely dovetailed into the intended pattern:
it was a skilled and difficult job, for a space suit is not the most
convenient of garbs in which to work. However, Sven s team
had one great advantage over the construction groups you see
putting up skyscrapers down on Earth. They could step back
and admire their handiwork without being abruptly parted
from it by gravity.

Don t ask me why Sven wanted a pet, or why he chose the
one he did. I m not a psychologist, but I must admit that his

wiry: thin but a
strong py
assorted:

consisting of

various types

mixed together

girders: long,
thick piece of
steel or concrete are"
that supports a
large structure

precisely:
exactly

dovetailed:
fitted together

garbs: clothing
of a special kind

handiwork:
creation

.
abruptly:

unexpectedly/
suddenly

a

POORVI

aboard: on an
aircraft

cubbyhole: a
small enclosed
space or room

ceased: stopped

canary: a
popular bird
which people
love to keep as
pets; found in
open areas with
small trees and
shrubs

wits: ability to
think quickly
flicks:

sudden, quick
movements

concealing:
hiding
ventilating
shafts:
passageways or
ducts that allow
fresh air ina
closed space

bulkheads:
dividing walls
or barriers
between
separate
compartments
in an aircraft
selection was very sensible. Claribel weighed practically
nothing, her food requirements were tiny and she was not
worried, as most animals would have been, by the absence
of gravity.

I first became aware that Claribel was aboard when I was
sitting in the little cubbyhole laughingly called my office,
checking through my lists of technical stores to decide what
items we d be running out of next. When I heard the musical
whistle beside my ear, I assumed that it had come over the
station intercom, and waited for an announcement to follow.
It didn t; instead, there was a long and involved pattern of
melody that made me look up with such a start that I forgot
all about the angle beam just behind my head. When the stars
had ceased to explode before my eyes, I had my first view
of Claribel.

She was a small yellow canary, hanging in the air as motionless
as a hummingbird and with much less effort, for her wings
were quietly folded along her sides. We stared at each other for
a minute; then, before I had quite recovered my wits, she did
a curious kind of backward loop I m sure no earthbound
canary had ever managed, and departed with a few leisurely
flicks. It was quite obvious that she d already learned how to
operate in the absence of gravity, and did not believe in doing
unnecessary work.

Sven didn t confess to her ownership for several days, and
by that time it no longer mattered, because Claribel was a
general pet. He had smuggled her up on the last ferry from
Earth, when he came back from leave partly, he claimed,
out of sheer scientific curiosity. He wanted to see just how a
bird would operate when it had no weight but could still use
its wings.

Claribel thrived and grew fat. On the whole, we had little trouble
concealing our guest when VIPs from Earth came visiting.
A space station has more hiding places than you can count;
the only problem was that Claribel got rather noisy when she
was upset, and we sometimes had to think fast to explain the
curious peeps and whistles that came from ventilating shafts
and storage bulkheads.

There were a couple of narrow escapes but then who would
dream of looking for a canary in a space station?

SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY

PN
Let us discuss 7 CG

I Answer the following questions briefly. 4 

\
1. Why did the narrator think Sven had sneaked a bird aboard? What 
was Sven s scientific reason?

2. How did Claribel adjust to the new surroundings?

3. What made the narrator mistake the musical whistle for a sound from
the intercom?

4. Do you think the presence of the canary would lead the spacers into
trouble? If yes, why? If no, why not? ,
I *

We were now on twelve-hour watches, which was not as bad as . =
it sounds, since you need little sleep in space. Though of course ~ ee
there is no day and night when you are floating in permanent - Cay
sunlight, it was still convenient to stick to the terms. Certainly /

when I woke that morning it felt like 6:00 a.m. on Earth. I had =
a nagging headache, and vague memories of fitful, disturbed nagging: .
dreams. It took me ages to undo my bunk straps, and I was still persistently

only half awake when I joined the remainder of the duty crew Painful

in the mess. Breakfast was unusually quiet, and there was one

seat vacant.

POORVI

retort: answer/
respond
clenched:
pressed together
tightly

hushed: quiet

snugly: cosily

keeled:
collapsed/
fainted
tugging at:
causing to
remember
something

- sluggish:
% inactive
\
 Where s Sven? I asked, not very much caring.

 He s looking for Claribel, someone answered. Says he can t
find her anywhere. She usually wakes him up. 

Before I could retort that she usually woke me up, too,
Sven came in through the doorway, and we could see at once
that something was wrong. He slowly opened his hand, and
there lay a tiny bundle of yellow feathers, with two clenched
claws sticking pathetically up into the air.

 What happened? we asked, all equally distressed.

 T don t know, said Sven mournfully. I just found her
like this. 

 Let's have a look at her, said Jock Duncan, our
cook-doctor-dietitian. We all waited in hushed silence
while he held Claribel against his ear in an attempt to detect
any heartbeat.

Presently he shook his head. I can t hear anything, but that
doesn t prove she s dead. I ve never listened to a canary s
heart, he added rather apologetically.

 Give her a shot of oxygen, suggested somebody, pointing
to the green-banded emergency cylinder in its recess beside
the door. Everyone agreed that this was an excellent idea,
and Claribel was tucked snugly into a face mask that was
large enough to serve as a complete oxygen tent for her.

To our delighted surprise, she revived at once. Beaming
broadly, Sven removed the mask, and she hopped onto his
finger. She gave her series of Come to the cookhouse, boys 
trills then promptly keeled over again.

 I don t get it, lamented Sven. What s wrong with her?
She s never done this before. 

For the last few minutes, something had been tugging at my
memory. My mind seemed to be very sluggish that morning,
as if I was still unable to cast off the burden of sleep. I felt that
I could do with some of that oxygen but before I could reach
the mask, understanding exploded in my brain. I whirled on
the duty engineer and said urgently: Jim! There s something
wrong with the air! That s why Claribel s passed out. I ve just
remembered that miners used to carry canaries down to warn
them of gas. 

SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY

 Nonsense! said Jim. The alarms would have gone off. We ve
got duplicate circuits, operating independently. 

 Er the second alarm circuit isn t connected up yet, 
his assistant reminded him. That shook Jim; he left without a
word, while we stood arguing and passing the oxygen bottle
around like a pipe of peace.

He came back ten
minutes later with a
sheepish expression.
It was one of those
accidents that couldn t
possibly happen; we d
had one of our rare
eclipses by _ Earth s
shadow that night;
part of the air purifier
had frozen up, and
the single alarm in the
circuit had failed to go
off. Half a million dollars worth of chemical and electronic
engineering had let us down completely. Without Claribel,
we should soon have been slightly dead.

So now, if you visit any space station, don t be surprised if you
hear an inexplicable snatch of birdsong. There s no need to
be alarmed; on the contrary, in fact. It will mean that you re
being doubly safeguarded, at practically no extra expense.

ARTHUR C. CLARKE

Let us discuss

I Identify whether the following statements from parts I and
II are true or false. Share your answers with your classmates
and teacher.

1. The alarm at the space station failed to work properly because
they were not connected.

2. Claribel was brought to the space station for an official
experiment on animal behaviour in space.

sheepish:
embarrassed

inexplicable:
unexplainable

safeguarded:
protected
2a

POORVI

3. The canary s suffering helped the crew discover a problem with the

~ _ air purifier.
y 5 & ~ 4. The air purifier froze because there was a rare eclipse.
5. Claribel could fly gracefully in the space station, performing loops in
E the air.

6. The space station crew was uninterested in Claribel and hardly noticed
her presence after she was discovered.

. Claribel had fainted and had to be revived with oxygen supply.

Let us think and reflect

I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow.

1. Sven was one of our best construction men, and excelled at the tricky and
specialised work of collecting assorted girders as they floated around in
free fall, making them do the slow-motion, three-dimensional ballet that
would get them into their right positions, and fusing the pieces together
when they were precisely dovetailed into the intended pattern: it was
a skilled and difficult job, for a space suit is not the most convenient of
garbs in which to work.

(i) What can be inferred about Sven s abilities from his job description?
A. He is good at following instructions but lacks creativity.

B. He possesses a strong understanding of working in space.

C. He struggles with the complexities of construction in space.

D. He prefers working on simpler tasks rather than complex jobs.

(ii) How can we conclude that Sven was working in zero gravity?
(iii) Select the option that is correct for both (Assertion) A and (Reason) R.

(A): Sven sjob required him to make girders perform a three-dimensional
ballet in space.

(R): Working in zero gravity allows objects to float, making precise

Nw, positioning more challenging.
4 A. Both (A) and (R) are true, and (R) is the correct explanation of (A).
> . 4 B. Both (A) and (R) are true, but (R) is not the correct explanation of (A).

C. (A) is true, but (R) is false.
D. (A) is false, but (R) is true.

(iv) Replace the underlined word with a word similar in meaning from
the extract.

During the festival, people wore colourful outfits that represented
Se their culture.
I

-_

SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY

2. Jim! There s something wrong with the air! That s
why Claribel s passed out. I ve just remembered that
miners used to carry canaries down to warn them
of gas. 

 Nonsense! said Jim. The alarms would have
gone off. We ve got duplicate circuits, operating
independently. 

 Er the second alarm circuit isn t connected up yet, his assistant
reminded him. That shook Jim; he left without a word, while we stood
arguing and passing the oxygen bottle around like a pipe of peace.

(i) Fill in the blank by selecting the correct option from those given in

the brackets.

The narrator references canaries and miners in order to

(highlight the historical use of canaries as warning systems/explain
the reason that caused Claribel to faint suddenly)

(ii) Complete the following sentence with a suitable reason.

Jim initially dismisses the warning about the air because
(iii) What does the phrase shook Jim mean in the context of the
information in the extract?
Jim was
A. physically pushed by someone
B. startled by unexpected information
C. cold and needed to warm up
D. trying to shake off sleepiness

(iv) What does the crew s action of passing the oxygen bottle around
 like a pipe of peace suggest about their response to the situation?

Answer the following questions.
1. What was the purpose of the alarm? What had caused its failure?

2. How does the crew s reaction to Claribel change over the course of
the story?

3. What does the last part of the story tell us about the significance of
unusual ways of problem solving?

4. Justify the appropriateness of the title of the story.

5. Without Claribel, we should soon have been slightly dead. What does
this line suggest about uncertainty of life in space?

6. Explain how has the writer presented science fiction with a touch
of humour.

7. How would Sven reflect on his experience of almost losing Claribel
and for saving the lives of the entire crew?

POORVI

AY
2h Let us learn

 I Choose the appropriate adjectives from the box given below to match
with the words 1-8 that follow.

nagging vague delighted narrow
sluggish hushed inexplicable sheepish

reason
traffic

voices

ono FF wn
 
[o)
fo)
yr

expression

Now, underline the sentences that use these adjectives in the text.

II The word intercom is used in the text. It is called a merged word
as it is made by combining the parts of two words internal and
 communication . Merged words are made by combining two words.

Combine the words in Column 1 with the words in Column 2 to make
merged words. Write the merged word and its meaning.

One example has been done for you.

breakfast lunch G) brunch meal eaten between
breakfast and lunch

It will mean that you re being doubly safeguarded.

In the given sentence, will denotes

SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY

III Read the following sentence from the text and fill in the blank.

___ (past/present/future) time.

There are several ways to use verbs to talk about the future in English.
The following table lists some of the usages of future time references.

S. No. Tense

1. will [Note: also
common in offers,
promises, and
orders expressing
willingness,
certainty or
obligations]

2. Simple Present
Tense

os Present
Progressive Tense

4. Going to 

5. Future Perfect
(will have + Past
Participle)

Usage

When we provide
information about
future events or
discuss possible
future occurrences.

When we talk about
the future only in
situations that are

a part of a regular
schedule or planned
action.

When we use for
future actions

and events mostly
for personal
arrangements and
fixed plans.

Present Progressive
Tense of go 

This is common

in informal style,
especially in speech
or conversation.

When we say that
something will be
finished or completed
by a certain time in
future.

Examples

e J think the Kailash

House will win.

My school reopens
on 03 January.

My exams are
getting over this
weekend.

I am visiting my
grandparents
during the
vacation.

We're going to get
a new motorbike
soon.

The teacher says,
she will have
completed the
portions by next
month.

POORVI

Future
Progressive (will +
be + -ing)

When we say that
something will be
in progress ata

This time
tomorrow I will be
relaxing at home.

particular moment
in the future.

I had no time

to shop as I

was leaving for
Chennai in an
hour. (instead of
 am leaving )

Future in the Past | Sometimes, when
we talk about the
past, we need to
mention something
that was still in the
future at that time 

something that had
not happened yet.

Last time I saw
you, you were
going to start a
new business.
(instead of are
going to )

In 2024, I arrived
in a town where I
would spend the
rest of my life.
(instead of will
spend )

IV Fill in the blanks with the correct form (Simple Present, Present
Progressive, will , or going to ) to indicate future time.

1. Our flight (leave) at 10.00 a.m. tomorrow.

2. They (finish) the project by the end of this week.
3. The weather forecast says it ___ (rain) later today.

4. We (move) into our new house next month.

5. I (start) my new hobby class next Monday.

6. She (go) to the mall this afternoon.

7. The team (have) a meeting at 3.00 p.m. tomorrow.
8.1 (help) you with your homework after dinner.

SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY

V Fill in the blanks with the suitable forms of verbs given in brackets to V7

express future time reference. ~ {p)
\

By 2040, artificial intelligence 1. (revolutionise) medical
treatments. Researchers 2. (develop) Al-powered diagnostic

tools that 3. (transform) healthcare by the end of this decade.

Next week, the International Science Congress 4. (open) to ~
showcase advancements in AI and robotics. In the coming years, robots / ~
5. (assist) surgeons in performing complex operations. Years ago, 4 \
experts had predicted that AI would reshape our world, and now, as we

approach the future, this 6. (be) our new reality.

Let us listen

I You will listen to a conversation between
Monika and Toby. Toby is a Martian and is
stranded on Earth. He has become Monika s
friend. As you listen, put a tick mark (v)
against the correct statements and a cross
against the wrong ones. (Transcript for
teacher on page 249)

1. Toby misses his school.
2. Monika accepts Toby as her friend.

3. Monika asks Toby about one of his
facial features.

4. Toby tells Monika that she had a banana
for breakfast.

5. Toby shares that he can see much clearer
with a closed eye.

POORVI

II Listen to the conversation again and fill in the blanks with the exact

words you hear.
 

w 1. Toby: I miss my and home.

2. Toby: Well, we _ don t need to eat anything. We get our
P from the Sun.

3. Monika: Oh! Don t you ever feel like having ice-creams and
i !

s 4. Monika: Okay, tell me one thing. How are you able to see only with
eye?
5. Toby: I can see beyond mountains and , woods and

even

Let us speak

ge I Read the following words from the text aloud and circle the letters that
 are not pronounced (silent letters).

 ballet (ba-lay) [ba pronounced asin bat] whistle (wi-sl)
alarm (uh-laam) psychologist (sai-ko-luh-juhst)

Now, read some more words with silent letters. As you read, circle the
letters that are not pronounced.

receipt debris pneumonia almond foreign
A)
 
 

island wreck aisle campaign fasten

II Work in pairs. Use the given situations to ask for and give suggestions.

 Youneed to makea model ofthe solar system for the Science Exhibition
but don t know what materials to use. Ask your friend for suggestions.

 Youneed to prepare for the inter-class quiz on the topic Chandrayaan-3.
Ask your friend for advice on how to prepare.

You may use the prompts given below.
| Asking for Advice Giving Advice
 What should I do... ? I feel you should...

e What are the best ways... ? * It s good to prepare yourself...

wy What should I... ? * It is best to use...
SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY

Now, write an article titled The Importance of Internet with the help of
the social media web.

Points to remember:
Heading/Title
Name of the writer
PARAGRAPH 1: Give a general introduction to the topic.

PARAGRAPH 2: Explain the uses of the internet and why it is important.
Give examples to support your view.

PARAGRAPH 3: End with a comment and leave the reader with a thoughtful
idea or quote.

Let us explore

 A canary in the coal mine is a popular phrase to describe early signs of
potential danger.

I Coal miners in places like Arunachal Pradesh used canary birds to detect
the presence of carbon monoxide. Such gases are a potential risk to the
life of the miners. These little birds are particularly sensitive to carbon
monoxide and can prevent mining accidents.

Zao

POORVI
II Astronauts living in space stations have to do things differently. Read
how they manage the routine tasks in the absence of gravity. You may
find out more information about it from the internet.

III

1.

Write: Astronauts use a special Space Pen which has a cartridge with
ink combined with resin. The ink remains solid until friction with the
ball at the point of the pen liquefies it. It works in all positions, in
extreme heat and cold, and in atmospheres ranging from pure oxygen
to vacuum.

. Exercise: Astronauts use resistance exercise equipment. Weight

training is done by applying a load using vacuum cylinders. Running
on the treadmill is made possible with the bodies held down using
rubber straps.

. Eat: Astronauts eat preserved foods which is dried, canned,

vacuum-packed, and frozen. These can be prepared by adding cold
or hot water, and some can be heated in an oven. They also eat
ready-to-eat items, such as nuts, breads, and fruits.

. Sleep: Astronauts can sleep on a floor, wall, or ceiling as there s no

distinction between up and down but they may gradually float away
while sleeping. Therefore, they need to restrain their bodies in small
sleeping compartments or sleeping bags.

Did you know that animals can save humans from natural calamities?
Animals can sense natural calamities. Read the following examples and
decide if this is true.

In 2004, before a tsunami could hit the coastline of Indonesia, some
animals made efforts to flee elephants ran for higher ground,
flamingos abandoned low-lying nesting areas, and dogs refused to
go outdoors.

Minutes before the Naples quake of 1805, oxen, sheep, dogs, and geese
started making alarm calls in unison.

Migratory birds crossing the Pacific are able to dodge storms and
other hazards.

In the Gulf of Mexico, sharks sense the drop in barometric pressure
that precedes hurricanes and tend to swim to deeper waters as a
result. Dolphins have also been observed swimming away from
storm-prone areas.

Scientists have studied this behaviour and found that when severe
stresses arise in deep rock before the earthquake, ultra-low frequency
electromagnetic waves are generated that animals can sense.

IV Salim Ali, the Birdman of India , was an Indian ornithologist (a
person who studies birds). He was the first Indian to conduct
systematic bird surveys across India and wrote several books
on birds. He was awarded the Padma Bhushan in 1958 and the
Padma Vibhushan in 1976.

V We need to conserve our feathered friends. Work in groups
of four.

Look at the pictures and make a bird feeder with cardboard,
chart paper, etc.

UY NS raw

SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY

MAGNIFYING GLASS

Let us do these activities before we read.

I Work in pairs. Answer the questions that follow the pictures given below.
Share your answers with your classmates and teacher.

1. What is common in all these pictures?
2. Select the pictures you are familiar with.

3. Why do you think the people in the pictures need to use a
magnifying glass?

4. What other instruments magnify objects?

II If you have a magnifying glass, what would you like to use it for and
why? Share your answers with your classmates and teacher.

PE Vet usread pms
 a;
With this round glass C )
I can make Magic talk =
A myriad shells show 4
In a scrap of chalk; ai

Of but an inch of moss

A forest flowers and trees;
A drop of water
Like hive of bees.

I lie in wait and watch
How the deft spider jets
The woven web-silk
From his spinnerets;

The tigerish claws he has!
And oh! the silly flies

The stumble into his net 
With all those eyes!

Not even the tiniest thing
But this my glass

Will make more marvellous
And itself surpass.

Yes, and with lenses like it,
Eyeing the moon,

 Twould seem you d walk there
In an afternoon!

WALTER DE LA MARE th

Let us discuss

I Complete the summary of the poem given below with suitable words
from the poem.

The poem describes the magic of seeing the world through a

1. . It reveals how tiny things like 2. and 3.

can appear vast and complex. Even a 4. of water can seem ,
like a hive of 5. . The poet is impressed at how the spider spins

its 6. from its 7. . The poem ends with the idea that,

through lenses, the 8. could seem within reach. yf

II Fill in the blanks by choosing the correct answer from the brackets. = (a
/

1. The main idea of the poem is the transformative power of
(wonders in nature/close observation) through the magnifying glass.

2. The tone of the poem is . (wonder and curiosity/peaceful
and emotional)

3. The poem has stanzas with lines in each stanza.
Hence, it is a quatrain. (four; six/six; four)

4. The rhyme scheme of the poem is . (ABCD; ABCB)

POORVI

.

=
~

>)
III Pick examples from the poem for the following poetic devices.
1. Simile
2. Alliteration
3. Metaphor
IV The poem is rich in visual imagery, painting vivid pictures of small,
everyday things magnified into something grand.

1. In the line, A myriad shells show in a scrap of chalk , the magnifying
glass reveals

2. In the line, A forest flowers and trees the poet uses the imagery of
nature to emphasise

V Complete the following sentences with a reason.

1.The poet uses exclamation marks in lines, The tigerish claws
he has! , With all those eyes! and In an afternoon! because it

2. In the phrase, Magic talk the poet uses personification to describe the
magnifying glass because it

3. Each stanza follows a repetitive pattern of introducing a small or
ordinary object and then describing the extraordinary details revealed
through magnification.

This is because it supports the theme of as the speaker
reveals

4. In the final stanza the poet shifts from small, everyday objects being
magnified to a celestial body like moon because

oC?

fo Let us think and reflect

I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow.
1. With this round glass
Ican make Magic talk 
A myriad shells show
Ina scrap of chalk;
Of but an inch of moss
A forest flowers and trees;

(i) Identify whether the following statement is true or false.

The poet uses his magical powers to make the round glass
powerful.

SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY

(ii) Select the line from the extract that expresses the presence of intricate

patterns in ordinary objects.

(iii) What does the comparison of an inch of moss to a forest suggest 
about the speaker s view of the world through the magnifying glass? .

(iv) How does the poet feel about the ability of the magnifying glass to
reveal hidden wonders?
A. Satisfied
B. Fascinated
C. Grateful
D. Determined

II Answer the following questions.

1. What is the significance of the spider in the poem? oe,
2. How might the speaker s view of the natural world change if there t me
was no use of a magnifying glass? lh
3. Why does the poem end with the idea of the moon being within reach? 2
4.What is the speaker s attitude towards nature and the act .
of observation?

5. Which is your favourite part of the poem? Why?

woven myriad deft
I
I
stumble surpass marvellous
1]

With his 1. description, the author has written the story
beautifully 2. with fascinating details. When you read the
story, you will surely enjoy the 3. storytelling technique
that attracts all kinds of readers. What makes the story interesting is
the superb way of describing the 4. ___emotions and feelings of
the characters. The reader will 5. upon the unexpected twists
and turns that 6. all our understanding and make us wonder
at the narrative power of the author.

POORVI

II The collective noun a hive of bees , is used in the poem. Match
the phrases in Column 1 with suitable words in Column 2 to make
collective nouns.

(ships
Gi)_soldiers

III The poet uses the expression eyeing the moon in the poem. Match the
idiomatic expressions with eye given in Column 1 with their meanings
in Column 2. You may refer to a dictionary.

1. apple of one s eye (i) watch something or someone
closely

in the blink of an eye (ii) act as if you do not see or
notice

3. keep an eye on something or | (iii) something that happens very
somebody quickly
4. turn a blind eye (iv) an overall look at something

5. see eye to eye (v) aperson whois very precious
or important

6. bird s-eye view (vi) agree with each other

IV The poet uses the adjective form tigerish in the poem by adding the
suffix - ish to the noun tiger . In the same way, we can make adjectives
by adding the suffix - ish to some nouns.

Choose the nouns to which you can add the suffix - ish to make adjectives.

girl glass book silk
boy water moon scrap
]
]
1
J

SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY

"6
Let us listen

I You will listen to a conversation between a father and daughter
about lesser-known Indian inventions. As you listen, mark the four
true statements from (1)-(6) given below. (Transcript for teacher on
page 250)

1. The father is surprised by the fact that India was
involved in the invention of radio broadcasting
and fibre optics.

. The daughter appears indifferent when learning
the origins of the USB port.

. The father shows little interest in the information
about the origin of snakes and ladders.

. The father was simply confirming all the facts
shared by the daughter.

. The daughter expresses pride and admiration
for India s role in global inventions.

. The daughter is excited as she shares new
discoveries about India s contributions with
her father.

Papa,
everyone talks
about how yoga
and the concept
of zero came
from India.

POORVI

I

II

II

 S)

Let us speak

When pronouncing /v/ and /f/, the lower lip lightly touches the edge
of the upper teeth. Air flows through the small gap, creating a soft
friction sound.

Note the difference between /v/ and /f/. When we pronounce words with
/v/sound, there is a vibration, whereas /f/ sound has no vibration. Both the
sounds can occur in the beginning, middle, or at the end of words.

Read these words aloud with the help of your teacher.

beginning sound /f/: forest flowers from

middle sound /f/: deft afternoon

end sound /f/: of itself

beginning sound /Vv/: vase valour victory

middle sound /Vv/: woven even marvellous
end sound /v/: hive

If you could travel to space, which planet would you like to visit? Why?
What preparations would you like to make? Speak about any five things
that you would like to take along.

If you could invent something, what would you like to invent and
how? Give reasons for the choice of your invention. Speak about your
wonder invention.

SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY

Let us write

I In a conversation, we communicate through dialogues. While writing
a conversation, we need to ensure that the dialogues are engaging and
serve a purpose.

Points to remember:

 Mention where, when, and with whom the conversation is
taking place.

 Identify the word choice and tone formal or informal.
 Include key information, points of agreement and disagreement, etc.

 Use words in brackets to express emotions or actions, such as (joyfully)
(sits down).

 You may use filler words like Uff, Er... , Ugh, etc.

Deepa and Asma, members of the Science Club have a conversation to
take a decision about making a model for an upcoming Science Fair.
Create this conversation between Deepa and Asma.

You may begin the conversation like this.

DEEPA: Hi Asma! Our Science teacher mentioned that you have a
wonderful idea for the Science Fair project.

ASMA: _ (hesitatingly) Yes, I do. But I m not sure if it is good enough.

DEEPA: (encouragingly) Don t worry...

Let us explore

I Children with low vision may benefit from different types of visual aids,
such as magnifying spectacles, stand magnifiers, hand-held magnifiers,
and telescopes. Magnifying spectacles are used for reading, threading
a needle or doing other close-up tasks. Stand magnifiers rest above the
object and are hands-free and help to keep the magnifying lens at a
proper distance. Hand-held magnifiers with and without built-in lights,
are usually smaller and lighter to move over printed material. They can
be moved more easily. Telescopes are used to see objects or signs far
away. Some telescopes can even be attached to eyeglasses.

POORVI

II Did you know that telescopes also use lenses?

1. The largest telescope in India for studying celestial objects is located
in the district of Nainital, Uttarakhand. Commissioned in 2016, it is
maintained and operated by ARIES (Aryabhata Research Institute of
Observational Sciences).

2.The Indian Astronomical Observatory (IAO) is a_ high-altitude
astronomy station located in Hanle, Ladakh, India. It is situated at an
elevation of 4,500 meters (14,764 ft), and supports optical, infrared, and
gamma-ray telescopes.

3. The largest, most powerful, and most complex telescope ever launched
into space is the James Webb Space Telescope. NASA launched it
on, 25 December 2021. It orbits the Sun at a distance of 1.5 million
kilometres from Earth. To learn more, visit the link below.

https://science.nasa.gov/mission/webb/

4. The Mauna Kea Observatory, astronomical observatory in Hawaii, US,
that has become one of the most important in the world because of
its outstanding observational conditions. The Mauna Kea Observatory
is operated by the University of Hawaii and lies at an elevation of
4,205 metres (13,796 feet) atop the peak of Mauna Kea, a dormant
volcano on north-central Hawaii island. The summit hosts a worldrenowned collection of astronomical research facilities and large
telescope observatories, including the Keck Observatory and Subaru
Telescope, for optical, infrared, and submillimeter astronomy.

The observatories are set up here because of Mauna Kea s high
elevation, dry environment, and stable airflow that make it a prime
location for astronomical observation. The focus is scientific research
across the electromagnetic spectrum.

Public Access: The Onizuka Center for International Astronomy
provides visitor information and exhibits about the mountain and its
observatories, and offers guided tours of the summit.

Find out more about them from the internet and discuss with your
science teacher and classmates.

SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY

III Read about ancient Indian scholars.

1. One of the eminent astronomers of the ancient India was Aryabhata. +
His work Aryabhatiyam, laid the groundwork for various astronomers s
to develop in subsequent centuries and continues to be an important
work even today. Aryabhata proposed a heliocentric model of the
solar system centuries before Copernicus. He also gave a scientific
explanation of lunar and solar eclipses.

awe
 arate pet

2. Varamihira, the sixth-century CE astronomer, philosopher, and
mathematician wrote the astronomical treatise Pafichasiddhantika

(Fine Treatises), a compendium of Greek, Egyptian, Roman, and
Indian astronomy.

POORVI

3. The tenth-century CE mathematician-astronomer Bhaskaracharya II
contributed significantly to the advancement of astronomical
concepts. His works Siddhantasiromani and Karanakutuhala, include
compiled data on planetary positions, conjunctions, and eclipses.

https://indianculture.gov.in/timeless-trends/unveiling-cosmos-journey-throughhistory-astronomy-india

IV Jantar Mantar in New Delhi is an astronomical observatory. It has
large-scale astronomical instruments designed for precise calculations
and measurements of celestial movements. It was built in 1724 by
Maharaja Sawai Jai Singh II. The observatory is a UNESCO World Heritage
Site. Five such observatories were built by Jai Singh IJ, the other four are
located in Ujjain, Mathura, Varanasi, and Jaipur.

BripHA CHOWDHURI

Tue Beam oF LIGHT THAT LIT THE PATH FOR WOMEN IN
INDIAN SCIENCE

Let us do these activities before we read.

I Work in pairs. What qualities do you associate with a scientist? Share
your answers with your classmates and teacher. Complete the word web
given below.

II Some pictures of women scientists are given below. What do you know
about their work? Share your answers with your classmates and teacher.

| >

 
 

(Sant
pepe aes] |

[|i occ

ll

POORVI

trailblazers:
people who are
the first to do
something that
other people do
later

TT,

equitable:
treating
everyone fairly
and in the same
way

defied the
odds: achieved
something
despite
difficulties

towering: very
high or great

persistence:

ability to

keep doing

something
al difficult

delved:
examined
something in
detail to find
information
2
e a
.
*
 g 
oe
se z Cif Let us read
ZZ

In a world where women s potential in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) is being recognised
beyond doubt, India has seen its share of trailblazers who
paved the way. Today, the women behind ISRO s Mars Orbiter
Mission and Chandrayaan-3 are celebrated for their brilliance
and achievements. However, the foundation was laid by
early pioneers like Bibha Chowdhuri India s first woman
physicist who carved a path in the male-dominated field
of physics.

At a time when Indian
women struggled to seek
knowledge and equitable
access to education, Bibha
Chowdhuri emerged as
a rare beam of light a
woman who defied the
odds and lit a path for
others to follow. Born
in 1913 in Kolkata, in an
India that still followed the
traditional path. Bibha s
story was anything but
ordinary. She was a scientist who rose not only against the
societal expectations of women but also amidst the towering
giants of science men whose names the world would come to
celebrate, while hers was whispered only in the halls of those
who recognised her brilliance.

Bibha s persistence eventually earned her a place at the Bose
Institute. She had already begun to chip away at the walls
of exclusion, becoming the first Indian woman to excel in
high-energy particle physics.

Breaking Boundaries

In 1945, Bibha s academic journey took her to the University
of Manchester. Under the guidance of the celebrated Nobel
Laureate, Patrick M.S. Blackett, she delved deeper into the
field of cosmic rays. Her Ph.D. thesis on cosmic rays earned
local recognition, with newspapers introducing her as India s

SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY

New Woman Scientist She has an eye for Cosmic Rays . This
title reflected the awe she inspired in a world still sceptical of sceptical:

her capabilities. doubtful J),
In an era marked by towering scientific discoveries, Bibha was

often on the cusp of greatness but remained in the shadows
of her male counterparts. Her most notable contribution
was the discovery of pi-mesons, a subatomic particle. Her
nomination for a Nobel Prize in 1950 by Erwin Schrodinger,
though unsuccessful, reflected her remarkable talent. Her
life, full of challenges and struggles, was marked by an uphill
battle to be heard and seen in the field of science. Chowdhuri
never received any awards during her lifetime, but continued
her work tirelessly. 

notable:
remarkable

In 1949, upon her return to India, she became the first woman

faculty member at the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research

(TIFR), personally selected by Homi J. Bhabha. Chowdhuri s

contributions spanned across research institutes like the

Physical Research Laboratory in Ahmedabad and the Saha Y/
Institute of Nuclear Physics in Kolkata. This is where she

continued her work on cosmic rays and subatomic particles.

Through decades of crucial research, from Kolar Gold Mines

to the Physical Research Laboratory under the mentorship

of Vikram Sarabhai, Bibha s work went on quietly, as she ipherv:

; 3 age . periphery:
remained in the periphery of Indian scientific acclaim. joundary
She passed away in 1991, her story untold, her name
largely forgotten. acclaim: praise

The Legacy of Bibha Chowdhuri and Today s Women in
Indian Science

The stars are not meant to remain
hidden forever. In 2019, the
International Astronomical Union
(IAU) honoured her legacy by
renaming a Star in the constellation
Leo HD 86081 as Bibha, 
meaning beam of light. Fittingly,
she is now a star in heaven, a
symbol of the light she brought
to Indian science. A fitting tribute

<4

POORVI

tenacity:
determination
to continue
what you are
doing

ignite: arouse

autonomous:
independent

arduous:
difficult,
needing a lot
of effort and
energy

stark: clear

beacon: a good
example that
gives people
hope and
encouragement
to a woman whose life was a radiant example of tenacity,
brilliance, and quiet determination. In 2020, the Government
of India declared a chair professorship in her name.

Fast forward to the present day, and the advancements made
by women in Indian science reflect Chowdhuri s pioneering
spirit and the progress she helped ignite. Women in ISRO, for
instance, are no longer participants but leaders in missions
that make global headlines.

One such luminary is Dr. Ritu Karidhal Srivastava, popularly
referred to as the Rocket Woman of India. Her pivotal role
in ISRO s Mars Orbiter Mission and subsequent leadership in
Chandrayaan-2 and Chandrayaan-3 reflect the leaps women
have made in STEM in India. Over 50 women contributed to
Chandrayaan-3, and their success is built upon the shoulders
of pioneers like Bibha Chowdhuri. Their roles in developing
autonomous systems for spacecraft and managing
mission-critical operations highlight the capabilities of women
in pushing India s space programme forward.

From Shadows to the Stars

The journey from Bibha Chowdhuri s era to today s women
scientists has been long and arduous, but it is also inspiring.
The struggles Chowdhuri faced are a stark reminder of how far
we ve come and how much further we have to go. But with
every cosmic achievement be it landing on the moon or
reaching Mars these women prove that the journey is well
worth it.

Bibha Chowdhuri s legacy lives on. Her story continues to
inspire young women to pursue their passions, break barriers,
and leave their mark on the world. Whether exploring cosmic
rays or sending rockets to Mars, India s women scientists are
writing the next chapter in a story that Bibha Chowdhuri
helped begin.

As the stars of Indian science shine brighter, Bibha Chowdhuri,
the beacon- beam of light, will always guide the way.

SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY

Let us discuss

I Arrange the following events from Bibha Chowdhuri s life in the
correct order of occurrence. Share your answers with your classmates
and teacher.

1. The International Astronomical Union (IAU) honoured her legacy by
renaming a star in the constellation Leo HD 86081 as Bibha .

2. She became the first woman faculty member at the Tata Institute of
Fundamental Research (TIFR).

3. Bibha Chowdhuri was born in pre-independent India.

4.The Government of India declared a chair professorship in
Bibha s name.

5. She joined the University of Manchester under the guidance of the \
celebrated Nobel Laureate, Patrick M.S. Blackett. _
6. She was nominated for a Nobel Prize by Erwin Schrodinger. 
Let us think and reflect

I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow.

1. In 1945, Bibha s academic journey took her to the University of
Manchester. Under the guidance of the celebrated Nobel Laureate,
Patrick M.S. Blackett, she delved deeper into the field of cosmic rays. Her
Ph.D. thesis on cosmic rays earned local recognition, with newspapers
introducing her as India s New Woman Scientist She has an eye for
Cosmic Rays .

(i) Why is the mention of Patrick M.S. Blackett, a Nobel Laureate,
significant in this extract?

(ii) What can be inferred about the public perception of women
scientists in the 1940s from the title given to her by the press India s
New Woman Scientist ?

A. Women scientists were widely accepted and celebrated at
that time.

B. The world was still doubtful about the capabilities of
women scientists.

C. Women scientists were as common and renowned as men in
the 1940s.

D. Women were not allowed to study sciences or pursue
scientific careers.

 
sy

vg
Cat

\

 

POORVI

i)

=
~

>)
3.

(iii) In the phrase celebrated Nobel Laureate, the word celebrated 
refers to all of the following EXCEPT someone who is

A. famous and highly respected

B. frequently seen in public

C. renowned for their achievements
D. well-regarded in their field

(iv) Complete the following sentence suitably.

The phrase She has an eye for Cosmic Rays suggests that

. The journey from Bibha Chowdhuri s era to today s women scientists

has been long and arduous, but it is also inspiring. The struggles
Chowdhuri faced are a stark reminder of how far we ve come and
how much further we have to go. But with every cosmic achievement 
be it landing on the moon or reaching Mars these women prove that
the journey is well worth it.

Bibha Chowdhuri s legacy lives on. Her story continues to inspire
young women to pursue their passions, break barriers, and leave
their mark on the world. As the stars of Indian science shine brighter,
Bibha Chowdhuri, the beacon beam of light, will always guide the way.

(i) What can be inferred about the challenges faced by women
scientists today, as compared to Bibha Chowdhuri s era?
A. Women scientists no longer face any barriers.
B. The challenges remain, but progress has been made.
C. The struggles have become more difficult over time.
D. The struggles are the same as they were for Chowdhuri.

(ii) The phrase Bibha Chowdhuri s legacy lives on suggests that

(iii) Why is Bibha Chowdhuri referred to as a beacon and a beam of
light in the extract?

(iv) State whether the following sentence is a fact or an opinion.

Bibha Chowdhuri was the beacon, the beam of light whose story
continues to inspire young women.

II Answer the following questions.
1.
2.

Why is Bibha Chowdhuri considered a pioneer in the field of science?

What does Bibha Chowdhuri s nomination by Erwin Schrodinger tell
us about her abilities?

Bibha Chowdhuri never worked for awards or recognition. Support
this statement with evidence from the text.

SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY

4. How does the renaming of a star as Bibha serve as both a literal and
symbolic recognition of her contributions to science?

5. How do the roles of women in ISRO today reflect broader changes in
societal attitudes towards women in STEM in India?

6. What is the writer s purpose of highlighting the contributions of Bibha
Chowdhuri and other modern women scientists?

7. How might this text help shape people s perception of the role of
women in other traditionally male-dominated fields?

Let us learn

I Complete the crossword puzzle by filling in the antonyms from the clues
given below in the table. You may refer to the text.

Acore i teeffortless

POORVI

Ese

jie a8
f
II

III

Substitute the underlined phrase in the sentences with the suitable
words from the box given below.

physicist luminaries pioneers
peers barriers persistence

. They are considered to be the first people to start the online markets.

. A scientist who studies matter, energy, light, etc.

. Most of my friends are my classmates and are my age.

re WwW NY

. We first welcomed all the famous and important people in folk song
for the award ceremony.

5. My brother finally succeeded in his business because of his continuous
efforts and determination.

6.We should remove all the things that block our way in
achieving success.

The words professorship , mentorship , and leadership are used in
the text. These words are made by adding the suffix -ship to the words
 professor , mentor and leader . Similarly, we can make words by
adding -ment and -hood to certain words.

Now, make words by adding suitable suffixes -ship, -ment, and -hood to
the words given below. One example has been done for you.

achieve + ment = achievement

1. member + =
2. govern + =
3. partner + =
4. child + =
5. citizen + =
6. entertain + =
7. brother + =
8. agree + =

SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY

IV The abbreviations ISRO and STEM used in the text are called acronyms
because they are read or pronounced as full words. 6,

The grid given below has acronyms for the following. Circle the acronyms e
in the grid.

1. National Aeronautics and Space Administration

2. All India Institute of Medical Sciences

3. Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, and Homoeopathy
4. National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research

5. World Health Organization og >

Clipping
The short form of laboratory is lab. In making this short form, the

front part of the word is retained and the end part is removed
or clipped.

Clipping is a method of making words from larger words in
English. There are three clipping methods.

1. Back clipping: a word is made by removing the end part of
a word and retaining the front part (exam examination,
ad advertisement, gas gasoline, memo memorandum,
gym gymnasium, photo photograph, etc.).

2. Front clipping: a word is made by removing the front part
of a word and retaining the end part (phone telephone,
net internet, bike motorbike, net internet, etc.).

3. Middle clipping: a word is made by removing the front and
the end parts of the word and retaining the middle part
(flu influenza, fridge refrigerator, etc.).
POORVI

V Read the following sentence from the text and the table that follows.

.... the foundation was laid by early pioneers like Bibha Chowdhuri...

The foundation early pioneers like Bibha Chowdhuri...

Here the verb is expressed in passive form.

Verbs can be expressed in either active voice or passive voice.

When the subject performs the action, the sentence is said to be in active
voice. On the other hand, when the subject receives the action, the
sentence is in passive voice.

Generally, sentences written in active voice are considered effective.
However, passive voice is used when the

* action is more important than the doer,
A cure for the disease was discovered.
(The focus is on the discovery, not on who discovered it.)

 doer of the action (agent) is obvious,
The national anthem is sung at the beginning of the event.
(It is clear that people sing it, so mentioning the doer is unnecessary.)

 doer of the action is unknown.
The car was stolen last night.

(The identity of the thief is unknown.)

Now, complete the following news report with the passive form of verbs
given in the box below. (Remember that the verb must agree with the
subject.)

[oF
a
Q
 
<
o)
ao
-)
n
los
fo)
fet)
n
 Ss
lo)
ce)
 Ss
a
Ee
n
By
(o>)
a
jor
ot
%
 
>)

we ewe eB ee ee eB ee ee ee ee ee eB eB eB eB eB eB eB ee eB eB eB eB eB eB ee eB eB eB ee ee ee ee Ke

Last year, significant advancements in medical science 1.

in leading medical journals when a new vaccine for malaria 2.

The vaccine 3. through several clinical trials and results
4. in those journals. During the trials, blood samples
5. regularly from participants to monitor their immune
response. The amount of antibodies produced 6. carefully to
assess the effectiveness of the vaccine.
SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY

VI Read the following report of an experiment. Rewrite the report using
passive verbs wherever necessary. ,

I conducted an experiment to investigate the effects of light on plant my
growth. I placed various plants under different light conditions and
measured their growth over several weeks. I recorded data daily to track
the height of each plant. At the end of the experiment, I analysed the 4
results and found that plants exposed to natural light grew significantly |
taller than those under artificial light. I concluded that sunlight plays a

crucial role in plant development. I presented my findings to the class,
highlighting the importance of light in enhancing photosynthesis and 
overall plant health.

You may begin like this.
An experiment was conducted...

VII Read the instructions given in the box on landing of Chandrayaan.
Complete the passage by choosing the correct answer from the
options given.

 Launch the spacecraft towards the Moon from Earth.
* Position the spacecraft to enter the Moon s orbit.
Adjust the spacecraft s path for landing.

 Slow down the spacecraft as it nears the Moon s surface.

* Release the rover to explore the surface and collect
valuable data.

Chandrayaan s landing mission involves several key Steps.
First, the spacecraft 1. towards the Moon from the Earth.
Then, it 2. to enter the Moon s orbit. After reaching the Moon s
orbit, the spacecraft s path 3. for landing. Next, the spacecraft
4. as it nears the Moon s surface. Finally, the rover 5. to
explore the surface and collect valuable data.

(i) A. launched B. were launched
C. was launched D. is launched
(ii) A. position B. was positioned
C. is positioned D. has positioned
(iii) A. adjusted B. was adjusted
C. is adjusted D. were adjusted
POORVI

(iv) A. slowed down B. was slowed down

C. is slowed down D. were slowed down

(v) A. is released B. has released

C. were released D. was released

Let us listen

I You will listen to a podcast about Artificial Intelligence. As you listen,

answer the following questions by selecting the correct options.
(Transcript for teacher on page 251)

1. What is one of the key benefits of AI in the healthcare sector?
(i) Helps doctors communicate faster with patients.
(ii) Provides personalised treatments and faster diagnoses.
(iii) Focuses on cosmetic surgeries to improve appearance.

2. How did AI play a crucial role during the global pandemic?
(i) Al robots monitored patient behaviour in hospitals.
(ii) AI assisted in speeding up the discovery of new medicines.
(iii) AI developed different types of vaccines by itself.

3. What example was given regarding Al s role in renewable energy?
(i) AI is optimising the placement of wind turbines and solar panels
in cities.
(ii) AI is promoting alternative energy from wind turbines and
solar panels.
(iii) Alis improving the performance of wind turbines and solar panels.

4. What does AI offer to teachers in the field of education?
(i) Helps teachers assign grades more quickly.
(ii) Allows teachers to communicate better with students.
(iii) Helps teachers analyse student performance.
5. What is one of the user-friendly features that AI is enhancing for
people with disabilities?
(i) Helps them find better jobs in the mainstream.
(ii) Improves speech recognition and voice command technologies.
(iii) Trains individuals to interact with robots.

SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY

Impact of e :
Mobile Phones 2

I Forma group of five. Conduct a panel discussion on the topic, Evaluating
the Impact of Mobile Phones Beneficial or Harmful . Each student will
take on one of the following roles.

 Moderator (initiates and directs the flow of the discussion inviting the
speakers to share their views on the subject; at the end sums up the
points of discussion and thanks the members of the group)

 Principal (opposed to focus on discipline in school)

 Teacher (in favour of partially in favour, educational use with
limitations)

 Parent (opposed to concerned about health and social effects on
children)

 Student (in favour of highlighting the benefits like connectivity and
learning)

POORVI
You may use the cues given below and add your own ideas when speaking.
eo. Principal Teacher
4 As a Principal, I strongly From an educator s
believe mobile phones are perspective, I think mobile
is largely disruptive because... phones can be valuable but...
a;
Py
Parent Student
As a parent, I m concerned As a student, I feel mobile
that mobile phones phones are essential
pose certain risks to because...
children s health and social
development...

Let us write

I Your school recently hosted the Zonal Science Exhibition, in which teams
of students from 25 schools participated enthusiastically. As the student
editor, write a report on the exhibition to be published in your school
magazine. Use the cues given below with your own ideas to compose
this report.

 Who was the organiser and who hosted the exhibition?
 When (date and time) and where was it held?

 Why was it held?

 Who participated?

 Who was the Chief Guest?

 What were the competitions held? For example: Science Quiz, Science
Models, etc.

 What were the topics of models exhibited? Give details.

 Which team got the trophy for best exhibit?

 What were the observations of the Chief Guest and other visitors?
Points to remember:

1. Write the report in past tense, passive voice, and third person.

2.Follow proper format with a headline, reporter s name, and
three paragraphs.

I

II

SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY

Let us explore

 
\__ <i
DS
ra

In the recent times, Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality are changing
the way students learn. Let us know more about them.

e Augmented reality (AR) enhances a person s environment by adding
digital elements to what can be seen in real time, usually through a
smartphone camera.

 Virtual reality (VR) offers a fully immersive experience, replacing the
real world with a simulated one.

 Through AR and VR, the students can see and interact with things that
they could not interact with in real life. This enables younger students
to understand difficult ideas easily.

 To keep up with the times, NCERT has developed the e-Pathshala AR
(Augmented Reality) App under the aegis of MHRD, Government
of India.

 This App aims to enable students to go beyond textbooks and four
walls of the classrooms and learn concepts by directly experimenting
rather than only through reading and memorisation.

 This revolutionary effort will change most students from passive
listeners to active learners.

 This effort is in line with the Prime Minister s Digital India vision to
empower varied sectors using technology and addressing the triple
need of skill, scale, and speed.

Gear up for the new age education!
https://ciet.ncert.gov.in/ar-vr

The Government of India has come out with a new set of National Awards
in the field of Science, Technology, and Innovation known as Rashtriya
Vigyan Puraskar .

The objective of the Rashtriya Vigyan Puraskar (RVP) is to recognise the
notable and inspiring contribution made by the scientists, technologists,
and innovators individually or in teams in various fields of science,
technology, and technology-led innovation.

1. Vigyan Ratna (VR) award will recognise lifetime achievements and
contributions made in any field of science and technology.

2. Vigyan Shri (VS) award will recognise distinguished contributions in
any field of science and technology.

POORVI

3. Vigyan Yuva-Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar (VY-SSB) award will recognise
 and encourage young scientists up to the age of 45 years, who have made
, an exceptional contribution in any field of science and technology.

4, Vigyan Team (VT) award to be given to a team comprising three or more
scientists/researchers/innovators, who have made an exceptional
contribution working in a team in any field of science and technology.

https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaselframePage.aspx?PRID=1959262

III A glimpse of women pioneers from different fields.

Renu Swaroop
Establishment of India s
to head a missile largest microbial resource
Project in India centre, Microbial Culture Computer Scientist &
Collection Director of the Indian
Statistical Institute

Gupta Gagandeep Kang Aditi Sen De Soumya Swaminathan
Youngest woman First woman First woman Youngest person First Indian woman First female physicist First Indian to become
scientist to receive president of the President of the to ever receive to be elected as a awarded the Shanti WHO's Deputy Director
Shanti Swarop _ _Indian National Astronomical the Shanti Swarup Fellow of the Royal Swarup Bhatnagar Prize General, and also its first
Bhatnagar Awardin = Science Academy Society of india Bhatnagar Prize at Society chief scientist
Chemical Sciences (INSA) (ASD the age of 35

Source: https://www.indiascienceandtechnology.gov.in/sites/all/themes/
vigyan/images/Women's_Scientist_Brochure_Low_Res.pdf
1

TRANSCRIPTS

Let us listen (refer to page 217)

I You will listen to a conversation between Monika and Toby. Toby is a
Martian and is stranded on Earth. He has become Monika s friend. As
you listen, put a tick mark against the correct statements and a cross
against the wrong ones.

MONIKA
TOBY
MONIKA

TOBY
MONIKA
TOBY

MONIKA
TOBY

MONIKA

TOBY
MONIKA

TOBY

MONIKA

: Hi, Toby! Do you miss your planet?
: Very much, Monika! I miss my people and home.
: Oh! I wish I could do something about it! But I am

happy to have you as my friend.

: Thank you, Monika!
: Er...could youtellme something more about yourself?
: Why not! What do you want to know about

me, Monika?

: What do you eat for breakfast?
: Well, we Martians don t need to eat anything. We get

our energy from the Sun.

: Oh! Don t you ever feel like having ice creams and

chocolates? I can t think of life without them!

: No, Monika! We are made of different stuff.
: Okay, tell me one thing. How are you able to see with

only one eye? I see only one big eye in the centre of
your face.

: My friend, we Martians need only one eye to see

clearly. In fact, I can see even with my eye closed.
I can see beyond mountains and clouds, wood and
even metals. I can see that you are carrying a toy
in your pocket. It s a blue aeroplane. Isn t it? And
yes! That apple you just had for breakfast is going
round-and-round in your stomach right now!

: (gasps in disbelief) Oh my goodness!
~

&)

>
II Listen to the conversation again and fill in the blanks with the exact
words you hear.

By)

Let us listen (refer to page 227)

I You will listen to a conversation between a father and daughter about
lesser-known Indian inventions. As you listen, mark the four true
statements from 1-6 given below.

DAUGHTER :

FATHER

DAUGHTER :

FATHER

DAUGHTER :

FATHER

DAUGHTER :

Papa, everyone talks about how yoga and the
concept of zero came from India, but I recently
found out there are so many more inventions that
people don t really know about!

Oh really? Like what?

Well, did you know that radio broadcasting has
roots in India? We usually credit Marconi, but
Jagadish Chandra Bose, a Bengaliscientist, actually
conducted an experiment using microwaves
before Marconi.

Wow, I didn t know that! That s incredible. I can
recollect something about fibre optics.

Yes! You re absolutely right Papa. Can you
imagine life without fibre optics? No fast internet,
no clear communication... And guess what? It
was pioneered by Narinder Kapany, an Indian
physicist from Punjab. He s called the father of
fibre optics. 

That s something I use every day, but I just had an
idea that the origins were in India. What about fun
things? Any of those that you ve found out about?

Yes indeed! You'll love this one Snakes and
Ladders! It was actually invented as a game to
teach children values, with ladders representing
virtues and snakes representing evil. It wasn t
just a board game like we think today. It had a
spiritual meaning in ancient times.

FATHER : So even that simple game had such deep roots.
Let me tell you about one that I just remembered.

DAUGHTER : Of course! I d love to know.

FATHER : Well, the USB port, something we rely on all the
time to connect devices, was invented by Ajay
Bhatt. He s an Indian-born engineer who helped
revolutionise the way we use technology.

DAUGHTER : That s amazing. USB is such a basic part of life
now. It s hard to imagine a time without it.

FATHER : That s incredible. And all this from India. I
definitely learned a lot from this conversation.

Adapted from https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/articles/SrnsYs1QcPB7CsyjzvTcmjf/7-surprising-things-india-has-given-the-world

2 @
Let us listen (refer to page 244)

I You will listen to a podcast about Artificial Intelligence. As you listen,
answer the following questions by selecting the correct options.

Hello and welcome to Tech Talks, the podcast where we explore
how technology is shaping our world! I m Faizy, your host,
and today we re diving into the fascinating topic of artificial
intelligence, or AI, and how it s benefiting humankind.

AI is often seen as futuristic, but it s already making everyday

tasks easier and more efficient. Let s look at some of the incredible Vi,

ways AI is improving our lives in four of the many segments. ~ {e) \ _

Let s begin with Segment 1: Healthcare Transformation

AI systems can analyse medical data much faster and more
accurately than humans, leading to quicker diagnoses and
personalised treatments.

Al-powered robots are also assisting in surgeries, making
them more precise and less invasive. And during the global
pandemic, AI played a crucial role in speeding up the discovery
of new medicines.
~

>)

wy
Let s now talk about Segment 2: Environmental Sustainability

Alis helping us fight climate change. It helps in predicting natural
disasters, and managing resources like water and agriculture
more efficiently.

In renewable energy, AI is improving the performance of wind
turbines and solar panels, pushing us toward a greener future.

Next, we have Segment 3: Enhancing Education

In education, AI is offering personalised learning experiences
to students.

Teachers also benefit from AI, which helps analyse student
performance and manage administrative tasks, giving them
more time to focus on teaching.

Segment 4: Accessibility and Inclusion is the final segment of
the podcast today.

You see, AI is also improving accessibility for people with
disabilities. Technologies like speech recognition, text-to-speech,
and voice commands make communication easier and faster.

Now you know how AI is improving life for humankind. AI is a
powerful force for good but we need to use it responsibly.

Thanks for tuning in to Tech Talks. Join us next time for another
deep dive into the world of technology. Until then, stay curious,
and keep exploring!