maintaining good health has been recognised for centuries. The Charaka Samhita, an ancient Ayurvedic text, highlights the role of easily digestible foods and the judicious use of spices like ginger, black pepper, and cumin to enhance digestion. Advances in science in the area of nutrition also emphasise eating meals at proper timings, practising mindful eating, and avoiding overeating as key factors in maintaining digestive health. 9.1.2 Do all animals digest food the same way as humans do? have seen cows keep chewing the food even when they are not actively grazing or eating anything. Why? Chapter 9.indd 127 4/3/2025 4:55:13 PM Grass-eating animals, such as Small Intestine Parycreas Oesophagus cows (Fig. 9.6) and buffaloes, partially chew the grass and swallow it into their stomachs. In the stomach, partial digestion of the food takes place. The partially digested food is brought back to the mouth for gradual chewing. This process is called rumination, and these animals are called ruminants. A cow spends about 8 hours a day just chewing the food! The thoroughly chewed food again passes down the alimentary canal for further digestion. Fig. 9.6: Digestive system of a ruminant Birds do not have teeth, but they have a chamber called a gizzard (Fig. 9.7). Oesophagus Food is broken down by the Stomach contraction and relaxation Gizzard of the walls of the gizzard, Intestine often with the help of grit (small stones) that the birds swallow. Fig. 9.7: Digestive system in birds This shows that animals exhibit variations in the structure and function of the alimentary canal to adapt to different ways of digesting different kinds of food. We have learnt that the nutrients from digested food are carried to different parts of the body. Some of the nutrients help build and repair the body, while others, like sugar, are broken down inside the body to release energy. The process by which nutrients are converted into usable energy is called respiration. Let us now explore how this process occurs in animals. 9.2 Respiration in Animals Oe ins We learnt in Grade 6 chapter Living Creatures: Exploring their Characteristics , that all living beings respire. Is the process of respiration the same in all animals? Let us first understand the process of respiration in humans. DF Chapter 9.indd 128 4/3/2025 4:55:13 PM | C) ao] Hd rT) C) 15) < a UW n a] x td x = > 2 he =] s) =o Py | : 9.2.1 Respiration in humans You know that we breathe in (inhale) and breathe out (exhale) air continuously to obtain oxygen and release carbon dioxide. How is this oxygen used in the body? Are breathing and respiration different? Let us find out. How do we breathe? The process of inhaling and exhaling air is called breathing. It is difficult to live without food for a week; without water for a day or two, but without breathing, we usually cannot survive more than a few minutes. Why is that? All of us are alive because we