thin and has thousands of finger-like projections (Fig. 9.5) that increase the surface area for efficient nutrient absorption. These finger-like projections allow the digested nutrients to pass into the blood, which carries them to different parts of the body. These nutrients provide energy, support growth and repair, and help the body function properly. Fig. 9.5: Inner lining of the small intestine SCIENCE AND SOCIETY Celiac disease is a condition in which the body reacts to gluten, a protein found in wheat, barley, and rye. This reaction damages the inner lining of the small intestine, where nutrients are absorbed. As a result, the intestine cannot function properly. The only way to manage celiac disease is to avoid foods that contain gluten. Millets (like jowar, bajra, and ragi) are good alternatives because they are naturally gluten-free. Large intestine After most of the nutrients are digested and absorbed in the small intestine, what happens to the undigested food? It moves into the large intestine. The large intestine is about 1.5 metres in length. It is shorter than the small intestine. Then why is it Ss i) GS rc) t) Le) < uu 1 al [-) = (=) td = wn 5 called the large intestine? The reason is that it is wider than the | Chapter 9.indd 126 4/3/2025 4:55:11 PM small intestine. The large intestine absorbs water and some salts from the undigested food, thus making the waste semi-solid. This semi-solid waste is called stool. The stool is then stored in the lower part of the large intestine, called the rectum, until the body is ready to get rid of it. Eating fibre-rich foods like fruits, vegetables, and whole grains helps the large intestine function properly by making the stool easier to pass. Finally, it is expelled through the anus a process known as egestion. This is how your body removes the waste it does not need, keeping you healthy! Isn t it fascinating how the digestive system works, absorbing nutrients from food and eliminating waste? E < < & wn o wn 17) ) 1 ) + a ") = a FASCINATING FACTS The large intestine contains various small living organisms, such as bacteria, that help in digestion. They help in keeping our digestive system healthy. They break down undigested food, especially fibre, and produce essential nutrients. Fibre-rich food, and especially fermented foods (like curd, buttermilk, shrikhand, kanji, pickles, gundruk, and poita bhat) are good for a healthy digestive system and overall well-being. SCIENCE AND SOCIETY The importance of digestion in maintaining good health has been recognised for centuries. The Charaka Samhita, an ancient Ayurvedic text, highlights the role of easily digestible foods and the judicious use of spices like ginger, black pepper, and cumin to enhance digestion. Advances in science in the area of nutrition also emphasise eating meals at proper timings, practising mindful eating, and avoiding overeating as key factors in maintaining digestive health. 9.1.2 Do all animals digest food the same way as humans do? have seen cows