parts Food Mouth > Stomach > > Anus 2. Sahil placed some pieces of chapati in test tube A. Neha placed chewed chapati in test tube B, and Santushti took boiled and mashed potato in test tube C. All of them added a few drops of iodine solution to their test tubes A, B, and C, respectively. What would be their observations? Give reasons. . What is the role of the diaphragm in breathing? (i) To filter the air (ii) To produce sound (iii) To help in inhalation and exhalation (iv) To absorb oxygen 4. Match the following Name of the part Functions (i) Nostrils (a) fresh air from outside enters (ii) Nasal passages (b) exchange of gases occurs (iii) Windpipe (c) protects lungs (iv) Alveoli (d) tiny hair and mucus help to trap dust and dirt from the air we breathe (v) Ribcage (e) air reaches our lungs through this part . Anil claims to his friend Sanvi that respiration and breathing are the same process. What question(s) can Sanvi ask him to make him understand that he is not correct? . Which of the following statements is correct and why? Anu: We inhale air. Shanu: We inhale oxygen. Tanu: We inhale air rich in oxygen. . We often sneeze when we inhale a lot of dust-laden air. What can be possible explanations for this? . Paridhi and Anusha of Grade 7 started running for their morning workout. After they completed their running, they counted their breaths per minute. Anusha was breathing faster than Paridhi. Provide at least two possible explanations for why Anusha was breathing faster than Paridhi. a My WHAT WILL HAPPEN os : Life Processes in Animals 4/3/2025 4:55:18 PM 9. Yadu conducted an experiment to test his idea. He took two test tubes, A and B, and added a pinch Iodine of rice flour to the test tubes, half- solution INNOVATION filled with water and stirred them properly. To test tube B, he added DISCOVERY a few drops of saliva. He left the two test tubes for 35-45 min. After that, he added iodine solution into both the test tubes. Experimental Fig. 9.15: Experimental results results are as shown in Fig. 9.15. ParLonant What do you think he wants to | test? _\._ 10. Rakshita designed an experiment 1 taking two clean test tubes, A and B and filled them with lime \ water as shown in the figure. In test tube A, the surrounding air (A) (B) (A) (B) ENQUIRY that we inhale was passed on by sucking air from the pipe, andin test tube B, the exhaled air was iS: 9.16 Experimental set-up blown through the pipe (Fig. 9.16). What do you think she is trying to investigate? How can she confirm her findings? Exploratory Projects * What are the good practices for maintaining oral hygiene? Try to gather information on the same from books/newspapers/ conversation with elders. Prepare a report. * Find out different ways to maintain a healthy digestive system. Suggest