Life Processes in Animals WEEVSer Cunard witMasse SH bswg) ADDS) Suri) 2 cooflesr. If your food is fully digested before you eat again, you won t need medicine for pain. (Thirukkural 942) In the Grade 6 Science textbook Curiosity, chapter Living Creatures: Exploring their Characteristics , we learnt about processes essential for survival of living beings like nutrition, respiration, excretion, and reproduction. These are collectively called life processes. In this chapter, we will learn about life processes such as nutrition and respiration in detail. QR Waa > TAT oY hen ae 4/3/2025 4:55:07 PM | Observe your surroundings and notice what animals eat. Animals eat different types of food. Bees and sunbirds suck the nectar of flowers, while infants of humans and many other animals feed on their mother s milk. Snakes, like python, swallow the animals they prey upon. Some aquatic animals filter tiny food particles floating nearby and feed upon them. Animals, including humans, obtain energy from food, which enables them to carry out various life processes. Animals consume food that contains complex components, such as carbohydrate, protein, and fat. These complex food components have to be broken down into simpler forms Mouth Oesophagus before the body can use them. But how does or Food pipe this process happen? Liver Breaking down of complex food components into simpler forms occurs in a Stomach long tube called the alimentary canal. This Pancreas process starts in the mouth and ends at the anus (Fig. 9.1). As food moves through this canal, digestive juices secreted at different Large intestine AS, parts break it down into simpler forms. __ This simpler form of food is absorbed by different parts of our alimentary canal and transported to various parts of our body to carry out various functions. Fig. 9.1: Human digestive system 9.1 Nutrition in Animals Oe hl hha How do the complex food components get broken down into simpler forms and used by the body in various animals? Is this process the same in all animals or does it vary? Let us first try to understand this process in humans. 9.1.1 Digestion in human beings Let us trace the journey of food inside our body as it passes through different parts of the alimentary canal. Beginning with the mouth cavity The journey of the food you eat begins when it enters your mouth. Your teeth break down food you eat into smaller pieces by the processes of crushing and chewing. This process of initial breakdown of food into fine pieces is called mechanical digestion. Think about your favourite food. Does your mouth feel watery? DF Chapter 9.indd 122 4/3/2025 4:55:08 PM | C) ao] Hd rT) C) 15) < a UW n a] x td x = > 2 he =] s) Sy This happens because of more saliva that gets released when you recall your favourite food. What do you think is the role of saliva in your mouth? What do you feel when you eat other types of food, such