(exhale) air continuously to obtain oxygen and release carbon dioxide. How is this oxygen used in the body? Are breathing and respiration different? Let us find out. How do we breathe? The process of inhaling and exhaling air is called breathing. It is difficult to live without food for a week; without water for a day or two, but without breathing, we usually cannot survive more than a few minutes. Why is that? All of us are alive because we breathe. Not just humans, plants and other animals also breathe. But how do we breathe? Just as food follows a specific pathway in the digestive system, our body also has a specific system for breathing and respiration. This system is called respiratory system. The respiratory system consists of various parts as shown in Fig. 9.8. In this system, the exchange of gases follows a specific pathway. The pathway through which the air is inhaled and exhaled involves various parts of the respiratory system assisting in the process of breathing and respiration. Therespiratory system begins witha pair of nasal openings called nostrils through which we inhale and exhale air (Fig. 9.8). The inhaled air passes into a pair of small passages called the nasal passages. Have you noticed tiny hair inside your nostrils? These hair, along with mucus, help trap Left lung A dust and dirt from the air we breathe in. , [ah This is why we should breathe through the F nose and not through the mouth. From the _ Rib cage nasal passages, the air reaches our lungs Diaphragm through the windpipe. The windpipe forms two branches, which enter the two lungs. In the lungs, these branches further divide into smaller and finer branches that end in small balloon-like sacs called alveoli (Fig. 9.8). Our lungs are protected by the rib cage. E < < & wn o wn 17) ) 1 ) + a ") = a Fig. 9.8: Human respiratory system SCIENCE AND SOCIETY While a lot of the dust is filtered out from the inhaled air, often small infectious particles can get through the lungs. For example, during the COVID-19 pandemic, the SARS-CoV-2 virus affected the respiratory system, leading to breathing difficulties and often causing serious lung problems. Chapter 9.indd 129 4/3/2025 4:55:14 PM Let us understand the mechanism of breathing by making a simple model. [activity 9.2: Let us make a model of >, ~ Take a wide transparent plastic bottle with a lid. Remove its bottom. Make a hole in the lid of the bottle. Take a Y-shaped hollow tube, as shown in Fig. 9.9. Fix two deflated balloons to the forked end of the tube. Secure them with rubber bands to make them airtight. Insert the straight end of the tube | tightly through the lid from the @halation (b) Exhalation open base of the bottle and seal Fig. 9.9: Model to show the lid with clay to make it airtight. | echanisms of breathing To the open base of the bottle,