the change of colour in test tube A? In Grade 6, we learned that iodine gives a blue-black colour when it reacts with starch. In test tube A, the appearance of the blue-black colour indicates the presence of starch. In test tube B, which contains chewed boiled rice, if there is no change in colour, it indicates that the starch is no longer present; if there is only a slight change in colour, it indicates that starch is present only in very small amount. It has been broken down into simple sugars by the action of saliva. If the colour still appears in test tube B, what changes would you make in the activity to explore it further? Would the colour change if chewing time is increased? Try to find out by repeating the activity. Now, we know that saliva secretion in the mouth helps break down starch into sugars. This process of breaking complex food components into simpler forms in the body is called digestion. Food is partially digested in the mouth. Let us learn how this partially digested food gets further digested through the alimentary canal. Food pipe (Oesophagus): A passage from the mouth to the stomach Site of contraction When you chew your food, your saliva not only helps in digesting mN the starch but also moistens Site of relaxation NS Stomach Stomach it, making it soft and easy to swallow. Your tongue helps in Fig. 9.2: Movement of food in the food pipe mixing chewed food with saliva and pushing this softened food into a long, flexible tube called the food pipe or oesophagus (Fig. 9.2). But how does the food move down? The walls of the food pipe gently contract and relax in a wave-like motion to push the food down into the stomach. This movement takes place throughout the alimentary canal and pushes the food forward. Stomach In the stomach, the walls contract and relax to churn the food. The churned food is then mixed with a secretion from the inner lining of the stomach. The secretion from stomach contains digestive juice, acid, and mucus. a ea, S rR C) ao] S LU) C) 15) < o UW n a] -] = o o td s = ~~ 2 he =] U a Chapter 9.indd 124 4/3/2025 4:55:09 PM The digestive juice of the stomach breaks Dicestive iui : . . . igestive juice, down proteins present in the food into simpler acid and mucus components. The acid not only helps break down proteins but also kills many harmful bacteria. The mucus protects the stomach lining from the acid, preventing damage. In the stomach, the food is partially digested : ey. . Stomach wall and transformed into a semi-liquid mass, preparing it for the next stage of digestion. Fig. 9.3: Stomach Life Processes in Animals FASCINATING FACTS How did scientists learn about digestion in the human body? The discovery of how the stomach works happened by chance. In 1822, a man named Alexis St.