percentage of oxygen and carbon This exchange of gases dioxide in inhaled and exhaled air ensures that each segment of our body gets oxygen to produce energy and remove waste products. In simple words, breathing brings in oxygen and removes carbon dioxide, while respiration uses oxygen to break down food and release energy. This energy helps us walk, run, play, and even think! Breathing is a physical process, while respiration is a chemical process that occurs inside the body. Both the processes are essential for our survival! iF 4/3/2025 4:55:16 PM Our body has a unique system for the transport of nutrients, oxygen, and other substances. This system is called the circulatory system. It includes the heart, blood, and blood vessels. The heart pumps blood through blood vessels, ensuring the transport of nutrients, oxygen, and other substances to all parts of the body, while waste products are carried away. SCIENCE AND SOCIETY Smoking is extremely harmful to health. It damages the lungs and increases the risk of serious diseases, including lung cancer and other respiratory illnesses. It leads to persistent coughing and frequent infections. In addition to harming the smoker, smoking releases toxic chemicals into the air, putting others at risk. When non-smokers inhale this polluted air, they experience passive smoking, which can be especially dangerous for children, pregnant women, and the elderly. Due to these risks, avoiding smoking helps protect both = personal health and the well-being of those around us. E < & wn o wn 17) ) 1 ) t= a ") = a 9.2.2 Do other animals breathe the same way as humans do? You have learnt that different animals live in different habitats. You may have observed birds flying and fish swimming. How do they breathe? Animals, such as birds, elephants, lions, cows, goats, lizards, and snakes, breathe through their lungs. Although all these animals have lungs, the structure of their lungs are quite different. Most aquatic animals like fish, have specialised structures known as gills (Fig. 9.14). These are richly supplied with blood vessels. The exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between the blood and the gases dissolved in water takes place across the gills. Amphibians, like frogs, live both on land and in water. They use different body parts for breathing at various stages of their life. For example, tadpoles breathe through gills, while adult frogs use lungs for breathing on land and skin for gas exchange when they stay in water. This adaptation helps them survive both in water and on land, showing how animals have adapted over time to different environments. Earthworms use their moist skin for the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide. SS), oe c 4 PS ny; Fig. 9.14: Breathing body parts ina fish Chapter 9.indd 133 4/3/2025 4:55:17 PM Thus, different animals have different breathing mechanisms to suit their unique habitats. Apart from the digestive system, the respiratory system, and the circulatory system, there are other systems which work in coordination with each other in the body