but also kills many harmful bacteria. The mucus protects the stomach lining from the acid, preventing damage. In the stomach, the food is partially digested : ey. . Stomach wall and transformed into a semi-liquid mass, preparing it for the next stage of digestion. Fig. 9.3: Stomach Life Processes in Animals FASCINATING FACTS How did scientists learn about digestion in the human body? The discovery of how the stomach works happened by chance. In 1822, a man named Alexis St. Martin was accidentally shot in the stomach. He was treated by a doctor, William Beaumont. However, his wound never fully healed, leaving a small permanent hole. This opening allowed Dr. Beaumont to observe digestion in the stomach as it happened. He conducted experiments on how different foods were broken down and studied how emotions affect digestion. Alexis St. Martin s shotgun wound Small Intestine After its journey through the stomach, the partially digested food moves into the small intestine. Look at Fig. 9.4. Itis a sketch of a stretched-out alimentary canal. Guess how long it is. You will be surprised Stomach that although it is called small intestine, it is almost 6 metres long almost twice the height of your bem al Beas classroom! You will be surprised to know that the small intestine is the longest part of the alimentary canal. _ Small Thesmallintestinereceivesdigestivesecretions Mtestine from three sources the inner lining of the small intestine itself, and two more structures associated with the alimentary canal the liver and the pancreas (Fig. 9.4). The liver secretes bile, which is mildly basic in nature. Recall the neutralisation Large reaction in chapter Exploring Substances: Acidic, intestine Basic, and Neutral . Bile neutralises acids present in the food moving down from the stomach and Anus breaks down fats into tiny droplets, making its digestion easier. Fig. 9.4: Alimentary canal if it is stretched out Food pipe (Oesophagus) Chapter 9.indd 125 4/3/2025 4:55:10 PM The pancreas secretes pancreatic juice, which is also basic in nature and helps neutralise acids present in the food. Additionally, pancreatic juice also breaks down carbohydrates, proteins, and fats. The digestive juice secreted by the wall of the small intestine further breaks down fats, proteins, and partially digested carbohydrates into simpler forms. The digested nutrients pass on from the small intestine into the blood present in blood vessels found in the walls of the small intestine. This process is called absorption of nutrients. How are these nutrients absorbed from the small intestine? The inner lining of the small intestine is thin and has thousands of finger-like projections (Fig. 9.5) that increase the surface area for efficient nutrient absorption. These finger-like projections allow the digested nutrients to pass into the blood, which carries them to different parts of the body. These nutrients provide energy, support growth and repair, and help the body function properly. Fig. 9.5: Inner lining of the small intestine SCIENCE AND SOCIETY Celiac disease is a condition in which the body reacts to gluten, a protein found in