their products such as irrigation pumps, fertilisers, insecticides, pesticides, plastic and PVC pipes, machines and tools, etc. to the farmers. Thus, development and competitiveness of Reprint 2025-26 manufacturing industry has not only assisted agriculturists in increasing their production but also made the production processes very efficient. In the present day world of globalisation, our industry needs to be more efficient and competitive. Self-sufficiency alone is not enough. Our manufactured goods must be at par in quality with those in the international market. Only then, will we be able to compete in the international market. Classification of Industries List the various manufactured products you use in your daily life such as transistors, electric bulbs, vegetable oil, cement, glassware, petrol, matches, scooters, automobiles, medicines and so on. If we classify the various industries based on a particular criterion then we would be able to understand their manufacturing better. Industries may be classified as follows: On the basis of source of raw materials used: Agro based: cotton, woollen, jute, silk textile, rubber and sugar, tea, coffee, edible oil. Mineral based: iron and steel, cement, aluminium, machine tools, petrochemicals. According to their main role: Basic or key industries are those which supply their products as raw materials to manufacture other goods e.g. iron and steel and copper smelting, aluminum smelting. Consumer industries that produce goods for direct use by consumers sugar, toothpaste, paper, sewing machines, fans etc. On the basis of capital investment: A small scale industry is defined with reference to the maximum investment allowed on the assets of a unit. This limit has changed over a period of time. At present the maximum investment allowed is rupees one crore. On the basis of ownership: Public sector, owned and operated by government agencies BHEL, SAIL etc. Private sector industries owned and operated by individuals or a group of individuals -TISCO, Bajaj Auto Ltd., Dabur Industries. Joint sector industries which are jointly run by the state and individuals or a group of individuals. Oil India Ltd. (OIL) is jointly owned by public and private sector. * Cooperative sector industries are owned and operated by the producers or suppliers of raw materials, workers or both. They pool in the resources and share the profits or losses proportionately. Such examples are the sugar industry in Maharashtra, the coir industry in Kerala. Based on the bulk and weight of raw material and finished goods: Heavy industries such as iron and steel e Light industries that use light raw materials and produce light goods such as electrical goods industries. Activity Classify the following into two groups on the basis of bulk and weight of raw material and finished goods. (i) Oil (ii) Knitting needles (vi) Sewing Machines (vii) Shipbuilding (viii) Electric Bulbs (ix) Paint brushes (iii) Brassware (iv) Fuse wires (v) Watches (x) Automobiles Agro-based Industries Cotton, jute, silk, woollen textiles, sugar and edible oil, etc. industries are based on yy agricultural raw materials. MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES Reprint 2025-26 Fibre Production a i Weaving Knitting Dyeing and > Garment