so? In recent years, there is a tendency for the mills to shift and concentrate in the southern and western states, especially in Maharashtra, This is because the cane produced here has a higher sucrose content. The cooler climate also ensures a longer crushing season. Moreover, the cooperatives are more successful in these states. Mineral-based Industries Industries that use minerals and metals as raw materials are called mineral-based industries. Can you name some industries that would fall in this category? Iron and Steel Industry The iron and steel industry is the basic industry since all the other industries heavy, medium and light, depend on it for their machinery. Steel is needed to manufacture a variety of engineering goods, construction material, defence, medical, telephonic, scientific equipment and a variety of consumer goods. Activity Make a list of all such goods made of steel that you can think of. Production and consumption of steel is often regarded as the index of a country s development. Iron and steel is a heavy industry because all the raw materials as well as finished goods are heavy and bulky entailing heavy transportation costs. Iron ore, coking coal and lime stone are required in the ratio of approximately 4 : 2: 1. Some quantities of manganese, are also required to harden the steel. Where should the steel plants be ideally located? Remember that the finished products also need an efficient transport network for their distribution to the markets and consumers. Processes of Manufacture of Steel Blast Furnace Transport of raw material to plant Iron ore is melted. Lime stone is fluxing material which is Pig Iron Molten materials poured into moulds called pigs added, Slag is removed. Coke is burnt to heat the ore. Shaping Metal and forging Rolling, pressing, casting Steel Making Pig iron is further purified by melting and oxidising the impurities. Manganese, nickel, chromium are added Fig. 6.2 Reprint 2025-26 68 E Pies AFGHANISTAN 36 N JS ly Rin etd nN PAKISTAN 20 ARABIAN SEA e <"e ? bed LAKSHADWEEP (INDIA) INDIAN 72 E 76 43 Jamshedpuras. INDIA IRON AND STEEL PLANTS A" Burmpu Senne... BOKAarO 8. ny fs =. ap | =f Rourkela BAY OF BENGAL ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS (INDIA) 600 km 2 Cy oe India: Iron and Steel Plants MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES Reprint 2025-26 ol Chhotanagpur plateau region has the maximum concentration of iron and steel industries. It is largely, because of the relative advantages this region has for the development of this industry. These include, low cost of iron ore, high grade raw materials in proximity, cheap labour and vast growth potential in the home market. Aluminium Smelting Aluminium smelting is the second most important metallurgical industry in India. Itis light, resistant to corrosion, a good conductor of heat, malleable and becomes strong when it is mixed with other metals. It is used to manufacture aircraft, utensils and wires. It has gained popularity as a substitute of steel, copper, zinc and lead in a number of industries. Fig. 6.3: Strip