lay emphasis on spinning yarn and weaving khadi? Why is it important for our country to keep the mill sector loomage lower than power loom and handloom? Jute Textiles India is the largest producer of raw jute and jute goods and stands at second place as an exporter after Bangladesh. Most of the mills are located in West Bengal, mainly along the banks of the Hugli river, in a narrow belt. The first jute mill was set up near Kolkata in 1855 at Rishra. After Partition in 1947, the jute mills remained in India but three-fourth of the jute producing area went to Bangladesh (erstwhile East Pakistan). Reprint 2025-26 68 E Pies AFGHANISTAN 36 N ae INDIA i o on = TEXTILE INDUSTRIES PAKISTAN a & Anantnag , a ees 32 oo (% Ainritsar j > Cui Pe CHINA < Panipat @ Moradabg . fe ascent ProeF rs Gurugram @, e fee Ve, Md. Bikaner Agra age 5 ba at ee tos | ra Pe >~ Jaipur 29% anjananpur aa Le BHUTAN r.. Pre w, . re ~ i, Guatir ; @@ Kanpur ind San S Varanasi + < Py Mirza or : fins jo gee! re, BANGLADESH Murshidabad ~* Haora teal tags | eiaige aon oes g Wardha @ Aurangabad _ : ARABIAN @ Pune SEA F onelt ar i @ COTTON TEXTILE oe @ WOOLLEN TEXTILE Bengali sai c @ SILK TEXTILE eo . e Coimbatore bd LAKSHADWEEP (INDIA) INDIAN F India: Distribution of cotton, woollen and silk industries MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES Reprint 2025-26 Factors responsible for their location in the Hugli basin are: proximity of the jute producing areas, inexpensive water transport, supported by a good network of railways, roadways and waterways to facilitate movement of raw material to the mills, abundant water for processing raw jute, cheap labour from West Bengal and adjoining states of Bihar, Odisha and Uttar Pradesh. Kolkata as a large urban centre provides banking, insurance and port facilities for export of jute goods. Sugar Industry India stands second as a world producer of sugar but occupies the first place in the production of gur and khandsari. The raw material used in this industry is bulky, and in haulage its sucrose content reduces. The mills are located in Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Maharashtra, Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Punjab, Haryana and Madhya Pradesh. Sixty per cent mills are in Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. This industry is seasonal in nature so, it is ideally suited to the cooperative sector. Can you explain why this is so? In recent years, there is a tendency for the mills to shift and concentrate in the southern and western states, especially in Maharashtra, This is because the cane produced here has a higher sucrose content. The cooler climate also ensures a longer crushing season. Moreover, the cooperatives are more successful in these states. Mineral-based Industries Industries that use minerals and metals as raw materials are called mineral-based industries. Can you name some industries that would fall in this category?