high grade raw materials in proximity, cheap labour and vast growth potential in the home market. Aluminium Smelting Aluminium smelting is the second most important metallurgical industry in India. Itis light, resistant to corrosion, a good conductor of heat, malleable and becomes strong when it is mixed with other metals. It is used to manufacture aircraft, utensils and wires. It has gained popularity as a substitute of steel, copper, zinc and lead in a number of industries. Fig. 6.3: Strip coasting mill at smelter of NALCO Aluminium smelting plants in the country are located in Odisha, West Bengal, Kerala, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra and Tamil Nadu. Bauxite, the raw material used in the smelters is a very bulky, dark reddish coloured rock. The flow chart given below shows the process of manufacturing aluminium. Regular supply of electricity and an assured source of raw material at minimum cost are the two prime factors for location of the industry. Chemical Industries The Chemical industry in India is fast growing and diversifying. It comprises both large and small scale manufacturing units. Rapid growth has been recorded in both inorganic and organic sectors. Inorganic chemicals include sulphuric acid (used to manufacture fertilizers, synthetic fibres, plastics, adhesives, paints, dyes stuffs), nitric acid, alkalies, soda ash (used to make glass, soaps and detergents, paper) and caustic soda. These industries are widely spread over the country. Why do you think it is so? Organic chemicals include petrochemicals, which are used for manufacturing of synthetic fibers, synthetic rubber, plastics, dye-stuffs, drugs and pharmaceuticals. Organic chemical | 4 to 6 tonnes of bauxite * 2 tonnes of alumina 1 tonne of aluminium | Fig. 6.4 Process of Manufacturing in Aluminium Industry Bauxite Alumina The raw material and alumina dissolved out. TRANSPORT Rail or Ship Bauxite Quarry Aluminium Refinery gq 64 ConTeMPORARY INDIA II Bauxite crushed _y 1, > 2. 3. Cryolite A molten metal acts as an electrolyte v Bulk ore shipped Aluminium Smelter to site of smelter Calcinated petroleum coke from a refinery Aluminium Pitch from a colliery Smelter Electricity t (18,600 Kwh per tonne of ore) Fig. 6.5 Reprint 2025-26 plants are located near oil refineries or petrochemical plants. The chemical industry is its own largest consumer. Basic chemicals undergo processing to further produce other chemicals that are used for industrial application, agriculture or directly for consumer markets. Make a list of the products you are aware of. Fertilizer Industry The fertilizer industry is centred around the production of nitrogenous fertilizers (mainly urea), phosphatic fertilizers and ammonium phosphate (DAP) and complex fertilizers which have a combination of nitrogen (N), phosphate (P), and potash (K). The third, i.e. potash is entirely imported as the country does not have any reserves of commercially usable potash or potassium compounds in any form. After the Green Revolution the industry expanded to several other parts of the country. Gujarat, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, Punjab and Kerala contribute towards half of the fertilizer production. Other significant producers are Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, Rajasthan, Bihar,