hot water and effluents before releasing them in rivers and ponds. Treatment of industrial effluents can be done in three phases (a) Primary treatment by mechanical means. This involves screening, grinding, flocculation and sedimentation. (b) Secondary treatment by biological process (c) Tertiary treatment by biological, chemical and physical processes. This involves recycling of wastewater. Overdrawing of ground water reserves by industry where there is a threat to ground water resources also needs to be regulated legally. Particulate matter in the air can be reduced by fitting smoke stacks to factories with electrostatic precipitators, fabric filters, scrubbers and inertial separators. Smoke can be reduced by using oil or gas instead Reprint 2025-26 68 E 12? AFGHANISTAN e 36 N Y ea PAKISTAN ih A 2" " a ARABIAN SEA INDIAN 72 E ia Mona 36 N INDIA SOME SOFTWARE TECHNOLOGY PARKS CHINA (TIBET } Vo 2 _ BHUTAN an _ rd ] a! pe . apa 3 < = tae | CBanatapesyl 2 a eee, y Vishakhapatnam ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS (INDIA) 600 km =a a 9 8N 92 F India: Some Software Technology Parks MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES Reprint 2025-26 of coal in factories. Machinery and (a) Optimum utilisation of equipment equipment can be used and generators adopting latest techniques and should be fitted with silencers. Almost all machinery can be redesigned to increase (b) energy efficiency and reduce noise. Noise absorbing material may be used apart from personal use of earplugs and earphones. The challenge of sustainable development requires integration of economic development with environmental concerns. upgrading existing equipment. Minimising waste generation by maximising ash utilisation. (c) Providing green belts for nurturing ecological balance and addressing the question of special purpose vehicles for afforestation. (d Reducing environmental pollution through ash pond management, ash water recycling system and liquid waste management. Ecological monitoring, reviews and on-line database management for all its power stations. ~ (e Fig. 6.7: Sewage Treatment plant under Yamuna action plan at Faridabad NTPC shows the way NTPC is a major power providing corporation in India. It has ISO certification for EMS (Environment Management System) 14001. The corporation has a proactive approach for preserving the natural environment and resources like water, oil and gas and fuels in places where it is setting up power plants. . : . Fig. 6.8: Ramagundam plant This has been possible through- 6 eu P ccreises EXERCISES EXERCISES Exercises 1. Multiple choice questions. (i) Which one of the following industries uses bauxite as a raw material? (a) Aluminium Smelting (b) Cement (c) Paper (d) Steel (ii) Which one of the following industries manufactures telephones, computer, etc. (a) Steel (c) Aluminium Smelting (b) Electronic (d) Information Technology 2. Answer the following briefly in not more than 30 words. (i) What is manufacturing? a Reprint 2025-26 (ii) What are basic industries? Give an example. CONTEMPORARY INDIA II 3. Write the answers of the following questions in 120 words. (i) How do industries pollute the environment? (ii) Discuss the steps to be taken to minimise environmental degradation