industries. Activity Classify the following into two groups on the basis of bulk and weight of raw material and finished goods. (i) Oil (ii) Knitting needles (vi) Sewing Machines (vii) Shipbuilding (viii) Electric Bulbs (ix) Paint brushes (iii) Brassware (iv) Fuse wires (v) Watches (x) Automobiles Agro-based Industries Cotton, jute, silk, woollen textiles, sugar and edible oil, etc. industries are based on yy agricultural raw materials. MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES Reprint 2025-26 Fibre Production a i Weaving Knitting Dyeing and > Garment Finishing < manufacture Raw fibre i Yarn - Fabric ; Garments i Fig. 6.1: Textile Industry: The textile industry occupies unique position in the Indian economy, because it contributes significantly to industrial production, employment generation and foreign exchange earnings. It is the only industry in the country, which is self-reliant and complete in the value chain i.e., from raw material to the highest value added products. Cotton Textiles: In ancient India, cotton textiles were produced with hand spinning and handloom weaving techniques. After the 18" century, power-looms came into use. Our traditional industries suffered a setback during the colonial period because they could not compete with the mill-made cloth from England. The first successful textile mill was ( established in Mumbai in 1854. The two world wars were fought in Europe, India was a British colony. There was a e demand for cloth in U.K. hence, they gave a boost to the development of the cotton textile industry. In the early years, the cotton textile industry was concentrated in the cotton growing belt of Maharashtra and Gujarat. Availability of raw cotton, market, transport including accessible port facilities, labour, moist climate, etc. contributed towards its localisation. This industry has close links with agriculture and provides a living to farmers, cotton boll pluckers and workers engaged in ginning, spinning, weaving, / Value addition in the textile industry dyeing, designing, packaging, tailoring and sewing. The industry by creating demands supports many other industries, such as, chemicals and dyes, packaging materials and engineering works. While spinning continues to be centralised in Maharashtra, Gujarat and Tamil Nadu, weaving is highly decentralised to provide scope for incorporating traditional skills and designs of weaving in cotton, silk, zari, embroidery, etc. India has world class production in spinning, but weaving supplies low quality of fabric as it cannot use much of the high quality yarn produced in the country. Weaving is done by handloom, powerloom and in mills. The handspun khadi provides large scale employment to weavers in their homes as a cottage industry. Why did Mahatma Gandhi lay emphasis on spinning yarn and weaving khadi? Why is it important for our country to keep the mill sector loomage lower than power loom and handloom? Jute Textiles India is the largest producer of raw jute and jute goods and stands at second place as an exporter after Bangladesh. Most of the mills are located in West Bengal, mainly along the banks of the Hugli river, in a narrow belt. The first jute mill was set up near Kolkata