Steel (ii) Which one of the following industries manufactures telephones, computer, etc. (a) Steel (c) Aluminium Smelting (b) Electronic (d) Information Technology 2. Answer the following briefly in not more than 30 words. (i) What is manufacturing? a Reprint 2025-26 (ii) What are basic industries? Give an example. CONTEMPORARY INDIA II 3. Write the answers of the following questions in 120 words. (i) How do industries pollute the environment? (ii) Discuss the steps to be taken to minimise environmental degradation by industry? Activity Give one word for each of the following with regard to industry. The number of letters in each word are hinted in brackets. (i) Used to drive machinery (5) Pricceeececeseeeeeeeeeeee (ii) People who work in a factory (6) Wau... eee ce ccecececeeee ences (iii) Where the product is sold (C) ne \Y) (iv) A person who sells goods [(S) ee 9 Ce rree (v) Thing produced (7) Prreeeccecececeseeeeeeeenees (vi) To make or produce (11) Miu... cece eee (vii) Land, Water and Air degraded ((C) Re oe rren Prosect Work Select one agro-based and one mineral-based industry in your area. (i) What are the raw materials they use? (ii) What are the other inputs in the process of manufacturing that involve transportation cost? (iii) Are these factories following environmental norms? Activity Solve the puzzle by following your search horizontally and vertically to find the hidden answers. 1. Textiles, sugar, vegetable oil and plantation industries deriving raw materials from agriculture are called... The basic raw material for sugar industry. This fibre is also known as the Golden Fibre . Iron-ore, coking coal, and limestone are the chief raw materials of this industry. A public sector steel plant located in Chhattisgarh. ak ON MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES Reprint 2025-26 Activity Solve the puzzle by following your search horizontally and vertically to find the hidden answers. _ Textiles, sugar, vegetable oil and plantation industries deriving raw materials from agriculture are called... The basic raw material for sugar industry. This fibre is also known as the Golden Fibre . Iron-ore, coking coal, and limestone are the chief raw materials of this industry. A public sector steel plant located in Chhattisgarh. Railway diesel engines are manufactured in Uttar Pradesh at this place. Sak Ob Reprint 2025-26