why do we need to work on a definition? The other day you quoted Abraham Lincoln to us: Democracy is government of the people, by the people and for the people . We in Meghalaya always ruled ourselves. That is accepted by everyone. Why do we need to change that? Lyngdoh Madam: | am not saying we need to change it. | too find this definition very beautiful. But we don t know if this is the best way of defining unless we think about it ourselves. We must not accept something just because it is famous, just because everyone accepts it. Yolanda: Ma am, can! suggest something? We don t need to look for any definition. | read somewhere that the word democracy comes from a Greek word Demokratia . In Greek demos means people and kratia means rule. So democracy is rule by the people. This is the correct meaning. Where is the need to debate? Lyngdoh Madam: Thatis also a very helpful way of thinking about this matter. | would just say that this does not always work. A word does not remain tied to its origin. Just think of computers. Originally they were used for computing, that is to say calculating, very difficult mathematical sums. These were very powerful calculators. But nowadays very few people use computers for computing sums. They use it for writing, for designing, for listening to music and for watching films. Words remain the same but their meaning can change with time. In that case it is not very useful to look at the origins of a word. Merry: Ma am, so basically what you are saying is that there is no shortcut to our thinking about the matter ourselves. We have to think about its meaning and evolve a definition. Lyngdoh Madam: You got me right. Let us get on with it now. ACTIVITY Let us take Lyngdoh Madam seriously and try to write down the exact definition of some of the simple words that we use all the time: pen, rain A simple definition Let us get back to our discussion on similarities and differences among governments that are called DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 | have heard a different version. Democracy is off the people, far (from) the people and (where they) buy the people. Why don t we accept that? CHECK YOUR PROGRESS democracies. One simple factor common to all democracies is: the government is chosen by the people. We could thus start with a simple definition: democracy is a form of government in which the rulers are elected by the people. This is a useful starting point. This definition allows us to separate democracy from forms of government that are clearly not democratic. The army rulers of Myanmar were not elected by the people. Those who happened to be in control of the army became the rulers of the country. People had no say in this decision. Dictators like Pinochet (Chile) are not elected by the people. This