their decisions, or the rulers can be changed. This cannot happen in a non-democratic government. Let us sum it up. Democracy cannot get us everything and is not the solution to all problems. But it is clearly better than any other alternative that we know. It offers better chances of a good decision, it is likely to respect people s own wishes and allows different kinds o people to live together. Even when it fails to do some of these things, it allows a way of correcting its mistakes and offers more dignity to all citizens. That is why democracy is considered the best form o government. THEY VE BROKEN OUR TRUST IN GOVERNMENT... Cam Cardow, The Ottawa Citizen, Canada, Cagle Cartoons Inc. 30 May 2004. ~ WE'RE GOING To TO DO WHAT CANADIANS DO BEST.. = VOTE THEM BACK IN. Rajesh and Muzaffar read an article. It showed that no democracy has ever gone to war with another democracy. Wars take place only when one of the two governments is non-democratic. The article said that this was a great merit of democracy. After reading the essay, Rajesh and Muzaffar had different reactions. Rajesh said that this was not a good argument for democracy. It was just a matter of chance. Itis possible that in future democracies may have wars. Muzaffar said that it could not be a matter of chance. Democracies take decisions in such a way that it reduces the chances of war. Which of the two positions do you agree with and why? This cartoon was published in Canada just before its parliamentary elections of 2004. Everyone, including the cartoonist, expected the Liberal party to win once again. When the results came, the Liberal Party lost the elections. Is this cartoon an argument against democracy or for democracy? read the cartoon CHECK YOUR PROGRESS DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 This famous cartoon by R K Laxman comments on the celebrations of the fifty years of independence. How many images on the wall do you recognize? Do many common people feel the way the common man in this cartoon does? read the cartoon 1.4 BROADER MEANINGS OF DEMOCRACY In this chapter we have considered the meaning of democracy in a limited and descriptive sense. We have understood democracy as a form of government. This way of defining democracy helps us to identify a clear set of minimal features that a democracy must have. The most common form that democracy takes in our times is that of a representative democracy. You have already read about this in the previous classes. In the countries we call democracy, all the people do not rule. A majority is allowed to take decisions on behalf of all the people. Even the majority does not rule directly. The majority of people rule Cy N 2p..~/GN COLLABORATION SEN Gop CARs, coMPvTER> "oO What 1s Democracy? WuHy DEMOCRACY? Reprint 2025-26 : ~ e _ My ro NOMIC PROGRESS oT %. iim GROWTH, ECO > ff N EXPORT