government owns the radio and television in the country. All the newspapers have to get permission from the government to publish any news about government s policies and protests. In 2004 a report published in USA pointed to the increasing inequalities in that country. Inequalities in income reflected in the participation of people in democracy. It also shaped their abilities to influence the decisions taken by the government. The report highlighted that: If an average Black family earns $ 100 then the income of average White family is $ 162. A White family has twelve times more wealth than the average Black family. In a President s election nearly 9 out of 10 individuals in families with income over $ 75,000 have voted. These people are the top 20% of the population in terms of their income. On the other hand only 5 people out of 10 from families with income less than $ 15,000 have voted. They are the bottom 20% of the population in terms of their income. About 95% contribution to the political parties comes from the rich. This gives them opportunity to express their opinions and concerns, which is not available to most citizens. As poor sections participate less in politics, the government does not listen to their concerns - coming out of poverty, getting job, education, health care and housing for them. Politicians hear most regularly about the concerns of business persons and the rich. Write an essay on Democracy and Poverty using the information given in this report but using examples from India. Most newspapers have an editorial page. On that page the newspaper publishes its own opinions about current affairs. The paper also publishes the views of other writers and intellectuals and letters written by the readers. Follow any one newspaper for one month and collect editorials, articles and letters on that page that have anything to do with democracy. Classify these into the following categories: Constitutional and legal aspects of democracy = Citizens rights = Electoral and party politics = Criticism of democracy Wuat Is Democracy? WuHy Democracy? a7 Reprint 2025-26