government is run after the elections. A democratic government cannot do whatever it likes, simply because it has won an election. It has to respect some basic rules. In particular it has to respect some guarantees to the minorities. Every major decision has to go through a _ series of consultations. Every office bearer has certain rights and responsibilities assigned by the constitution and the law. Each of these is accountable not only to the people but also to other independent officials. We shall read more about this in Chapter 4. Both these aspects give us the fourth and final feature of democracy: a democratic government rules within limits set by constitutional law and citizens rights. Summary. definition Let us sum up the discussion so far. We started with a simple definition that democracy is a form of government in which the rulers are elected by the people. We found that this definition was not adequate unless we explained some of the key words used in it. Through a series of examples we worked out four features of democracy as a form of government. Accordingly, democracy is a form of government in which: = Rulers elected by the people take all the major decisions; = Elections offer a choice and fair opportunity to the people to change the current rulers; a This choice and opportunity is available to all the people on an equal basis; and = The exercise of this choice leads to a government limited by basic rules of the constitution and citizens rights. DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 the cartoon Chinese government blocked free flow of information on the internet by placing restrictions on popular websites like Google and Yahoo . The image of tanks and an unarmed student reminds the reader of another major event in recent Chinese history. Find out about that event. CHECK YOUR PROGRESS Read these five examples of working or denial of democracy. Match each of these with the relevant feature of democracy discussed above. Example Feature King of Bhutan has declared that in future he will be Rule of law guided by the advice given to him by elected representatives. Many Tamil workers who migrated from India were not given a right to vote in Sri Lanka. Respect for Rights SS The king imposed a ban on political gatherings, demonstrations and rallies. One person one vote one value _errrerrw The Indian Supreme Court held that the dissolution of Bihar assembly was unconstitutional. Free and fair el iti ectoral Competition Political parties in Bangladesh have agreed that a neutral Major decisions by elected leaders government should rule the country at the time of elections. | want to besin Lyngdoh Madam s class! That sounds like a democratic classroom. Doesn't it? 1.3 WHY DEMOCRACY? An argument broke out in Madam Lyngdoh s class. She had finished teaching the previous section on what is democracy and asked the students if they thought democracy was the best form of government. Everyone had something to say. Debating