are most corrupt, selfish and brutal. It is just that we don t get to know about this. And what is worse, you can t even get rid of them. Madam Lyngdoh was listening to this discussion with interest. Now she stepped in: I was delighted to see you all arguing so passionately. I don t know who is right and who is wrong. That is for you to settle. But I did feel that you all wanted to speak your mind. You may have felt very bad if someone tried to stop you or if someone punished you for saying what you felt. Would you be able to do that in a country that is not democratic? Is that a good argument for democracy? Arguments against democracy This conversation has most of the arguments that we routinely hear against democracy. Let us go over some of these arguments: aLeaders keep changing in a democracy. This leads to instability. = Democracy is all about political competition and power play. There is no scope for morality. = So many people have to be consulted in a democracy that it leads to delays. = Elected leaders do not know the best interest of the people. It leads to bad decisions. = Democracy leads to corruption for it is based on electoral competition. = Ordinary people don t know what is good for them; they should not decide anything. Are there some other arguments against democracy that you can think of? Which of these arguments applies mainly to democracy? Which of these can apply to misuse of any form of government? Which of these do you agree with? Clearly, democracy is not a magical solution for all the problems. It has not ended poverty in our country and in other parts of the world. Democracy as a form of government only ensures that people take their own decisions. This does not guarantee that their decisions will be good. People can make mistakes. Involving the people in these decisions does lead to delays in decision making. It is also true that democracy leads to frequent changes in leadership. Sometimes this can set back big decisions and affect the government s efficiency. These arguments show that democracy of the kind we see may not be the ideal form of government. But that is not a question we face in real life. The real question we face is different: is democracy better than other forms of government that are there for us to choose from? Arguments for democracy China s famine of 1958-1961 was the worst recorded famine in world history. Nearly three crore people died in this famine. During those days, India s economic condition was not much better than China. Yet India did not have a famine of the kind China had. Economists think DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 www.caglecartoons.com/espanol This cartoon is from Brazil, a country that has long experience of dictatorship. It is entitled The Hidden Side of Dictatorship . Which hidden sides