a form of government in which the rulers are elected by the people. This is a useful starting point. This definition allows us to separate democracy from forms of government that are clearly not democratic. The army rulers of Myanmar were not elected by the people. Those who happened to be in control of the army became the rulers of the country. People had no say in this decision. Dictators like Pinochet (Chile) are not elected by the people. This also applies to monarchies. The kings of Saudi Arabia rule not because the people have chosen them to do so but because they happen to be born into the royal family. This simple definition is not adequate. It reminds us that democracy is people s rule. But if we use this definition in an unthinking manner, we would end up calling almost every government that holds an election a democracy. That would be very misleading. As we shall find out in Chapter 3, every government in contemporary world wants to be called a democracy, even if it is not so. That is why we need to carefully distinguish between a government that is a democracy and one that pretends to be one. We can do so by understanding each word in this definition carefully and spelling out the features of a democratic government. Ribiang went back home and collected some more famous quotations on democracy. This time she did not mention the names of the people who said or wrote these. She wants you to read these and comment on how good or useful these thoughts are: = Democracy gives every man the right to be his own oppressor. = Democracy consists of choosing your dictators after they ve told you what you think it is you want to hear. = Man s capacity for justice makes democracy possible, but man s inclination to injustice makes democracy necessary = Democracy is a device that insures we shall be governed no better than we deserve. = Allthe ills of democracy can be cured by more democracy. read the cartoon This cartoon was drawn when elections were held in Iraq with the presence of US and other foreign powers. What do you think this cartoon is saying? Why is democracy written the way it is? Stephane Peray, Thailand, Cagle Cartoons Inc. What 1s Democracy? Wuy DEMOCRACY? Reprint 2025-26 1.2 FEATURES OF DEMOCRACY We have started with a simple definition that democracy is a form of government in which the rulers are elected by the people. This raises many questions: Who are the rulers in this definition? Which officials must be elected for any government to be called a democracy? Which decisions may be taken by nonelected officials in a democracy? = What kind of election constitutes a democratic election? What conditions must be fulfilled for an election to be considered democratic? = Who are the people who can elect the rulers or get elected as rulers? Should this include every citizen on