Sometimes the polling booths were shifted from one place to another in the last minute, which made it read the 17 May 2005 cartoon This cartoon was titled Building Democracy and was first published in a Latin American publication. What do moneybags signify here? Could this cartoon be applied to difficult for people to cast their votes. The PRI spent a large sum of money in the campaign for its candidates. Should we consider the elections described above as examples of people electing their rulers? Reading these examples we get a sense that we cannot. There are many problems here. In China the elections do not offer the people any serious choice. They have to choose the ruling party and the candidates approved by it. Can we call this a choice? In the Mexican example, people seemed to really have a choice but in practice they had no choice. There was no way the ruling party could be defeated, even if people were against it. These are not fair elections. We can thus add a second feature to our understanding of democracy. Holding elections of any kind is not sufficient. The elections must offer a real choice between political alternatives. And it should be possible for people to use this choice to remove the existing rulers, if they wish so. So, a democracy must be based on a free and fair election where those currently in power have a fair chance of losing. We shall find out more about a democratic election in Chapter 3. ee Ove bank @ aS caglecartoons.com/espafiol One person, one vote, one value Earlier, we read about how the struggle for democracy was linked to the demand for universal adult franchise. This principle has now come to be accepted almost all over the world. Yet there are many instances of denial of equal right to vote. = Until 2015, in Saudi Arabia women did not have the right to vote. = Estonia has made its citizenship rules in such a way that people belonging to Russian minority find it difficult to get the right to vote. aln Fiji, the electoral system is such that the vote of an indigenous Fiji has more value than that of an Indian-Fijian. Democracy is based on a fundamental principle of political equality. That gives us the third feature of democracy: in a democracy, each adult citizen must have one vote and each vote must have one value. We shall read more about it in Chapter 3. DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 India? read the cartoon This cartoon is about the Iraqi election held after Saddam Hussein s regime was over thrown. He is shown behind the bars. What is the cartoonist saying here? Compare the message of this cartoon with the first cartoon in this chapter. Why talk about Zimbabwe? | read similar reports from many parts of our own country. Why don t we discuss that? AT LAST! Wi eno TH Dera John Trever, Albuquerque Journal, US, Cagle Cartoons Inc