You have already read about this in the previous classes. In the countries we call democracy, all the people do not rule. A majority is allowed to take decisions on behalf of all the people. Even the majority does not rule directly. The majority of people rule Cy N 2p..~/GN COLLABORATION SEN Gop CARs, coMPvTER> "oO What 1s Democracy? WuHy DEMOCRACY? Reprint 2025-26 : ~ e _ My ro NOMIC PROGRESS oT %. iim GROWTH, ECO > ff N EXPORT INCREAg Ee SA MOBILE PHONES, PRGERS EEN SPECTACULA@ THUS THERE HAS 6 eer MINED through their elected representatives. This become necessary because: = Modern democracies involve such a large number of people that it is physically impossible for them to sit together and take a collective decision. = Even if they could, the citizen does not have the time, the desire or the skills to take part in all the decisions. This gives us a clear but minimal understanding of democracy. This clarity helps us to distinguish democracies from non-democracies. But it does not allow us to distinguish between a democracy and a good democracy. It does not ~ "9 uo itl | ESQ NS ae R.K. Laxman, The Times of India allow us to see the operation of democracy beyond government. For this we need to turn to broader meanings of democracy. Sometimes we use democracy for organisations other than the government. Just read these statements: u We are a very democratic family. Whenever a decision has to be taken, we all sit down and arrive ata consensus. My opinion matters as much as my father s. I don t like teachers who do not allow students to speak and ask questions in the class. I would like to have teachers with democratic temperament. One leader and his family members decide everything in this party. How can they talk of democracy? These ways of using the word democracy go back to its basic sense of a method of taking decisions. A democratic decision involves consultation with and consent of all those who are affected by that decision. Those who are not powerful have the same say in taking the decision as those who are powerful. This can apply to a government or a family or any other organisation. Thus democracy is also a principle that can be applied to any sphere of life. Sometimes we use the word democracy not to describe any existing government but to set up an ideal standard that all democracies must aim to become: =u True democracy will come to this country only when no one goes hungry to bed. In a democracy every citizen must be able to play equal role in decision making. For this you don t need just an equal right to vote. Every citizen needs to have equal information, basic education, equal resources and a lot of commitment. If we take these ideals seriously, then no country in the world is a democracy. Yet an understanding of democracy as