Bangladesh have agreed that a neutral Major decisions by elected leaders government should rule the country at the time of elections. | want to besin Lyngdoh Madam s class! That sounds like a democratic classroom. Doesn't it? 1.3 WHY DEMOCRACY? An argument broke out in Madam Lyngdoh s class. She had finished teaching the previous section on what is democracy and asked the students if they thought democracy was the best form of government. Everyone had something to say. Debating merits of democracy Yolanda: We live in a democratic country. All over the world people want democracy. Countries that were not democratic earlier are becoming democratic now. All great people have said nice things about democracy. Isn t it obvious that democracy is the best? Do we need to debate this? Tangkini: But Lyngdoh Madam had said we should not accept something just because it is famous, just because everyone else accepts it. Isn t it possible that everyone is following a wrong path? Jeni: Yes, it actually is a wrong path. What has democracy brought to our country? Seven decades of democracy and there is so much poverty in the country. Ribiang: But what has democracy got to do with it? Do we have poverty because we are demoCratic or do we have poverty despite being a democracy? What 1s Democracy? Wuy DEMOCRACY? Reprint 2025-26 Jeni: Whatever, how does it make a difference? The point is that this can t be the best form of government. Democracy is all about chaos, instability, corruption and hypocrisy. Politicians fight among themselves. Who cares for the country? Poimon: So, what should we have instead? Go back to the British rule? Invite some kings to rule this country? Rose: | don t know. | think what this country needs is a strong leader, someone who does not have to bother about elections and parliament. One leader should have all the powers. He should be able to do whatever is needed in country s interest. That alone can remove corruption and poverty from this country. Someone shouted: That is called dictatorship! Hoi: What if that person starts using all these powers for himself and his family? What if he is corrupt himself? Rose: | am speaking only of the honest, sincere and strong leader. Hoi: But that is not fair. You are comparing a real democracy with an ideal dictatorship. We should compare an ideal with an ideal, the real with the real. Go and check the record of dictators in real life. They are most corrupt, selfish and brutal. It is just that we don t get to know about this. And what is worse, you can t even get rid of them. Madam Lyngdoh was listening to this discussion with interest. Now she stepped in: I was delighted to see you all arguing so passionately. I don t know who is right and who is wrong. That is for you to settle. But I did feel that you all wanted to speak