eae CHAPTER 1 WHAT IS DEMOCRACY? WHY DEMOCRACY? OVERVIEW What is democracy? What are its features? This chapter builds on a simple definition of democracy. Step by step, we work out the meaning of the terms involved in this definition. The aim here is to understand clearly the bare minimum features of a democratic form of government. After going through this chapter we should be able to distinguish a democratic form of government from a non-democratic government. Towards the end of this chapter, we step beyond this minimal objective and introduce a broader idea of democracy. Democracy is the most prevalent form of government in the world today and it is expanding to more countries. But why is it so? What makes it better than other forms of government? That is the second big question that we take up in this chapter. Reprint 2025-26 1.1 WHat is DEMOCRACY? You have already read about different forms of government. On the basis of your understanding of democracy so far, mentioning a few examples write down some common features of: = Democratic governments = Non-democratic governments Why define democracy? Before we proceed further, let us first take note of an objection by Merry. She does not like this way of defining democracy and wants to ask some basic questions. Her teacher Matilda Lyngdoh responds to her questions, as other classmates join the discussion: Merry: Ma am, | don t like this idea. First we spend time discussing democracy and then we want to find out the meaning of democracy. | mean logically shouldn t we have approached it the other way round? Shouldn't the meaning have come first and then the example? Lyngdoh Madam: | can see your point. But that is not how we reason in everyday life. We use words like pen, rain or love. Do we wait to have a definition of these words before we use them? Come to think of it, do we have clear definition of these words? It is only by using a word that we understand its meaning. Merry: But then why do we need definitions at all? Lyngdoh Madam: We need a definition only when we come across a difficulty in the use of a word. We need a definition of rain only when we wish to distinguish it from, say, drizzle or cloudburst. The same is true for democracy. We need a clear definition only because people use it for different purposes, because very different kinds of governments call themselves democracy. Ribiang: But why do we need to work on a definition? The other day you quoted Abraham Lincoln to us: Democracy is government of the people, by the people and for the people . We in Meghalaya always ruled ourselves. That is accepted by everyone. Why do we need to change that? Lyngdoh Madam: | am not saying we need to change it. | too find this definition very beautiful. But we don t know if this is the best way of