for democracy China s famine of 1958-1961 was the worst recorded famine in world history. Nearly three crore people died in this famine. During those days, India s economic condition was not much better than China. Yet India did not have a famine of the kind China had. Economists think DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 www.caglecartoons.com/espanol This cartoon is from Brazil, a country that has long experience of dictatorship. It is entitled The Hidden Side of Dictatorship . Which hidden sides does this cartoon depict? Is it necessary for every dictatorship to have a hidden side? If possible, find this out about the dictators including Pinochet in Chile, Jaruzelski in Poland, Sani Abacha in Nigeria and Ferdinand Marcos in the Philippines. read the cartoon + Ma WM oA Cagle Cartoons Inc. 6 December 2004 Osmani Simanca, Brazil, What would have happened if India was not a democracy? Could we have stayed together as a single nation? that this was a result of different government policies in the two countries. The existence of democracy in India made the Indian government respond to food scarcity in a way that the Chinese government did not. They point out that no large-scale famine has ever taken place in an independent and democratic country. If China too had multiparty elections, an opposition party and a press free to criticise the government, then so many people may not have died in the famine. This example brings out one of the reasons why democracy is considered the best form of government. Democracy is better than any other form of government in responding to the needs of the people. A nondemocratic government may and can respond to the people s needs, but it all depends on the wishes of the people who rule. If the rulers don t want to, they don t have to act according to the wishes of the people. A democracy requires that the rulers have to attend to the needs of the people. Ademocratic government is a better government because it isa more accountable form of government. There is another reason why democracy should lead to better decisions than any non-democratic government. Democracy is based on consultation and discussion. A democratic decision always involves many persons, discussions and meetings. When a number of people put their heads together, they are able to point out possible mistakes in any decision. This takes time. But there is a big advantage in taking time over important decisions. This reduces the chances of rash or irresponsible decisions. Thus democracy improves the quality of decision-making. What 1s Democracy? WuHy DEMOCRACY? Reprint 2025-26 This is related to the third argument. Democracy provides a method to deal with differences and conflicts. In any society people are bound to have differences of opinions and interests. These differences are particularly sharp in a country like ours which has an amazing social diversity. People belong to different regions, speak different languages, practise different religions and have different castes. They look at the world very