by the people. This raises many questions: Who are the rulers in this definition? Which officials must be elected for any government to be called a democracy? Which decisions may be taken by nonelected officials in a democracy? = What kind of election constitutes a democratic election? What conditions must be fulfilled for an election to be considered democratic? = Who are the people who can elect the rulers or get elected as rulers? Should this include every citizen on an equal basis? Can a democracy deny some citizens this right? = Finally, what kind of a form of government is democracy? Can elected rulers do whatever they want in a democracy? Or must a democratic government function with some limits? Is it necessary for a democracy to respect some rights of the citizens? Let us consider each of these questions with the help of some examples. Major decisions by elected leaders In Pakistan, General Pervez Musharraf led a military coup in October 1999. He overthrew a democratically elected government and declared himself the Chief Executive of the country. Later he changed his designation to President and in 2002 held a referendum in the country that granted him a fiveyear extension. Pakistani media, human rights organisations and democracy activists said that the referendum was based _ on NO ENTRY BEFORE YOU FILL THAT FORM & BECOME A MEMBER IN AL-BA ATH PARTY. Is THAT CLEAR ?? read the cartoon Syria is a small west Asian country. The ruling Ba ath Party and some of its small allies are the only parties allowed in that country. Do you think this cartoon could apply to China or Mexico? What does the crown of leaves on democracy signify? Emad Hajjaj, Jordan, Cagle Cartoons Inc. 7 June 2005 DEMOCRATIC POLITICS Reprint 2025-26 read the cartoon This cartoon was drawn in the context of Latin America. Do you think it applies to the Pakistani situation as well? Think of other countries where this could apply? Does this happen sometimes in our country as well? All this is so remote for me. Is democracy all about rulers and governments? Can we talk about a democratic classroom? Or a democratic family? Ares, Caglecartoon.com, Cagle Cartoons Inc. 22 January 2005 malpractices and fraud. In August 2002 he issued a Legal Framework Order that amended _ the Constitution of Pakistan. According to this Order, the President can dismiss the national and provincial assemblies. The work of the civilian cabinet is supervised by a National Security Council which is dominated by military officers. After passing this law, elections were held to the national and provincial assemblies. So Pakistan has had elections, elected representatives have some powers. But the final power rested with military officers and General Musharraf himself. Clearly, there are many reasons why Pakistan under General Musharraf should not be called a democracy. But let us focus on one of these. Can we say that the rulers are elected by the people in Pakistan? Not quite. People may have