rulers do, but mainly on what we, as citizens, do. This is what distinguished democracy from other governments. Other forms of government like monarchy, dictatorship or one-party rule do not require all citizens to take part in politics. In fact most non-democratic governments would like citizens not to take part in politics. But democracy depends on active political participation by all the citizens. That is why a study of democracy must focus on democratic politics. exercises 1 Here is some information about four countries. Based on this information, how would you classify each of these countries. Write democratic , undemocratic or not sure against each of these. a Country A: People who do not accept the country s official religion do not have a right to vote. b Country B: The same party has been winning elections for the last twenty years. ce Country C: Ruling party has lost in the last three elections. d Country D: There is no independent election commission. 2 Here is some information about four countries. Based on this information, how would you classify each of these countries. Write democratic , undemocratic or not sure against each of these. a Country P: The parliament cannot pass a law about the army without the consent of the Chief of Army. b Country Q: The parliament cannot pass a law reducing the powers of the judiciary. ce Country R: The country s leaders cannot sign any treaty with another country without taking permission from its neighbouring country. d Country S: All the major economic decisions about the country are taken by officials of the central bank which the ministers cannot change. 3 = Which of these is not a good argument in favour of democracy? Why? a People feel free and equal in a democracy. b Democracies resolve conflict in a better way than others. c Democratic government is more accountable to the people. d Democracies are more prosperous than others. What 1s Democracy? WuHy DEMOCRACY? 15, Reprint 2025-26 Each of these statements contains a democratic and an undemocratic element. Write out the two separately for each statement. a Aminister said that some laws have to be passed by the parliament in order to conform to the regulations decided by the World Trade Organisation (WTO). b The Election Commission ordered re-polling in a constituency where large-scale rigging was reported. c Women s representation in the parliament has barely reached 10 per cent. This led women s organisations to demand one-third seats for women. Which of these is not a valid reason for arguing that there is a lesser possibility of famine in a democratic country? a Opposition parties can draw attention to hunger and starvation. b Free press can report suffering from famine in different parts of the country. ce Government fears its defeat in the next elections. d People are free to believe in and practise any religion. There are 40 villages in a district where the government has made no provision for drinking water. These