also help you to see science as an ongoing process of discovery. And not just about discovery alone, but also about responsibility. As young science explorers, you will soon see how human activities are linked to what happens in the natural world and are connected to the society we live in. You will, we hope, also see the role that science can play in addressing environmental challenges and help in creating a more sustainable world. But let s get back into this book for now. You will read about topics in different fields of science, from physics and chemistry to biology and earth sciences. While they might appear as different chapters, just as we had said in Grade 6, they are all interconnected. Scientific ideas in one area often inspire discoveries in another, or at least allow us to ask questions in another area. So, let s take a quick journey through our book for this year. We will start by looking at the properties of materials around us, mostly the things we experience but perhaps never ask questions about why are some fruits sour? What happens when we wash a haldi stain on our school uniform? 4/3/2025 4:50:07 PM Chapter l.indd 3 We then move on and play with some electric batteries, lamps and wires to try to find other kinds of properties of materials. What kind of materials do we need to make a lamp glow? This will lead us to classifying materials based on their properties and we will enter the world of metals and non-metals. We know from our experience that a torch battery runs out eventually, and can t be used again. We ll explore what kind of changes happen around us. Some changes can be reversed and others cannot be reversed. Batteries run out, ice melts into water, fruits ripen, rocks break into pebbles... what kind of changes are these? Some of these happen, or happen faster, when things are heated. We will look at how heat flows whether it is the melting of an ice cube ina glass, or the melting of a glacier. Water is, of course, everywhere, and with the heat from the Sun, it evaporates from the seas and falls as rain, perhaps trickling down into the ground, somewhere far away. The Ever-Evolving World of Science 4/3/2025 4:50:09 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 Chapter l.indd 4 However, it isn t just changes in materials around us that we see, or the hidden changes in water that we do not see. As we are growing, our bodies are changing as well. Especially around the middle-school years, our bodies are changing rapidly! Why? Not just us humans, there are life processes that are essential to all animals for their survival. To grow, we have to eat and breathe, blood has to circulate the nutrients from the food all over the body and so on. But why animals alone? Don t plants also need food to grow? How do