xX The Ever-Evolving World of Science We hope you enjoyed your adventures with Curiosity in Grade 6, and are now ready to continue our journey into the wonderful world of science. This again, is not just a textbook with facts it is an invitation to question, to perform experiments, and to explore, as we try to understand the beautiful world we live in. The world of science covers everything small and large, near and far. We may be looking at tiny cells inside a leaf, or the movement of the sun and the stars. We may be testing out the materials around us at home, or discussing how water flows underground. As you go through the chapters in this book, you will start new adventures that challenge your thinking, expand your knowledge, and help you become an explorer, making small discoveries for yourself. Before we dive into our exciting journey, take a moment to observe something special about this book. Look at the page numbers they follow the playful flight of a butterfly and the soaring of a paper plane! Just as a butterfly flutters freely and a paper plane flies into the sky, learning takes flight when curiosity leads the way. Did you know that something as simple as a paper plane inspired real scientific explorations of flight? From early inventors studying bird wings to modern engineers designing aircraft, the dream of flying started with simple observations and experiments. So, as you turn each page, let your imagination take flight exploring new ideas, discovering wonders, and reaching for the skies! 0777CHOl Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 Chapter l.indd 2 Exploration, of course, isn t just about discovering new facts or learning about different things in nature. Science, as we said in Grade 6, is a process, so it is about a way of thinking that welcomes curiosity, asks questions, and is open to the unknown. In Grade 7, we will try to ask deeper questions: How do things work? Why do events happen the way they do? And what can we learn from the patterns that we see in nature? To do this, we have to step out of this book, step out of the classroom perhaps, and experience the world through activities and experiments. These are experiences that we hope will not just be interesting or exciting but also serve as stepping stones to a deeper understanding of the environment we live in and of our place on this planet. We believe that this will also help you to see science as an ongoing process of discovery. And not just about discovery alone, but also about responsibility. As young science explorers, you will soon see how human activities are linked to what happens in the natural world and are connected to the society we live in. You will, we hope, also see the role that science can play in addressing environmental challenges and help in creating a more sustainable world. But let s get back