we do not see. As we are growing, our bodies are changing as well. Especially around the middle-school years, our bodies are changing rapidly! Why? Not just us humans, there are life processes that are essential to all animals for their survival. To grow, we have to eat and breathe, blood has to circulate the nutrients from the food all over the body and so on. But why animals alone? Don t plants also need food to grow? How do they get their food? Do they also breathe? How? Over the time that life has evolved on our planet Earth, it has figured out how to do this in a beautiful and carefully balanced way. Ah, but what is time? The clock on the wall or a wrist watch tells us the time and how it passes. We get prepared to go to school in the morning and are ready to sleep at night but have you thought about how we measure time? And how fast does something happen? Long before the age of electric clocks and digital watches, early humans observed the shadows of objects in the Sun and used the position of the shadows to tell the time. Light and shadows are not just useful for shadow y Naturally, light helps us see and today, we ve developed a lot of ways to generate light (so we can read a book at night, even when the Sun doesn t shine). But, more importantly, asking questions about the nature 4/3/2025 4:50:10 PM of light has given us a very deep understanding of the universe we live in. While we ll perhaps learn about it only later, light and shadows are not just limited to things around us at home. Even the Earth and the Moon can cast shadows, leading to the fascinating phenomena of eclipses. And of course, we have day and night that depend on receiving light from the Sun. To understand all of this, we need to know how the Earth rotates around its axis, how the Moon goes around the Earth, and the Earth around the Sun. And the consequences of these movements on life on our beautiful planet. While all this might have your head spinning, think about it. Isn t it amazing that we humans can wonder about the wonderful world we live in? In the chapters that follow, you ll also make simple observations and do fun experiments, and dive into topics that need careful thinking. Each chapter builds on what you < already know and encourages you to ask questions, explore, do handson experiments, and think like a scientist! As you will find out, even those experiments that seem to confirm what we think will happen, might lead to some _ additional questions that might need more experiments and more questions. C) Vv < av Vv 7) Ll -] he (-) S fo) = o wu Pa cH) S wu t) = = ) 1.1 Happy Exploring! (en a i ee ih