Rational Numbers Chapter 8 8.1 INTRODUCTION You began your study of numbers by counting objects around you. The numbers used for this purpose were called counting numbers or natural numbers. They are 1, 2, 3, 4, ... By including 0 to natural numbers, we got the whole numbers, i.e., 0, 1, 2, 3, ... The negatives of natural numbers were then put together with whole numbers to make up integers. Integers are ..., 3, 2, -1, 0, 1, 2, 3, .... We, thus, extended the number system, from natural numbers to whole numbers and from whole numbers to integers. . . numerator You were also introduced to fractions. These are numbers of the form umerato denominator | where the numerator 1s either 0 or a positive integer and the denominator, a positive integer. You compared two fractions, found their equivalent forms and studied all the four basic operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication and division on them. In this Chapter, we shall extend the number system further. We shall introduce the concept of rational numbers alongwith their addition, subtraction, multiplication and division operations. 8.2 NEED FOR RATIONAL NUMBERS Earlier, we have seen how integers could be used to denote opposite situations involving numbers. For example, if the distance of 3 km to the right of a place was denoted by 3, then the distance of 5 km to the left of the same place could be denoted by 5. If a profit of = 150 was represented by 150 then a loss of = 100 could be written as 100. There are many situations similar to the above situations that involve fractional numbers. You can represent a distance of 750m above sea level as 4 km. Can we represent 750m 3 -3 below sea level in km? Can we denote the distance of ~ km below sea level by 4 ? We can 3, see 4 is neither an integer, nor a fractional number. We need to extend our number system to include such numbers. 2024-25 RATIONAL NUMBERS ii oe 8.3 WHat ARE RaTIONAL NuMBERS? The word rational arises from the term ratio . You know that a ratio like 3:2 can also be written as : . Here, 3 and 2 are natural numbers. Similarly, the ratio of two integers p and q (q #0), 1.e., p:g can be written in the form P This is the form in which rational numbers are expressed. A rational number is defined as a number that can be expressed in the form 5 where p and q are integers and q # 0. A Thus, 5 is arational number. Here, p=4 and g=5S. Is 4 also a rational number? Yes, because p = 3 and q =4 are integers. 3 4.2 @ You have seen many fractions like 878 1 3 etc. All fractions are rational numbers. Can you say why? How about the decimal numbers like 0.5, 2.3, etc.? Each of such numbers can be written as an ordinary fraction and, hence,