materials allow more seepage of water than those with sandy materials. [ ] (iv) The movement of cooler air from land to sea is called land breeze. [ ] . Some ice cubes placed in a dish melt into water after sometime. Where do the ice cubes get heat for this transformation? . A burning incense stick is fixed, pointing downwards. In which direction would the smoke from the incense stick move? Show the movement of smoke with a diagram. . Two test tubes with water are heated by a candle flame as shown in Fig. 7.16. Which thermometers (Fig. 7.16a or Fig. 7.16b) will record a higher temperature? Explain. Thermometer ~ Thermometer Water 4 ro ing Burning Burning candle _ = candle Fig. 7.16(a) Fig. 7.16(b) Fig. 7.16: Two thermometers dipped in two test tubes Heat Transfer in Nature 4/3/2025 4:54:08 PM 10. Why are hollow bricks used to construct the outer walls of houses in hot regions? . Explain how large water bodies prevent extreme temperature in areas around them. Explain how water seeps through the surface of the Earth and gets stored as groundwater. The water cycle helps in the redistribution and replenishment of water on the Earth. Justify the statement. Exploratory Projects Oe ect >, ~~ >, ~ Disciplinary History >, ~ Geography Society Technology Economy Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 Chapter 7.indd 104 Society: Visit a site of water harvesting or a recharge pit. Find out from people how they are constructed and how they work. Prepare a report with illustrations. Activity: Tightly wrap a thin paper strip around a metallic rod. Try to burn the paper with a candle while rotating the rod continuously. Does the paper burn? Explain your observations. Activity: Take a sheet of paper. Draw a spiral on it, as shownin Fig. 7.17a. Cut the paper along the spiral. Suspend the paper as shown in the Fig. 7.17b above a burning candle. Observe what happens. Provide an explanation for your observation. Fig. 7.17(a): Cutting paper Fig. 7.17(b): Spiral paper in spiral above a burning candle 4/3/2025 4:54:09 PM