heat transfer but no medium is required for the radiation process. The principles of heat transfer are utilised in designing houses and clothing. The continuous movement of water upward as water vapour and downward through precipitation, passing through soil, rocks and plants, and finally returning to water bodies, is called water cycle. The process of surface water seeping through soil and rocks is called infiltration. Groundwater is the water that seeps through and gets stored in the pore spaces of sediments and the openings in rocks beneath the surface. The underground layers of sediments and rocks that store water in pore spaces are called aquifers. Let Us Enhance Our Learning id Choose the correct option in each case. (i) Your father bought a saucepan made of two different materials, A and B, as shown in Fig. 7.14. The materials A and B have the following properties (a) Both A and B are good conductors of heat (b) Both A and B are poor conductors of heat (c) Ais a good conductor and B is a poor conductor of heat (d) Ais a poor conductor and B is a good conductor of heat (ii) Pins are stuck to a metal strip with wax and a burning candle is kept below the rod, as shown in Fig. 7.15. Which of the following will happen? (a) All the pins will fall almost at the same time (b) Pins I and II will fall earlier than pins III and IV (c) Pins I and II will fall later than pins II and IV (d) Pins II and III will fall almost at the same time 4/3/2025 4:54:08 PM Chapter 7.indd 103 (iii) A smoke detector is a device that detects smoke and sounds an alarm. Suppose you are fitting a smoke detector in your room. The most suitable place for this device will be: (a) Near the floor (b) In the middle of a wall (c) On the ceiling (d) Anywhere in the room . A shopkeeper serves you cold lassi in a tumbler. By chance, the tumbler had asmall leak. You were given another tumbler by the shopkeeper to put the leaky tumbler in it. Will this arrangement help to keep the lassi cold for a longer time? Explain. . State with reason(s) whether the following statements are True [T] or False [F]. (i) Heat transfer takes place in solids through convection. [ ] (ii) Heat transfer through convection takes place by the actual movement of particles. [ ] (iii) Areas with clay materials allow more seepage of water than those with sandy materials. [ ] (iv) The movement of cooler air from land to sea is called land breeze. [ ] . Some ice cubes placed in a dish melt into water after sometime. Where do the ice cubes get heat for this transformation? . A burning incense stick is fixed, pointing downwards. In which direction would the smoke from the incense stick move? Show the movement of smoke with a diagram.