heats up faster than water. Does the soil also cool faster than water? After letting the soil and water get heated, bring the set-up indoors and let it cool for 20 minutes. You will observe that the soil cools faster than water, just as it gets heated faster. People living in _ coastal areas experience an interesting phenomenon caused by _ the heating and cooling of land and water at different rates. As the land gets heated faster than water during the day, it causes warm air above the land to rise. This causes cooler air to move from 7 the sea towards the land. This SS movement of cooler air from the Fig. 7.7(a): Sea breeze sea to the land is called sea breeze (Fig. 7.7a). Hence, in hot places, sea breeze relieves people from the heat. That is why, windows of the houses in coastal areas are placed facing the sea. Sy <3 4/3/2025 4:54:01 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 At night, the process Warm air reverses. In the absence of sunlight, land cools down c faster than the water in the sea. As a result, the air above the sea is warmer and rises up. Cooler air from the land then moves towards the sea, creating a land breeze Cool land (Fig. 7.7b). breeze Thus, people living near . the seashore experience that Fig. 7.7(b): Land breeze the direction of the wind reverses in the day and night. Warmer sea 7.3 Radiation [eet esse see a nee } Do you remember when Pema and Palden were sitting around the fireplace? They felt warm. Their grandfather tells them that the heat transfer, in this case, takes place directly from the fire (hot object) to us by a process known as radiation. The heat of the Sun reaches us through this process. Heat transfer by radiation does not require any medium. All objects radiate heat. You must have observed that a hot utensil kept away from the flame cools down after some time. What is the reason for it? The hot utensil cools down by radiating heat to its surroundings. IVE \ Why is it more comfortable to wear white or light-coloured EEPER 4 ) clothes during summers and dark-coloured clothes during - winters? Light-coloured clothes reflect most of the heat that falls on them, and therefore, we feel more comfortable wearing them during summers. Dark surfaces, on the other hand, absorb more heat, and therefore, we feel more comfortable with dark-coloured clothes during winters. | Chapter 7.indd 96 4/3/2025 4:54:03 PM There are many examples in our daily life, where we can observe conduction, convection, and radiation happening together. Consider the case of water being heated up, as shown in Fig. 7.8. Let us identify the various ways in which the pan and the water get heated up, as well as the warmth we feel around the flame and the hot pan. Heat is transferred from the flame to the utensil by conduction. Subsequently,