| Chapter 7.indd 96 4/3/2025 4:54:03 PM There are many examples in our daily life, where we can observe conduction, convection, and radiation happening together. Consider the case of water being heated up, as shown in Fig. 7.8. Let us identify the various ways in which the pan and the water get heated up, as well as the warmth we feel around the flame and the hot pan. Heat is transferred from the flame to the utensil by conduction. Subsequently, water in the utensil gets heated up by convection. The warmth that we feel around the flame and the hot utensil is due to radiation. Let us wrap up! From the activities, examples, and discussions so far, we find that there are three processes by which heat gets transferred. These are conduction, convection, and radiation. + In conduction, heating takes place when one particle receives heat, transfers heat to the next particle in contact, and so on. The particles themselves do not move away from their positions. In convection, heat transfer takes place by the actual movement of particles. Note that in conduction and convection, a medium must be present whose particles help in the transfer of heat. In the case of radiation, heat travels from one place to another and no material medium is required for its transfer. Heat Transfer in Nature Fig. 7.8: Heating water ina pan >, ~ >, ~ >, ~ FASCINATING FACTS In the upper reaches of the Himalayan region, a traditional room heater locally known as bukhari is used to keep rooms warm during winters. It consists of an iron stove in which wood or charcoal is burnt. A long pipe attached to the upper part of the heater serves as a chimney, venting out the smoke. Additionally, the bukhari can be used for cooking, as its flat top provides a platform for placing utensils. All the three processes of heat transfer are involved when this device is used for cooking and warming up the room. Bukhari Chapter 7.indd 97 4/3/2025 4:54:04 PM You have learnt in the Grade 6 Science textbook Curiosity, that the Sun is the main source of heat for the Earth. You have seen your parents drying wet clothes on the clothesline at home. Wet clothes dry faster on a sunny day since the heat from the Sun makes the evaporation of water faster. Thus, heat from the Sun plays an important role in the evaporation of water, be it from clothes drying on a line or from water bodies like oceans and lakes. Let us look at the phenomenon of water cycle to understand this in more detail. 7.4 Water Cycle Op You have also learnt in the Grade 6 Science textbook Curiosity, that water exists in three states in nature. As a liquid, it fills the oceans, rivers, and lakes on the Earth. As a solid, it forms snow, ice sheets, and glaciers in the mountains and the polar regions. As a gas, it exists in the form