the cup under which thecandle #rr was placed, rises up (Fig. 7.3b). Why is it so? The air around the candle flame heats up. As the air in the cup warms up, it expands and occupies more space. As a result, it becomes lighter and rises up. You can experience the expansion of air on heating it by placing a partially inflated balloon in the Sun (Fig. 7.4). After the air in the balloon gets heated, it expands and the balloon becomes larger. You must have observed that when an incense stick (agarbatti) is burnt, smoke rises up. Smoke is a mixture of hot gases and tiny solid particles that are released when something burns. As itis warmer than the surrounding air, it rises up. Let us find out how heat transfer takes place in liquids by performing the following activity. [Activity 7.3: Let us find out | Caution This activity should be carried out under the supervision of a teacher or an adult. Inflated balloon Fig. 7.4: An inflated balloon in the Sun How does heat transfer take place in liquids? Do liquids also rise up when heated like air? + Take a 500 mL beaker, half-filled with water as shown in Fig. 7.5a. * With the help of a straw, place a grain of potassium permanganate at the centre of the beaker s base (Fig. 7.5a). Placea candle right below the centre of the base of the beaker. Chapter 7.indd 93 4/3/2025 4:53:59 PM Candle Fig. 7.5(a): Initial set-up for demonstration Coloured streak Burning candle Fig. 7.5(b): Demonstration of convection in heated water | C) ao] Hd rT) C) 15) < a 1 ) n a] x td x = > 2 he =] s) \ / > -~ ee Chapter 7.indd 94 Fig. 7.6: Measurement of the temperature of soil and water * Observe the movement of the coloured streak in the water. + As you supply heat, a streak of colour starts moving up and then coming down from the sides (Fig. 7.5b). Why does the streak of coloured water go up in the middle and come down from the sides? The water at the bottom of the beaker gets heated up and becomes hot. It expands, becomes lighter, and rises. The water on the sides of the beaker is comparatively cooler and heavier, and comes down to take the place of the rising water. Then, this water gets heated and in turn also rises. This cycle continues until the entire volume of water gets heated. In this case, the entire volume of water gets heated through the actual movement of water particles. This process of heat transfer is known as convection. It is because of convection that we see the movement of the coloured streak inside the beaker. Thus, we can conclude that water, like air, gets heated up by the process of convection. Here, heat transfer takes place by the actual movement of particles of liquids and gases from one place to another. 7.2.1