its pores and as air is a poor conductor of heat, it reduces heat flow from our bodies to our surroundings. As a result, we feel warm. Similarly, air trapped between the layers of clothing acts as a poor conductor of heat and keeps us warm. The presence of air between two thin blankets is the reason why we prefer Fig. 7.2: Air trapped between two thin blankets them over one thick blanket to keep acts as an insulator us warm (Fig. 7.2). Is it possible to construct houses that are not affected much by the outside heat and cold? Houses constructed in places with a very hot or cold climate often use the concept of heat transfer to keep them cool or warm. FASCINATING FACTS The upper regions ofthe Himalayas, such as the Mori block of Uttarkashi in Uttarakhand, experience an extremely cold climate and heavy snowfall during winters. Houses here are often built to stay warm during winters, with walls made of two wooden layers filled with cow dung and mud between them. As wood and mud are poor conductors of heat, they prevent heat loss and help in keeping the houses warm. There are houses with outer walls that are constructed using hollow bricks that keep them warm in winters and cool in summers. This happens because the air that gets trapped in the hollow bricks is a poor conductor of heat. Pema draws Palden s attention to the = Why is the smo | rising smoke from the burning firewood, going up? around which they are sitting. 7.2 Convection To understand why smoke rises, let us perform an activity. Wood ; ; { stick " [ Activity 7.2: Let us investigate + Take two identical paper cups. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 Thread + Hang them using threads of equal length in Paper an inverted position on the two ends of a cup wooden stick, as shown in Fig. 7.3a. Fig. 7.3(a): Initial set-up Chapter 7.indd 92 4/3/2025 4:53:58 PM >, ~ Now, adjust the positions of the cups, so that the stick is horizontal. >, ~ Place a burning candle below one of the cups (Fig. 7.3b). Observe what happens to the cup. >, ~ - Burning } candle >, ~ Record your observations in Table 7.3 and think of probable reasons. + Fig. 7.3(b): Hot air rising up Table 7.3: Recording observations and probable reasons Observation about the cups Probable reasons for the observation Heat Transfer in Nature You observed that the cup under which thecandle #rr was placed, rises up (Fig. 7.3b). Why is it so? The air around the candle flame heats up. As the air in the cup warms up, it expands and occupies more space. As a result, it becomes lighter and rises up. You can experience the expansion of air on heating it by placing a partially inflated balloon in the Sun (Fig. 7.4). After the air in the balloon gets heated, it expands and the