Heat Transfer in Nature Pema and her brother Palden reside in Gangtok. On a cold winter evening, they are sitting around a fireplace. Palden shares his experiences of visiting Kerala during the winter vacation. He says that compared to Gangtok, winter in Kerala is comparatively warm and humid. Both Pema and Palden are curious about why some places are so cold and others quite hot. Hearing them express their curiosity, their grandfather, a retired science teacher, says, Kerala is closer to the equator than Sikkim and it also has a long coastline, which results in warmer and more humid weather conditions . Palden replies, Yes, we learnt in Grade 6 Science and Social Science that for us on the Earth, the Sun is the main source of heat and light, and around the equator, the climate is generally hot . As they are talking, Pema is keenly observing her grandmother cooking thukpa (a traditional Sikkimese dish) in a large metal pan. Pema asks, Why are cooking utensils generally made of metals? Palden immediately responds that they had studied in the chapter The World of Metals and Non-metals that such materials are good conductors of heat. How does heat get ~ transferred in these materials? Let us perform an activity to learn why certain materials are good conductors of heat. 7.1 Conduction of Heat [Activity 7.1: Let us experiment | Caution This activity should be carried out under the supervision of a teacher or an adult. >, ~ Take a strip of a metal, such as aluminium Metal or iron, about 15 cm long. mp + Attach four pins to the strip with the help of wax such that they are arranged at nearly equal distances (about 2 cm apart), as shown in Fig. 7.1. * Secure the strip to a stand and label the Burning pins as I, II, Il, and IV, as shown in Fig. 7.1. (If a stand is not available, place the strip between two bricks for support.) candle >, e Heat the end of the strip that is away from Fig. 7.1: Heat transfer in a metal strip the stand with a candle or a spirit lamp. + What will happen to the pins? Will they remain attached to the strip or will they fall? * Predict the order in which the pins will fall from the strip. * Record your observations in Table 7.1. Table 7.1: Falling of pins Pin falling first Reasons for what you observed | cc) ao] rT) oa 13) < a .>] n a] x td = > wn he =] s) Prediction Observation Ne Chapter 7.indd 90 4/3/2025 4:53:57 PM You observed that the pin closest to the candle flame (pin I) falls first, followed by pins IJ, III, and IV. Why does pin I fall before pin II? Why did all the pins not fall together? From your observations, what can you infer? Do you think that heat is being transferred along the metal strip from the end that