.>] n a] x td = > wn he =] s) Prediction Observation Ne Chapter 7.indd 90 4/3/2025 4:53:57 PM You observed that the pin closest to the candle flame (pin I) falls first, followed by pins IJ, III, and IV. Why does pin I fall before pin II? Why did all the pins not fall together? From your observations, what can you infer? Do you think that heat is being transferred along the metal strip from the end that is being heated? As the heat travels along the strip and approaches a pin, the wax holding it melts and the pin falls. Here, the transfer of heat takes place from the hot end of the strip to the colder end. The process of heat transfer from the hotter part of an object to the colder part is called conduction. In this process, the particle that gets heated, passes the heat on to its neighbour, and so on. However, the particles themselves do not move from their positions. Materials like metals that allow heat to pass through them easily are called good conductors of heat. Because metals are good conductors of heat, we use utensils made of metals for cooking. In solids, heat transfer takes place mainly through the process of conduction. If we use a strip made of a material like wood or glass in place of a metal strip to perform Activity 7.1, the pins will not fall. Can you think of the reason for this based on our learning from the chapter The World of Metals and Non-Metals ? Materials such as glass and wood do not allow heat to pass through them easily and are poor conductors (insulators) of heat. Clay and porcelain are also poor conductors of heat that is why tea or coffee kept in such cups stays hot longer. List some materials around you and classify them as good or poor conductors of heat in Table 7.2. Table 7.2: List of good or poor conductors of heat Heat Transfer in Nature Now, I know, why we generally use metal utensils for cooking, whereas we prefer clay and porcelain cups for drinking tea or coffee. S.No. Material Good or Poor conductor of heat 1. Steel Good conductor 2. Wood 3. Does your list include air? If it is there on the list, where have you placed it? You must have experienced that during winters, we prefer wearing woollen clothes to keep ourselves warm. Chapter 7.indd 91 4/3/2025 4:53:57 PM Woollen fabric traps air in its pores and as air is a poor conductor of heat, it reduces heat flow from our bodies to our surroundings. As a result, we feel warm. Similarly, air trapped between the layers of clothing acts as a poor conductor of heat and keeps us warm. The presence of air between two thin blankets is the reason why we prefer Fig. 7.2: Air trapped between two thin blankets them over one thick blanket to keep acts as an insulator us