12 1 0| [=] 0962CHO2 CHAPTER 2 POLYNOMIALS ee 2.1 Introduction You have studied algebraic expressions, their addition, subtraction, multiplication and division in earlier classes. You also have studied how to factorise some algebraic expressions. You may recall the algebraic identities : (x + yP =x + Ixy + y (x y) =x 2xy + y and wr-y=(x+y)a-y) and their use in factorisation. In this chapter, we shall start our study with a particular type of algebraic expression, called polynomial, and the terminology related to it. We shall also study the Remainder Theorem and Factor Theorem and their use in the factorisation of polynomials. In addition to the above, we shall study some more algebraic identities and their use in factorisation and in evaluating some given expressions. 2.2 Polynomials in One Variable Let us begin by recalling that a variable is denoted by a symbol that can take any real . : 1 value. We use the letters x, y, z, etc. to denote variables. Notice that 2x, 3x, x, 5% are algebraic expressions. All these expressions are of the form (a constant) x x. Now suppose we want to write an expression which is (a constant) x (a variable) and we do not know what the constant is. In such cases, we write the constant as a, b, c, etc. So the expression will be ax, say. However, there is a difference between a letter denoting a constant and a letter denoting a variable. The values of the constants remain the same throughout a particular situation, that is, the values of the constants do not change in a given problem, but the value of a variable can keep changing. Reprint 2025-26 26 MATHEMATICS Now, consider a square of side 3 units (see Fig. 2.1). 3 What is its perimeter? You know that the perimeter of a square is the sum of the lengths of its four sides. Here, each side is 3 units. So, its perimeter is 4 x 3, 1.e., 12 units. What will be the 3 3 perimeter if each side of the square is 10 units? The perimeter is 4 x 10, i.e., 40 units. In case the length of each side is x 3 units (see Fig. 2.2), the perimeter is given by 4x units. So, as Fig. 2.1 the length of the side varies, the perimeter varies. Can you find the area of the square PQRS? It is x X x =x? square units. x* is an algebraic expression. Youare * R also familiar with other algebraic expressions like 2x, x? + 2x, x3 x7 + 4x + 7. Note that, all the algebraic expressions we have considered so far have only whole numbers as the exponents of the variable. Expressions of this form are called polynomials in one variable. Inthe examples P Y Q above, the variable is x. For instance, x7> x? + 4x +7 isa polynomial in x. Similarly, 3y? + 5y is a polynomial in the variable y and +