Chapter 11.indd 207

1 Nature s Treasures

School vacations are always fun for Bhoomi and Surya. This
vacation, they visit their Ajji (grandmother). Ajji lives ina
village on the edge of a forest in the Western Ghats. The air
in the village is fresh and cooler than in the city. They can
see beautiful hills, streams, and many interesting plants,
animals and birds around them.

One afternoon, Bhoomi and Surya ask Ajji to tell them
more about the place. Ajji says, Children, do you know that
this place has several treasures of nature that enrich our
lives? The pure air is refreshing and the soil is so fertile
that it supports a variety of living beings. Moreover, this
place gets plenty of sunlight which is useful in many ways.
Different varieties of trees provide food and shelter to
animals including various birds and insects. Can you think
of more such treasures of nature? 

A village
Reprint 2025-26

O677CHI1

10/4/2024 3:03:50 PM

Bhoomi replies, Ajji,; we use water for drinking and
growing vegetables. Ajji says, Yes. We need these treasures
for our survival and for making our lives more comfortable.
Without these treasures of nature, any form of life on Earth
is not possible. We all are a part of nature.

Ajji explains the importance of air around us and how it
is essential for our survival. Let us find out more about air.

es || | iT

One morning, Bhoomi and Surya see
Ajji performing some _ breathing
exercises. Ajji asks them to join her.
She says, I am taking deep breaths
in, and letting them out. This helps
in getting more fresh air in the
lungs to stay healthy. Bhoomi and
Surya sit with Ajji and start taking
deep breaths.

Let us also perform a breathing
exercise.

oe . Breathing exercise
Activity 11.1: Let us experience $s

@ Take a deep breath in, and then breathe out slowly.

@ Take a deeper breath in again.

 Hold your breath for as long as you can and then
breathe out slowly.

 @ How long can you hold your breath?

 @ How do you feel when you hold your breath?

From this activity, we find that it is difficult to
A hold our breath for a long time. The air which

we breathe in has oxygen. Our body needs
oxygen to perform its functions. When we hold
our breath for a long time, the body does not get
enough oxygen to perform its functions. Thus,
we need oxygen for our survival. Similarly,
most of the living beings also need oxygen for
their survival.

Caution
Do not hold your
breath for so long
that you start feeling
uncomfortable.

Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd 208 10/4/2024 3:03:52 PM

Chapter 11.indd 209

oe

Do you
know?

The air which surrounds the Earth is a mixture of gases.
Can you name some gases which are present in the air? Air
contains nitrogen, oxygen, argon, carbon dioxide and other
gases in small quantities. Fig. 11.1 gives the composition of air
in percentage. Notice that in Fig. 11.1 there are 100 squares.
Out of 100 squares, 78 are occupied by nitrogen,
21 are occupied by oxygen, and 1 by argon, carbon
dioxide and other gases.

More to
know!

Composition of air

|| Nitrogen (78%)

|| Oxygen (21%)

|| Argon, carbon dioxide
ooo ctr ns

Fig. 11.1: Composition of air

You notice the presence of air when the leaves of a tree
rustle, the clothes hanging on a clothes line sway, or the pages
of an open book begin to flutter once a fan is switched on.

Moving air is called wind. Sometimes it blows fast, for
example, during a storm, and sometimes it blows gently as a
breeze. You must have played with a firki (paper pinwheel)
many times. Let us make a firki by performing Activity 11.2.

Reprint 2025-26

Nature s Treasures
10/4/2024 3:04:19 PM

Activity 11.2: Let us make and decorate 
@ Take a square paper of size 15 cm x 15 cm, a pair of
scissors, an all-pin and a soft stick.

 Follow the instructions shown in Fig. 11.2 to make a
firki. =

[G2]. a.

Fig. 11.2: Firki

Now, you can hold the firki in your hand and run.
 You can also blow air on it. What do you observe?
Does the firkirotate? When you move it a little back
and forth, the firki rotates. What makes a firki
rotate? It is the wind that makes a firki rotate.
The working of a windmill is similar to that
of a firki. Wind rotates the wings of a windmill.
Windmills can be used to run flour mills, to pull
up water from a well, or to generate electricity.
In India, there are many windmill farms.
A windmill farm is an area that has a large
number of windmills which use the energy of
the wind to generate electricity (Fig. 11.3).

Fig 11.3: A windmill farm

Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd 210 10/4/2024 3:04:34 PM

Chapter 11.indd 211

We have learnt that air is very important for us. Water too
is essential and precious for us. How do you feel when you
cannot get water to drink, especially when you are thirsty?
Let us find out more about water.

11.2 Water

Bhoomi and Surya help Ajji in
filling the troughs of water for
the cows. They also help her in
watering plants such as vegetables
and medicinal herbs in the garden.
Ajji teaches them how to water the
plants so that every drop is used
and none of it goes waste.

Can you think of some more
uses of water in your daily life?
Write down your responses in the

blank bubble. Watering the plants

We need
water for
drinking.

Pe cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccces a

Pe ccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccce

We need water for many daily activities, such as drinking,
cooking, bathing, washing and cleaning. It is also used for
growing crops and for industrial purposes. Where do we get
water from? Make a list of the different sources of water.

Water covers about two-thirds of the Earth s surface.
Most of the water is found in oceans and seas. However,
this water is saline or salty. This saline water is not fit for
domestic, agricultural and industrial use. For all these
activities, we need freshwater, which is present in the form
of ice sheets or snow, rivers or lakes on the surface of the
Earth, and underground. Freshwater present in ice sheets

Reprint 2025-26

Nature s Treasures
10/4/2024 3:04:35 PM

and snow, or underground water is difficult to access. A very
small fraction of the freshwater present in ponds, rivers,
lakes and wells is easily accessible. Water is precious, that is
why Ajji guides them to use it with care.

Do you feel that water is being used efficiently in our
daily activities? Have you observed water being wasted in
your daily activities? Let us find out activities where water
is wasted and how this wastage can be reduced.

Activity 11.3: Let us find OUt sum

Fill the Column II and Column III in Table 11.1.

Table 11.1: Wastage of water in your daily activities
Column I Column II Column III

Howis water Suggest ways to reduce

Activit
y wasted? wastage of water.

1. Hand washing
2. Washing clothes
3. Washing utensils
4. Taking shower
5. Cooking

6. Gardening

7. Brushing teeth

What conclusion can you draw from the information
you gathered in the table? What can you and your family
do to reduce this wastage of water? There are many ways
to reduce wastage of water. For example, turning off taps
when not in use and fixing water leakages. Recycling water
and water harvesting also help in saving water.

Our country is blessed with numerous rivers, streams
and lakes. Have you ever noticed plastic bags and wrappers
floating on the surface of water? We pollute freshwater

Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd 212 10/4/2024 3:04:35 PM

Chapter 11.indd 213

sources by throwing trash (waste materials) in them. Waste
from homes and industries pollute our water sources when
it is dumped into them. Identify other human activities that
lead to water pollution. Discuss with your friends in the class
what you can do to reduce water pollution. Polluted water is
not fit for consumption by living beings.

As freshwater sources are limited, there is a shortage of
water in many parts of India. At some places, people have to
walk long distances to fetch drinking water. Everyone does
not have the same kind of access to water. It is important
for us to conserve water and use it judiciously. We must
also prevent it from being polluted so that water remains fit
for consumption by all living beings. In what ways can you
conserve water?

Water harvesting is one of the
methods for conserving water. In many
buildings, rainwater is_ collected
and stored in large quantities for
later use. This is called rainwater
harvesting (Fig. 11.4a). Do you know
that rainwater is also harvested in
many homes, residential societies or
schools? It is an age-old practice in
India.

For example, stepwells (Fig. 11.4b),
commonly known as Bawadi in
Rajasthan and Vav in Gujarat are
built for water harvesting as a
response to the scarcity of water in
these regions. These stepwells have
a unique system of water harvesting.
They store not only rainwater but
also water seeping from nearby
lakes, ponds and rivers. The walls of
the trenches (long deep holes dug in
the ground) are lined with blocks of
stones that allow seepage of water.
Find traditional water harvesting
practices in your locality. Discuss
with your teachers and parents to
learn more about it.

Reprint 2025-26

Fig. 11.4 (b): Bawadi (Toorji ka Jhatra,
Jodhpur in Rajasthan)

Nature s Treasures

10/4/2024 3:04:36 PM

Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6

Chapter 11.indd 214

J

Do you

know?

In the chapter A Journey through States of Water , we
have learnt about the water cycle, where the Sun plays an
important role in the evaporation of water. Have you ever
observed your mother or grandmother cut raw mangoes
and expose them to the hot sun for several days to dry? Let
us explore more about energy from the Sun.

11.3 Energy from the Sun

On a sunny day, Bhoomi and Surya are helping Ajji dry
chillies in the Sun. Ajji says, We use the heat from the Sun
to dry it. We can use dried chillies when fresh ones are not
available. I will give you some to take home. Do you know
that the Sun is the main source of energy on Earth? All plants
and animals are dependent on it. 

We use heat and light from the Sun for various purposes.
What are some of the activities for which we need heat and
light? Bhoomi draws some pictures to show the uses of heat
and light from the Sun. Help her by adding more examples.
Draw the pictures and write their descriptions in the
space provided.

Plants make food Drying of clothes -------------- 9 -------------- 0 ------------One afternoon, Bhoomi and Surya pass by the field near
Ajj s house, where they see a cow grazing the grass. They
talk about the Sun being the main source of energy. Read
the conversation carefully and answer.

Reprint 2025-26

10/4/2024 3:04:50 PM

Look at this

cow. It is No, I think
grass and
i energy from
gene one ey the Sun.

from it.

cow is eating
grass. Grass leaves
need sunlight to grow. So,
the main source of energy
is the Sun. This way the
cow gets energy from
the Sun.

The
cow is standing
in the Sun. But it
does not mean that it
is getting energy from
the Sun.

According to you,
whose statement
is correct and

Sunlight helps plants prepare food. The Sun also provides
all the living beings on Earth with heat and light. It is their
main source of energy.

Have you seen solar panels on
rooftops, on top of street lights or
on traffic signals? The solar panels
capture the Sun s energy and
produce electricity. Energy from
the Sun can also be directly used
for cooking in a solar cooker or
for heating water in a solar water
heater. Uses of solar energy

Nature s Treasures
Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd 215 10/4/2024 3:05:04 PM

What will happen if the Sun

is not visible for a few days?

1. We may have to depend
on artificial lighting
during day time also.

ee = | | 4 Forests

Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6

Chapter 11.indd 216

One cannot imagine life on
Earth without the Sun. The Sun is
the main source of energy on the
Earth. Plants get energy from the
Sun and produce food. Animals eat
plants and grow. We get food from
both plants and animals. This cycle
on Earth is possible due to the Sun.
So, we all are dependent on the
Sun as the main source of energy.
Where do we find a large variety of
plants or animals? Let us explore.

One morning, Ajji takes Bhoomi and Surya for a walk in
the forest. They find a variety of herbs, shrubs and trees in
the forest. Ajji explains, Forests are large areas with dense
growth of various types of plants. On the way, they collect
some nellikai (Kannada term for Indian gooseberries)
that have fallen on the ground. Ajji tells them, We have a
tradition in the village not to pluck fruits from the trees;
they are left for animals and birds to eat. 

A forest

Reprint 2025-26

10/4/2024 3:05:04 PM

Chapter 11.indd 217

Discuss with your friends and make a list of at least five
products that we get from forests.

Forests are a natural home for many wild animals,
including birds and insects. Forests provide food and shelter
to them. In nature, every animal depends on other life forms
for survival. The diversity of life forms ensures food for every
living being. However, over the years, the forest cover has
been decreasing, mainly due to human activities like large
scale cutting of trees. It takes many years to grow a new
forest or restore lost forests. Therefore, we must preserve
and use forests responsibly so that they get enough time
to regenerate.

Van Mahotsav is a week
long event celebrated across What are the conseq

the country during the month cutting a large forest area? Make

of July. It is a forest festival story Ny le play,
m that

during which new plants rite sory oc

and trees are planted, and See ppen
awareness about respecting Li e conti ut down
forests is raised. The aim of the ees ino we ests.

event is to increase the green

cover. You too can plan a Van

Mahotsav in your community.

Reprint 2025-26

of

oD

Nature s Treasures
10/4/2024 3:05:25 PM

During their walk in the forests, Bhoomi and Surya notice
that there are a lot of leaves on the ground and the soil feels
damp. Ajji explains, The roots of plants hold on to the soil
and prevent it from being washed away. The leaves that
fall from the trees decay and enrich the soil with nutrients.
This soil is used by new plants and trees to grow. This is an
example of recycling in nature. Let us investigate the soil in
more detail.

es |] 5 Soil, Rocks and Minerals

Bhoomi, Surya and Ajji come back
home from the forest. Bhoomi
and Surya help Ajji in preparing
the soil in the garden for planting
some vegetables (Fig. 11.5). Ajji
asks them to dig the soil gently
and loosen the lumps. You have
already learnt in the chapter
 Living Creatures: Exploring their
Characteristics that for plants
Fig. 11.5: Soil preparation for to grow, the space between the
planting vegetables soil particles not only provides
sufficient air but also space for the
roots to grow easily. Bhoomi and Surya could see small
pebbles, the roots of plants and a few earthworms too in the
soil. Do you realise that earthworms are natural agents that
help in turning and loosening the soil?

While Bhoomi and Surya help Ajji, let us do our own

experiment by performing Activity 11.4.

Activity.11.4: Let usinvestigate $e

@ Collect samples of soils from
A different areas around your home
Caution and school.

aint ro wash you nas @ Guess what could be there in
oroughly after touching the . .
soil collected from different different soils.

places. vomenmes soil that has @ Observe carefully each soil sample
garbage carries germs .
that may be harmful to us. and note its colour.
Touch each soil sample and feel its
texture.

Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd 218 10/4/2024 3:05:26 PM

@ Observe the soil samples with your naked eye. If you
have a magnifying lens, look at the soil through it.

 Record your observations in Table 11.2.

Table 11.2: Soil samples

Location from What I Observation of soil with Observation

which soil guessed naked eye including its of soil with

sample was about the colour and texture magnifying
collected soil? lens

Soil from a farm
after ploughing

@ Is there any difference between your guess and what
you can actually observe when you look closely?

 Do you see any differences in the soil samples taken
from different places?

 Do you see differences in what you are able to observe
with your naked eye and what you can observe with a
magnifying lens?

There are many things in the soil, such as sand, insects
and worms. There may be many small organisms that we
cannot see with our naked eyes. Plants and animals also
become part of the soil as they decompose and decay. The
soil samples collected from different
places may be of different colours
because they may contain different
materials.

Have you ever wondered how
soil is formed? Soil is formed by the
disintegration (breaking apart) of
rocks by actions of the Sun, water
and living organisms over a long
time (thousands of years). There
are different types of soils. Some
are good for growing certain types of Ploughing

Nature s Treasures
Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd 219 10/7/2024 9:57:12 AM

plants while some are good for making bricks for buildings.
Forests have a variety of soils. Soil is a precious treasure
that supports biodiversity.

You may have seen rocks in your surroundings. Rocks
are used in the construction of houses, buildings, temples,
roads, dams and table tops. Some rocks, like slate, are used
for roofing (Fig. 11.6) and laterite can be used as a building
material, like bricks (Fig. 11.7). Some of the important rocks
are granite, sandstone and marble. Human beings have been
using rocks to make tools such as hand axes (Fig. 11.8a) and
arrowheads (Fig. 11.8b) since thousands of years.

Fig. 11.7: Laterite rocks used as bricks

Fig. 11.8 (b): Arrowheads made from stone

What are rocks made up of?
They are made up of minerals.
Important metals, such as
aluminium, gold, copper
and iron are extracted from
minerals. Minerals are used in
the manufacturing ofairplanes,
cars, jewellery, cosmetics, and

Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6

Mining of marble

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd 220 10/4/2024 3:05:28 PM

electrical and electronic equipment. For example, the basic
mobile phones that we use contain about a dozen minerals
like gold, silver, copper, cobalt, etc.

Naturally occurring gold Some minerals found in nature

Rocks play a vital role in our lives. It takes thousands to
millions of years to form rocks. Therefore, it is important to
conserve and use them responsibly. Do you know how rocks
and minerals are transported from one location to another?
Most vehicles that we use for transportation use fossil fuels.
Let us explore more about fossil fuels.

mee | 1.6 Fossil Fuels

The reason is
that they use
different types
of fuels. For
example, petrol
and diesel.

Surya, why do
different types
of vehicles go
to different
filling stations?

Nature s Treasures

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd 221 10/4/2024 3:05:29 PM

Let us explore more about it by performing Activity 11.5.

Activity 11.5: Let us conduct a survey = es

 Conduct a survey of vehicles in your neighbourhood.

@ Which types of vehicles are there? What types of fuels
do they use?

 Record the information that you collect in Table 11.3.

Table 11.3: Types of vehicles and fuels used

Type of vehicle Type of fuel used

What are the most common types of fuels used? Petrol
and diesel are the two most widely used fuels for vehicles.
Petrol, diesel and kerosene are obtained from petroleum.
Petroleum along with natural gas and coal are commonly
called fossil fuels. They are formed essentially from the
remains of microorganisms and plants that got buried deep
inside the earth, and were converted to petroleum, natural
gas and coal. It takes millions of years for these fuels to form.

Natural gas is used for cooking and generating electricity.
Nowadays, it is also used in the form of Compressed Natural
Gas (CNG) as a fuel for vehicles. It is a cleaner fuel than
petrol or diesel. Coal is mainly used for the production of
electricity. It is found in several parts of India. Find out the
major coal-producing states and mark them in a map of
India.

J

Do you
know?

Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd 222 10/4/2024 3:05:43 PM

Coal Petrol Natural gas

Fossil fuels are found in limited quantities. Hence, we
will soon run out of fossil fuels if we continue to use them in
the manner that we currently do. To avoid such a situation,
we need to explore alternate sources of energy. When fossil
fuels are burnt, smoke and carbon dioxide gas are produced
which pollutes the air. Over-dependence on fossil fuels for
transportation and as domestic fuels has resulted in large
scale air pollution.

Let us do our bit to conserve the fossil fuels by 
@ Walking or cycling to nearby places.

@ Using public transport.

Suggest some more ways.

mum | 1.7 Natural Resources: Renewable and
Non-renewable

Nature s treasures fulfill our needs. They are essential
resources to sustain all life forms on the Earth. For example,
we get heat and light from the Sun, water from rivers, and
food from plants and animals. These resources which we
get from nature are called natural resources. We also
use natural resources to make many useful things for
our convenience. For example, electric bulbs, furniture,
solar panels, bicycles, etc., make our lives comfortable.
All such resources created by human beings are called
human-made resources.

You have learnt about various natural resources, such
as air, water, energy from the Sun, forests, soil, rocks,
minerals and fossil fuels. Some of these natural resources

Nature s Treasures

 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd 223 10/4/2024 3:05:43 PM

Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6

Chapter 11.indd 224

get replenished through natural processes over a period
of time. If you remember, Ajji told Bhoomi and Surya that
they could collect only those nellikai that had fallen on the
ground. This makes sure that there would be enough fruits
for other animals and birds. The seeds from the droppings of
animals and birds would enable new trees to grow, though
it would take some years before we get fruits from these
new trees. Thus, resources which get renewed, replenished
or restored within a reasonable period of time are called
renewable resources. Air, water and forest are some of the
examples of renewable natural resources. Nature renews
them. We should use our natural resources judiciously.

On the other hand, fossil fuels take millions of years to
form. They are found in limited quantities and once used,
they get exhausted. They are not produced or replenished
within a reasonable period oftime. These resources are called
non-renewable resources. Examples of non-renewable
natural resources are minerals, soil, rocks, coal, petroleum
and natural gas.

11.8 Resources We Use

It is time for Bhoomi and Surya to go back home after a
wonderful holiday at their Ajji s home. Their Amma (mother)
comes to pick them up. Bhoomi and Surya show her the
vegetable plants that have started to grow in the garden and
the dried chillies given by Ajji to take home.

They notice changes in the colour of the skyline and the
smell of the air once they reach the city. There are very few
trees. The air does not smell as good as the air at Ajji s place.
They can smell smoke from the vehicles. The air is polluted.
Amma says, Yes. When we use fossil fuels in our vehicles,
smoke is generated. Now, there are vehicles which cause
less pollution. For example, there are electric vehicles that
do not release any smoke. So, people are making an effort to
create alternatives. 

Can you list some alternatives for reducing air pollution?

Reprint 2025-26

10/4/2024 3:05:43 PM

We use many natural resources in our everyday life.
Let us identify some resources that we use by performing
Activity 11.6.

Activity 11.6: Let us make a list of natural
resources used OO ee C ES

Make a list of activities you do in your daily life and write
down the natural resources used directly or indirectly for
each activity. In Table 11.4, some items are already filled in.
Using them as a guide, fill the remaining blank rows.

Table 11.4: Natural resources used

Activity Natural resource
Washing clothes Water
Making clay toys

Collecting firewood
Making kites

Having breakfast

How many natural resources did you list? Compare your
list with that of your friend.

You and your friends have listed many natural resources
that we use everyday. These resources are air, water, soil, and
food from plants and animals. We get these resources from
nature andalso make things using them for our consumption.
Therefore, we must conserve our natural resources and use
them responsibly without wasting them. This way, we can
continue to fulfill our present needs while also saving for
the future, without harming the environment.

 Earth provides enough to satisfy every man s need but not
for every man s greed. 

Nature s Treasures

 M. K. Gandhi

 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd 225 10/4/2024 3:05:44 PM

Classify - |

Explore

Investigate [

Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6

Chapter 11.indd 226

Sd

Resources required for our survival are provided by nature.
Resources provided by nature are called natural resources.

Some important natural resources are air, water, energy
from the Sun, forests, soil, rocks, minerals and fossil fuels.

Resources created by human beings to meet their needs are
called human-made resources.

Natural resources can be classified as renewable resources
and non-renewable resources.

Resources that get renewed, replenished or restored by
natural processes within a reasonable period are called
renewable resources.

Resources that are in limited quantities and do not
get replenished within a reasonable period are called
non-renewable resources.

All living beings, including humans, depend on natural
resources for their survival so we should use them
judiciously.

Reprint 2025-26

Experience

10/4/2024 3:05:49 PM

Let us enhance our learning

1. Fig. 11.9 shows items related to natural resources. Match
them with their jumbled up names. Make another table and
write the names of these resources. Classify these resources
as renewable or non-renewable.

Item Jumbled up name

Fig. 11.9: Natural resources

2. State whether the following statements are True [T] or
False [F]. If False, correct them.
(i) Nature has all the resources to meet human needs. [ ]
(ii) Machines are a resource found in nature. [ ]
(iii) Natural gas is a non-renewable resource. [ ]
(iv) Air is a renewable resource. [ ]

Nature s Treasures

 

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 11.indd 227 10/4/2024 3:05:55 PM

Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6

Chapter 11.indd 228

3.

10.

11.

12.

Fill in the blanks using the most appropriate option 

(i) A fuel that is commonly used in two wheelers like
scooters or bikes is.........

(a) Kerosene
(b) Petrol
(c) Diesel
(d) LPG
(ii) An example of a renewable resource is .................
(a) Coal
(b) Water
(c) Natural gas
(d) Petrol

Classify the following as renewable or non-renewable
resources coal, natural gas, forests and minerals.

Why do we say that petroleum is a non-renewable resource?
It is difficult to regrow forests. Justify this statement.

Make a list of five daily activities in which you use natural
resources. Suggest ways by which you can reduce their use.

List four activities that are possible due to the presence
of air.

How can you contribute towards enhancing the green
cover of your locality? Make a list of actions to be taken.

In the given illustration, we see that food is
being cooked.

Answer the following questions 

(i) What type of energy is being
used for cooking?

(ii) Name one benefit
and one drawback
of using this type of
energy for cooking.

Cutting down trees on a large
scale impacts the quality of the
soil. Why do you think it is so?

Explain two ways in which human activities pollute the air.
Propose one action which can help in reducing air pollution.

Reprint 2025-26

10/4/2024 3:05:55 PM

13.

14.

15.

16.

Chapter 11.indd 229

A family uses solar panels to generate electricity, a gas stove
to cook food and a windmill for pumping water from a well.
What would happen if there were no sunlight for a week?

Fill up the blanks using the following terms 

(fossil fuels, forest, air, petroleum, coal, water and nonrenewable resource)

Natural
Resources

Renewable
Resources

Natural
gas

There is an increasing demand of trees to meet the
requirements of industries and for housing. Therefore, trees
are being felled. Is it justified? Discuss and prepare a brief
report.

Propose a plan to use less water in your school. What steps
would you take to make this plan happen and how would it
help the environment?

Learning further

Rainwater harvesting is an age-old practice in India. Find
out some of the traditional rainwater harvesting techniques
being used in your state or in other parts of the country.

Reprint 2025-26

Nature s Treasures
10/4/2024 3:06:00 PM

Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6

Chapter 11.indd 230

Investigate the effect of air pollution on human health by
interacting with your elders or community members and
identify the main sources of air pollution in your local area.
Based on your findings, suggest two practical steps that your
school or community could take to help reduce air pollution.

Prepare a list of the names and uses of important
minerals and rocks that are used in your village/town/city
for various purposes.

You are an eco-club monitor. Organise a tree plantation
drive in your school with the help of your teacher. List
the steps required for organising this activity. Prepare a
one-page report listing the names of the trees planted along
with their importance.

Reprint 2025-26

10/4/2024 3:06:00 PM