Gas Jar A upside down over the smoke (Fig. 7.7a). e The gas jar should trap the smoke inside. e Turn it over and cover it with a glass plate (Fig. 7.7b). e Hold another Gas Jar B upside down and gently place it over the glass plate covering the Gas Jar A. Be careful while burning An an incense stick. N ETH LF = Chapter 7.indd 105 6/28/2025 2:53:06 PM e Remove the glass plate slowly and ensure that both gas jars are close enough and there is no gap for smoke to escape (Fig. 7.7c). e Observe how the smoke spreads inside the Gas Jar B. (a) Collecting smoke (b) Covering the gas jar with The smoke fills the entire a glass plate space in the Gas Jar B, indicating that gases do not have a fixed volume and tend to occupy the entire available space (Fig. 7.7d). Like liquids, they also acquire the shape of the vessel they are in. This illustrates that the particles in gases move freely in all directions and the interparticle attractions are negligible. As a () Placing the Gas Jar B and (d) Spreading the smoke __ result, gases do not have a fixed removing the glass plate > shape or volume. Fig. 7.7: Smoke spreads freely inside the gas jars . wo . 6 P freely y i In this activity, smoke is used to represent the gaseous state. The tiny particles of smoke suspended in the air are constantly hit by invisible particles of gases, and their movement helps us observe the motion of gas particles. This activity can also be demonstrated by using iodine vapour instead of smoke from incense sticks. Iodine vapour can be obtained by placing some solid iodine in a closed gas jar for some time, as shown in Fig. 7.8. Both liquids and gases flow and do not retain a fixed shape. These properties distinguish them from solids and classify them as fluids. Vapours of iodine can cause irritation. 4 Be careful while using solid iodine. LW | Ww Fig. 7.8: Iodine vapour spread freely inside the gas jar ohT er" Textbook of Science for Grade 8) Yn UM ee DY Chapter 7.indd 106 6/28/2025 2:53:11 PM Chapter 7.indd 107 SEY MEM BU TNUSI,A chaper 7 Particulate Nature of water) 107 7.3 How Does the Interparticle Spacing Differ in the Three States of Matter? What role does the interparticle spacing play in determining the properties of each state (solid, liquid, and gas)? Let us perform the following activities to find answers to these questions. | Activity 7.6: Let us experiment e Take a syringe without a needle. Pull the plunger of the syringe outwards in a fully extended position (Fig. 7.9a). e Place your thumb over the open end of the syringe to prevent the air present inside the syringe from escaping (Fig. 7.9b). e Push the plunger slowly and steadily inward (Fig. 7.9c). <_ Syringe =. wWithouta needle (a) Pulling the (b) Placing thumb