ordinary microscope. But, where did the sugar go? The tiny sugar particles separate and occupy the available spaces between the water particles. These spaces between the particles are known as interparticle spaces. Chalk and sugar can both be broken down into their constituent particles. But how are the constituent particles held together to form the solid pieces we see? 7.2 What Decides Different States of Matter? The constituent particles of matter are held together through forces which are attractive in nature. These forces are called interparticle attractions. The strength of these attractions depends on the nature of the substance and the interparticle distance. Even a slight increase in the distance decreases the interparticle forces drastically. The strength of these forces ultimately decides the physical state of the substances. Our scientific heritage Do you know that since ancient times, people have been thinking about how far things could be broken down and what is matter made up of? Acharya Kanad, an ancient Indian philosopher, first spoke about the idea of a Parmanu (atom). He believed that matter is made up of tiny, indivisible eternal particles called Parmanu. This idea was written in his work called Vaisheshika Sutras. 6/28/2025 2:52:56 PM Let us explore how these attractions vary in different states. 7.2.1 Solid state How are constituent particles held together in solids? | Activity 7.3 : Let us find out e Collect afew solid objects, such as a piece ee of iron or an iron nail, a piece of rock salt, * is a stone, a piece of wood, a key, and a piece of aluminium (Fig. 7.3). Tron nail e Observe their shapes and sizes. e Try hammering them. e In which of the above six objects do you think particles are strongly held together? Wooden block Fig. 7.3: Some solid objects M You must have noticed that all these objects are solids. They have a definite shape and volume. This is due to the fact that in solids, the particles are tightly packed and the interparticle attractions are very strong. These strong forces of attraction hold the particles in fixed positions, preventing them from moving freely (Fig. 7.4a). The particles can only move to and fro about their In the solid state, | positions (vibrate or oscillate) but cannot move is there any way | past each other. to move these When solids are heated, their particles vibrate particles apart? more vigorously (Fig. 7.4b). A stage is reached when these vibrations become so vigorous that the particles start leaving their position. The interparticle forces of attraction get weakened and the solid gets converted into the liquid state (Fig. 7.4c). The temperature at which this happens is the melting point of the solid. elle) CIG'IGIG'iG'e SidiSid (a) Solid (b) Particles with (c) Liquid increased vibrations Fig. 7.4: Magnified schematic pictures of melting of a solid uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8) IYI VEA BY Chapter 7.indd 102 6/28/2025 2:53:00 PM SEY MEM BU TNUSI,A chaper 7 Particulate Nature of water)