insoluble solids, like sand and stone pieces. What do you observe in each case? Do the sand particles dissolve? Does the volume of water in Fig. 7.11: Magnified schematic _ the vessel change after mixing, and why? picture of distribution of sugar particles in water Sugar and sand are both solids. Why does sugar dissolve in water but sand does not? uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8) IYI VEA BY Chapter 7.indd 108 6/28/2025 2:53:13 PM SEY MEM BU TNUSI,A chaper 7 Particulate Nature of water) Sand is a solid that does not dissolve in water. When added to water, the sand particles settle down and occupy some space in the container, causing the total volume to increase. What do youthinkaboutthe interparticle spacing in solids? You learnt earlier that the constituent particles in solids are held together by strong forces of attraction. So, these particles do (b) Liquid not move from one place to another and are closely packed. However, despite close packing, some space is left between the particles as shown in Fig. 7.12a. You might assume that the space between particles is filled with air, but this is not the case. They contain nothing at all. Fig. 7.12 summarises () Gas the packing of particles and the interparticle 8: 7.12: Magnified schematic pictures of spacing in the three states of matter. interparticle sp of matter he three states A step further Often, we use the term particle in different contexts. The meaning of this term changes with the context. For example, while talking about air pollution, the term Suspended Particulate Matter (SPM) is used. This term refers to the tiny dust particles suspended in air and not the constituent particles of matter which are extremely small as compared to the dust particles. In fact, even these tiny dust particles are also made up of a very large number of constituent particles, i.e, atoms and molecules. 7.4 How Particles Move in Different States of Matter? Let us find out about the movement of particles in the three states of matter. | Activity 7.8: Let us experiment e Take a glass tumbler containing VE AIS: water and put a few grains of Do not touch potassium permanganate ; potassium permanganate into it. | with your hands. Use aspoon ora spatula {) (| e What do you observe? to handle it. Wry | Chapter 7.indd 109 6/28/2025 2:53:16 PM e Initially, you will see some streaks of > __Glass C p} pink colour spreading out from the grain e With the passage of time, the entire bulk of water will acquire a uniform pink colour P ; (Fig. 7.13b). otassium e Do you know why this happens? = s permanganate This happens because the water particles (a) (b) are in constant motion. First they pull out the Fig. 7.13: (a) Streaks of pink colour particles of potassium permanganate from its spreading out; (b) Uniform pink colour in grain, and later they hit these particles so that Slass tumbler they get