... The particulate nature of matter plays a crucial role in many everyday processes. For example, when we wash clothes stained with oil using soap, numerous soap particles surround the oil particles on the fabric. One end of the soap particle attaches to the oil, and the other mixes with water, thus helping lift the oil off Pig. 7.15: P <a of soap and wash it away (Fig. 7.15). help in cleaning 6/28/2025 2:53:24 PM Based on our learnings from the chapter, we can say that matter is made up of small particles which are held together by the force of attraction. The strength of attractive forces between particles depends on the distance between them, which in turn depends on their thermal (heat) energy. Thus, it is the thermal energy of the particles that determines the physical state of matter. In the solid state, the thermal energy of particles is low, so they remain close to each other and experience strong interparticle attractive forces. This restricts their motion to only small vibrations. At the melting point, the thermal energy is used to overcome the attractive forces between particles, allowing the solid to change into a liquid. At this stage, the particles can move away from their fixed positions. The interparticle distance increases slightly, reducing the strength of the attractive forces to a level that allows the particles to move around, though still within a limited space. In the gaseous state, the particles have enough energy to overcome the forces of attraction between them and move freely in all directions. You will learn more about these particles that constitute matter in higher grades. Let us wrap up! Particle nature of the three states of matter- States of Matter Interparticle spacing Interparticle spacing little Interparticle spacing minimum more than in solids maximum Packing of particles Particles are a little are closely packed loosely packed than in solids Particles are free Interparticle attraction is minimum (negligible) Interparticle attraction Interparticle attraction is is maximum slightly weaker than in solids Movement of particles Movement of particles Movement of particles in negligible (only vibrations) restricted to limited space all the available space uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8) IYI VEA BY Chapter 7.indd 112 6/28/2025 2:53:25 PM Keep the curiosity alive Chapter 7.indd 113 SEY MEM BU TNUSI,A chaper 7 Particulate Nature of water) 113 Snapshots Matter is composed of extremely small particles. The particles are held together by interparticle forces of attractions. The interparticle attractions are the strongest in solids, a little weake in liquids, and the weakest in gases. Solids havea fixed shape and size due to strong interparticle attraction, minimum interparticle space, and no free movement of the constituent particles. The interparticle attraction in liquids is slightly weaker than in solids, enabling the particles to move within a particular space and providing them with a little more interparticle spacing. Therefore, liquids have a definite volume but no fixed shape. The interparticle attractions in gases are negligible, making their particles completely free to