Se Nel Particulate Nature of Matter Seas Probe and ponder e Why is it possible to pile up stones or sand, but not a liquid like water? e Why does water take the shape of folded hands but lose that shape when released? e We cannot see air, so how does it add weight to an inflated balloon? e Is the air we breathe today the same that existed thousands of years ago? e Share your questions Chapter 7.indd 98 6/28/2025 2:52:43 PM | Chapter 7.indd 99 SEY MEM BU TNUSI,A chaper 7 Particulate Nature of water) 9 You might have collected pebbles and stones from the sand while playing on a riverbank or a beach. Where do these pebbles, stones, and sand come from? In the mountains, rocks gradually break down due to erosion. Rivers flowing through these regions carry along the eroded rock pieces. As the rivers flow, they continue to break down the rocks further into pebbles, stones, sand; and transport large quantities of them to the plains. The bigger rocks are eventually broken down into finer grains of sand and clay. Is this grain the smallest unit of a bigger rock or can these grains of sand and clay be broken down further? Let us find out! 7.1 What Is Matter Composed of? | Activity 7.1: Let us explore e Take a stick of chalk (Fig. 7.1a) and break it into two pieces (Fig. 7.1b). e Continue breaking the chalk till it becomes difficult to break it further by hand. e Grind the small pieces of chalk thus obtained (Fig. 7.1c) using mortar and pestle. e Observe the fine powder of chalk with a magnifying glass (Fig. 7.1d). e What do you observe? e Each tiny grain you observe is still a speck of chalk. Is every speck of this fine chalk powder still composed of the same_ substance, or has it changed into something else on breaking or grinding? Recall Curiosity, Grade 7 chapter Changes Around Fig. 7.1: (QA stick of chalk; (b) The chalk stick broken into two pieces; Us: Physical and Chemical is grinding chalk a physical (c) A piece of chalk change or a chemical change? You learnt that the chalk ground into fine powder; does not change into a new substance on grinding. It is a (d) A close-up view of physical change in which only the size of each speck of chalk powder unaera chalk has reduced further. magnifying glass 6/28/2025 2:52:45 PM These specks of chalk powder can be broken further into smaller particles by further grinding. Let us imagine that this process of grinding continues. Eventually, we would reach a stage where the chalk particles cannot be broken down any further. The tiny units obtained at this stage are the basic building blocks that the chalk was made up of. This means that one whole piece of chalk was made up of a large number of smaller units. These units are called constituent particles of chalk. A constituent