position. The interparticle forces of attraction get weakened and the solid gets converted into the liquid state (Fig. 7.4c). The temperature at which this happens is the melting point of the solid. elle) CIG'IGIG'iG'e SidiSid (a) Solid (b) Particles with (c) Liquid increased vibrations Fig. 7.4: Magnified schematic pictures of melting of a solid uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8) IYI VEA BY Chapter 7.indd 102 6/28/2025 2:53:00 PM SEY MEM BU TNUSI,A chaper 7 Particulate Nature of water) 103 The minimum temperature at which a solid melts to become a liquid at the atmospheric pressure is called its melting point. Generally, in a liquid state, particles are somewhat farther away from each other as compared to those in the solid state (ice is an exception its particles are farther apart than those in water). Some solids have weak interparticle forces of attraction, so their melting points are low. While others have strong attractive forces and have high melting points. Some examples of solids and their melting points are shown in Table 7.1. Table 7.1: Melting points of some solids 1 Ice 0 C tbe Urea x , 133 C 3. Iron 1538 C Solids have a definite volume; what about liquids and gases? Chapter 7.indd 103 6/28/2025 2:53:03 PM 7.2.2 Liquid state | Activity 7.4: Let us try and find out oe 200 mL 4 200 mL == (a) (b) (c) Fig. 7.5: Water placed in containers of different shapes e Take three clean and dry containers of different shapes. Label them A, B, and C (Fig. 7.5). e Mark the 200 mL level in each container using a marker or by pasting a thin strip of paper. e Fill Container A with water up to the marked level. e Carefully transfer the water from Container A to Container B without spilling, and observe the shape and level of the water. e Now, transfer the same water from Container B to Container C, carefully, and observe the shape and its level again. You will notice that the water takes the shape of the container into which it is poured. So, we can say that the liquids do not have a fixed shape and take the shape of the container they are kept in. This happens because the particles of liquids are free to move. In all three containers, the water level remains at 200 mL and no change in volume is observed. Hence, we can say that liquids have a definite volume. However, if a container is not clean, some water may stick to its walls, causing the water level in the next container to be slightly less than 200 mL after pouring. Activity 7.4 shows that the particles of liquids can move freely, but only within a limited space. Therefore, we can infer that liquids have no fixed shape but have a fixed volume. Let us now compare interparticle forces of attraction in liquids and solids. Take some water in a shallow vessel and try to move