the following activities to find answers to these questions. | Activity 7.6: Let us experiment e Take a syringe without a needle. Pull the plunger of the syringe outwards in a fully extended position (Fig. 7.9a). e Place your thumb over the open end of the syringe to prevent the air present inside the syringe from escaping (Fig. 7.9b). e Push the plunger slowly and steadily inward (Fig. 7.9c). <_ Syringe =. wWithouta needle (a) Pulling the (b) Placing thumb (c) Pushing the plunger outwards over the open end plunger inwards Fig. 7.9: The syringe piston in different positions e What do you observe? As you do this, you will notice that the volume of air inside the syringe decreases. What can we say about the behaviour of gas in the syringe? When you compress the air by pushing the plunger, the particles are forced to come closer. This shows that the gas particles have a lot of space between them in their natural state, and this space can be reduced by applying external pressure. If you stop pushing the plunger, the gas particles spread, and the plunger moves back to its original position. Repeat this activity using water and observe. You would observe that water is practically incompressible. Let us perform another activity to learn about the interparticle spaces in liquids. 6/28/2025 2:53:12 PM Activity 7.7: Let us observe e Take a glass vessel, fill it about half with water, and mark the level of water A (Fig. 7.10a). Add two teaspoons of sugar into it. Mark the new water level on the glass vessel B (Fig. 7.10b). Stir the water with a glass rod to dissolve the sugar (Fig. 7.10c). Predict whether the water level will increase or decrease with respect to the mark B. e Mark this water level again as C (Fig. 7.10d). Glass rod B | Dissolving fc Sugar . Sugar t Wary dissolved in water (c) (a) Fig. 7.10: Variation in water levels What difference do you observe in the water levels? You will observe that initially, when sugar is added, the level of water increases, but after dissolution, it may decrease to some extent. Since the volume of the solution is less than the sum of the volumes of water and sugar, it indicates that there is some space between the water particles. The particles of the dissolved substance occupy particle these spaces (Fig. 7.11). Repeat the Activity 7.7 with some other soluble Water solids, such as common salt or glucose, and particle insoluble solids, like sand and stone pieces. What do you observe in each case? Do the sand particles dissolve? Does the volume of water in Fig. 7.11: Magnified schematic _ the vessel change after mixing, and why? picture of distribution of sugar particles in water Sugar and sand are both solids. Why does sugar dissolve in water but sand does not? uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8) IYI VEA BY Chapter 7.indd 108 6/28/2025 2:53:13 PM SEY MEM BU