broken further into smaller particles by further grinding. Let us imagine that this process of grinding continues. Eventually, we would reach a stage where the chalk particles cannot be broken down any further. The tiny units obtained at this stage are the basic building blocks that the chalk was made up of. This means that one whole piece of chalk was made up of a large number of smaller units. These units are called constituent particles of chalk. A constituent particle is the basic unit that makes up a larger piece of a substance or material. Just like chalk, the grains of sand and clay are not the smallest units of bigger rocks. These are also made up of a large number of their constituent particles. Let us explore further! Recall the dissolution of sugar into water to form a solution. What happens to sugar when it is dissolved in water? | Activity 7.2: Let us perform - e Fill a glass tumbler with Safety first drinking water. e Put two teaspoons of sugar into it. Are the units of chalk obtained in this manner considered the smallest units of chalk? Perform the _ activity under the , supervision of a teacher or an adult. YW. ) Never eat or drink anything unless | e Do not stir the water. Taste a * DY \asked to. small spoonful of water from the top layer of the glass. Does the water taste sweet? e Now, stir the water until the sugar dissolves completely (Fig. 7.2). e Again taste a spoonful of water from the top layer. What difference in taste do you notice? Does it taste sweet? Since the top layer of water tastes sweet after dissolving sugar, it must be present in the solution. Do you observe any sugar particles in the solution? Sugar particles can no longer be observed but their presence can be sensed by taste. When sugar dissolves in water, it breaks up into its constituent particles which cannot Fig. 7.2: Dissolving be broken down further. Each tiny grain of sugar is made up sugar in water of millions and millions of such constituent particles. uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8) IYI VEA BY Chapter 7.indd 100 6/28/2025 2:52:49 PM Chapter 7.indd 101 SEY MEM BU TNUSI,A chaper 7 Particulate Nature of water) 101 Activities 7.1 and 7.2 support the idea that matter is composed of a large number of extremely small particles. These particles are so small that they cannot be seen even through an ordinary microscope. But, where did the sugar go? The tiny sugar particles separate and occupy the available spaces between the water particles. These spaces between the particles are known as interparticle spaces. Chalk and sugar can both be broken down into their constituent particles. But how are the constituent particles held together to form the solid pieces we see? 7.2 What Decides Different States of Matter? The constituent particles of matter are held together through forces which are attractive in