the passage of time, the entire bulk of water will acquire a uniform pink colour P ; (Fig. 7.13b). otassium e Do you know why this happens? = s permanganate This happens because the water particles (a) (b) are in constant motion. First they pull out the Fig. 7.13: (a) Streaks of pink colour particles of potassium permanganate from its spreading out; (b) Uniform pink colour in grain, and later they hit these particles so that Slass tumbler they get spread throughout the liquid. In the case of many substances, the constituent particles are held together strongly that the water particles are unable to pull these out. Such substances, like sand, are insoluble in water. Think like a scientist Try it yourself! Take three clean glass tumblers. Pour hot water in one of them, water at room temperature in the second and ice-cold water in the third. Dropasmall grain of potassium permanganate into each of them. @ Watch carefully and compare. What do you observe? Water particles move faster in hot water compared to water at room temperature, and even slower in ice-cold water. As a result, the potassium permanganate spreads the fastest in hot water, less quickly in water at room temperature, and the slowest in ice-cold water. Hence, the movement of particles increases when heat is provided. Try to depict it by drawing a diagram. How can we demonstrate the movement of gas particles that cannot be seen with the naked eye? Activity 7.9: Let us find out e Light an incense stick in one corner of the room (Fig. 7.14). e Wait for a few minutes and observe. e Do you notice the fragrance from a distance? uriosity Textbook of Science for Grade 8) IYI VEA BY Chapter 7.indd 110 6/28/2025 2:53:19 PM Chapter 7.indd 111 SEY MEM BU TNUSI,A chaper 7 Particulate Nature of water) 111 Fig. 7.14: Burning of an incense stick When an incense stick is burnt in one corner of the room, initially, the fragrance is felt only around the incense stick. Shortly, you can smell the fragrance throughout the room. This happens because the particles of the fragrance spread, filling the entire room. This shows that the particles of air are moving constantly. The air particles hit the particles of the fragrance and help them spread throughout the room. Oh! Now I know why and how the fragrance of perfume reaches us. Can you share a few other real-life situations where you have experienced the movement of gas particles? Ever heard of ... The particulate nature of matter plays a crucial role in many everyday processes. For example, when we wash clothes stained with oil using soap, numerous soap particles surround the oil particles on the fabric. One end of the soap particle attaches to the oil, and the other mixes with water, thus helping lift the oil off Pig. 7.15: P <a of soap and wash it away (Fig. 7.15). help in cleaning 6/28/2025 2:53:24 PM Based on our learnings from