of the world s stock. It also shares has both tigers and lions. The natural habitat between 5 and 8 per cent of the world s of the Indian lion is the Gir forest in Gujarat. amphibians, reptiles and mammals. Tigers are found in the forests of Madhya NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE 43 Reprint 2025-26 Pradesh, the Sundarbans of West Bengal and the Himalayan region. Leopards, too, are members of the cat family. They are important among animals of prey. The Himalayas harbour a hardy range of animals, which survive in extreme cold. Ladakh s freezing high altitudes are a home to yak, the shaggy horned wild ox weighing around one tonne, the Tibetan antelope, the bharal (blue sheep), wild sheep, and the kiang (Tibetan wild ass). Furhtermore, the ibex, bear, snow-leopard and rare red panda are found in certain pockets. New Dethi, January 30 = sands of vulture= pouching of tigers in the November 206 and had con lakh in the global will take ser jor, vultures hi investigation into the large-scale rested on charges of poaching in $00,000. A dead tiger's skin and poachers and the connivance of ang Ss tevth and bones are worth Rs 20 forest department staff. It has or sed carcas' : 5 + in SS hate uel to probe links gagmmpose SV nq-like SPO" =. give othel inc, G In the rivers, lakes and coastal areas, turtles, crocodiles and gharials are found. The latter is the only representative of a variety of crocodile, found in the world today. Bird life in India is colourful. Peacocks, pheasants, ducks, parakeets, cranes and pigeons are some of the birds inhabiting the forests and wetlands of the country. We have selected our crops from a bio-diverse environment, i.e., from the reserve of edible plants. We also experimented and selected many medicinal plants. The animals were selected from large stock provided by nature as milch animal. They also provided us draught power, transportation, meat and eggs. The fish provide nutritive food. Many insects help in pollination of crops and fruit trees and exerting biological control on such insects is harmful. Every species has a role to play in the jarat ~ 4m anproved the con 5] omm: - According to a proposal iu... inet, the environment minister wi the authority. The 9"**ied for horn ab aaa a Ow Diclofenac. Soret athorities la rk (KNP) 20 an Asiat probe ore AL Paved rhino and ron I -hor . HT Correspondent 22 tigers have been killed in thrown up startling facts, espe- is the second tiger reserve inh YZ AZIRAN fa yare hy nges f e ngal nett New Delhi, January 5 Ranthambore in the past three cially after the arrests of Mohar jasthan where a CBI inquiry hi arcass 8) parate ax ___ years, the Rajasthan Police Singh and son Madho Singh, been ordered. The ministryha {he C an ES) ; of two nd a Pp THE MINISTRY of environment claim only 12 were killed. They who were involved