become extinct. The main causes for this major threat to nature are hunting by greedy hunters for commercial purposes. Pollution due to chemical and industrial waste, acid deposits, introduction of alien species and reckless cutting of the forests to bring land under cultivation and habitation, are also responsible for the imbalance. To protect the flora and fauna of the country, the government has taken many steps. (i) Eighteen biosphere reserves have been set up in the country to protect flora and fauna. Twelve out of these, the Sundarbans Nanda Devi, the Gulf of Mannar, the Nilgiri, Nokrek, Great Nicobar, Simlipal, Pachmarhi, Achanakmar-Amarkantak, Agasthyamalai, Kangchendzonga and Panna have been included in the world network of biosphere reserves. in hie. ae One st avourable with birds is Ba Rai ' Kachchh. At a place wher re, th deser merges with the sea, flamingo with their brilliant pink plumage come in thousands to build nest mounds from the salty mud pe raise their young ones. se e mong many extraordinary sig try. i 7 ours? . not a rich natural heritelg Eighteen Bio-reserves Sundarbans Simlipal Gulf of Mannar Dihang-Dibang Nilgiri Dibru Saikhowa Nanda Devi e Agasthyamalai Nokrek e Kangchendzonga Great Nicobar e Pachmarhi e Manas e Achanakmar-Amarkantak e Kachchh Cold Desert e Seshachalam e Panna (ii) Financial and technical assistance is provided to many botanical gardens by the government since 1992. (iii) Project Tiger, Project Rhino, Project Great Indian Bustard and many other eco-developmental projects have been introduced. (iv) 106 National Parks, 573 Wildlife sanctuaries and Zoological gardens are set up to take care of natural heritage. All of us must realise the importance of the natural ecosystem for our own survival. It is possible if indiscriminate destruction of natural environment is put to an immediate end. CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I Reprint 2025-26 EXERCISE 1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below: (i) To which one of the following types of vegetation does rubber belong to? (a) Tundra (c) Himalayan (b) Tidal (d) Tropical Evergreen (ii) Cinchona trees are found in the areas of rainfall more than (a) 100 cm (c) 70 cm (b) 50 cm (d) less than 50 cm (iii) In which of the following state is the Simlipal bio-reserve located? (a) Punjab (b) Delhi (c) Odisha (d) West Bengal (iv) Which one of the following bio-reserves of India is not included in the world network of bioreserve? (a) Manas (c) Gulf of Mannar (b) Nilgiri (d) Panna 2. Answer the following questions briefly. (i) What is a bio-reserve? Give two examples. (ii) Name two animals having habitat in tropical and montane type of vegetation. 3. Distinguish between (i) Flora and Fauna (ii) Tropical Evergreen and Deciduous forests 4. Name different types of Vegetation found in India and describe the vegetation of high altitudes. 5. Quite a few species of plants and animals are endangered in India. Why? 6. Why has India a rich heritage of flora and fauna? | Map Skills On an outline map of India, label the