this forest are ebony, mahogany, rosewood, rubber and cinchona. The common animals found in these forests are elephant, monkey, lemur and deer. Onehorned rhinoceroses are found in the jungles of Assam and West Bengal. Besides these animals, plenty of birds, bats, sloth, scorpions and snails are also found in these jungles. Tropical Deciduous Forests These are the most widespread forests of India. They are also called the monsoon forests and spread over the region receiving rainfall between 200 cm and 70 cm. Trees of this forest type shed their leaves for about six to eight weeks in dry summer. On the basis of the availability of water, these forests are further divided into moist and dry deciduous. The former is found in areas receiving rainfall between 200 and 100 cm. These forests exist, therefore, mostly in the eastern part of the country northeastern states, along the foothills of the Himalayas, Jharkhand, West Odisha and Chhattisgarh, and on the eastern slopes of the Western Ghats. Teak is the most dominant species of this forest. Bamboos, sal, shisham, sandalwood, khair, kusum, arjun and mulberry are other commercially important species. The dry deciduous forests are found in areas having rainfall between 100 cm and 70 cm. These forests are found in the rainier parts of the Peninsular plateau and the plains of Bihar and Uttar Pradesh. There are open stretches, in which teak, sal, peepal and neem grow. A large part of this region has been cleared for cultivation and some parts are used for grazing. In these forests, the common animals found are lion, tiger, pig, deer and elephant. A huge variety of birds, lizards, snakes and tortoises are also found here. The Thorn Forests and Scrubs In regions with less than 70 cm of rainfall, the natural vegetation consists of thorny trees and Figure 5.2 : Tropical Deciduous Forest Figure 5.3 : Thorn Forests and Scrubs CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I Reprint 2025-26 INDIA NATURAL VEGETATION PAKISTAN CHINA (TIBET) EE 2 BHUTAN nl MYANMAR ARABIAN BAY OF SEA BENGAL * . ? ~~ oe Ne ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS LAKSHADWEEP (INDIA) (INDIA) INDIAN % 76 2 E YQ Figure 5.4 : Natural Vegetation Study the given map for the forest cover and try to find the reasons as to why certain states have more forest area as compared to others? NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILBDLEE : Kl OS_ L eeew 41 Reprint 2025-26 bushes. This type of vegetation is found in the north-western part of the country, including semi-arid areas of Gujarat, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh and Haryana. Acacias, palms, euphorbias and cacti are the main plant species. Trees are scattered and have long roots penetrating deep into the soil in order to get moisture. The stems are succulent to conserve water. Leaves are mostly thick and small to minimise evaporation. These forests give way to thorn forests and scrubs in arid areas. In these forests, the common animals are rats, mice, rabbits, fox, wolf, tiger, lion, wild ass, horses and camels. Montane