facts, espe- is the second tiger reserve inh YZ AZIRAN fa yare hy nges f e ngal nett New Delhi, January 5 Ranthambore in the past three cially after the arrests of Mohar jasthan where a CBI inquiry hi arcass 8) parate ax ___ years, the Rajasthan Police Singh and son Madho Singh, been ordered. The ministryha {he C an ES) ; of two nd a Pp THE MINISTRY of environment claim only 12 were killed. They who were involved in smuggling however, broadened the scope o puffa oO oisont ards fo wy ir te and forests has decided to ask are depending on the version tiger skin and other body parts. the investigation, asking the of {EY ows F { guar jn a vy the Central Bureau of Investiga- given by a village pradhan and They had said that one body part _ficers to investigate into the pos: FYy4S follows 1 park. it yhino e.T tion to conduct an independent. his two associates who were ar- of the tiger fetched them Rs sible nexus of criminals and ationa dau ura ahar yange Activity @) Find out from the above newspaper cuttings, the main concern highlighted in the given news items. (i) Collect more information about various endangered species from newspapers and magazines. (iii) Find out various steps taken by the Indian government to protect them. (iv) Describe how you can contribute to the protection of endangered animals and birds. CONTEMPORARY INDIA-I Reprint 2025-26 ae Sy INDIA i ery SOME WILDLIFE RESERVES Veal Pachigam . 32 mL, PAKISTAN Rajali,. N wn, CHINA Corbett g - (TIBET) aoe aI oe On sy = ( Sariskag = Dudhwa a, 72 Steg er hy Keoladeo Ghanaa "74+. Mahanadi | BHUTAN Skaziranga if \. Ranthambhor & ste Ni \ PUM eid . gonrs I N oO . si pro . 7 A 2D, 5, Chandra Prabha = COUNT, Manas Kanha A Tadoba A Pimlipal ay | Sanjay Gandhi Chandd a Kawal @ Dampara 2 Pocharam @ e Eturnagaram Wildlife Sanctuary Bird Sanctuary National Park cw e * A Bandipur @ . \ Mudumalai LAKSHADWEEP a ~ Ur a Periyar INDIAN Figure 5.7 : Wildlife Reserves NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE ?:.?. OO]. Ln 45 Reprint 2025-26 ecosystem. Hence, conservation is essential. As has been mentioned earlier due to excessive exploitation of plant and animal resources by human beings, the ecosystem has been disturbed. About 1,300 plant species are endangered and 20 species are extinct. Quite a few animal species are also endangered and some have become extinct. The main causes for this major threat to nature are hunting by greedy hunters for commercial purposes. Pollution due to chemical and industrial waste, acid deposits, introduction of alien species and reckless cutting of the forests to bring land under cultivation and habitation, are also responsible for the imbalance. To protect the flora and fauna of the country, the government has taken many steps. (i) Eighteen biosphere reserves have been set up in the country to protect flora