disappear from the earth s surface? Can delta, sundari trees are found, which provide the human beings survive under such a situation? durable hard timber. Palm, coconut, keora, Why is biodiversity necessary and why should it be conserved? agar, etc., also grow in some parts of the delta. MEDICINAL PLANTS India is known for its herbs and spices from ancient times. Some 2,000 plants have been described in Ayurveda and at least 500 are in regular use. The World Conservation Union s Red List has named 352 medicinal plants of which 52 are critically threatened and 49 endangered. The commonly used plants in India are: Sarpagandha _ : Used to treat blood pressure; it is found only in India. Jamun : The juice from ripe fruit is used to prepare vinegar, which is carminative and diuretic, and has digestive properties. The powder of the seed is used for controlling diabetes. Arjun : The fresh juice of leaves is a cure for earache. It is also used to regulate blood pressure. Babool : Leaves are used as a cure for eye sores. Its gum is used as a tonic. Neem : Has high antibiotic and antibacterial properties. Tulsi : Is used to cure cough and cold. Kachnar : Is used to cure asthma and ulcers. The buds and roots are good for digestive problems. Identify more medicinal plants in your area. Which plants are used as medicines by local people to cure some diseases? Source : Medicinal Plants by Dr. S.K. Jain, 5th edition 1994, National Book Trust of India The elephants are the most majestic animals among the mammals. They are found in the hot wet forests of Assam, Karnataka and Kerala. One-horned rhinoceroses are the other animals, which live in swampy and marshy lands of Assam and West Bengal. Arid areas of the Rann of Kachchh and the Thar Desert are the habitat for wild ass and camels respectively. Indian <i! fxr bison, nilgai (blue bull), chousingha me of aie (four-horned antelope), gazel ond a, - different species of deer are some other animals found in India. It also has several species of monkeys. WILDLIFE Like its flora, India is also rich in its fauna. It has approximately 90,000 animal species. Do You Know? Wildlife Protection Act was The country has about 2,000 species of birds. implemented in 1972 in India. They constitute 13% of the world s total. There are 2,546 species of fish, which account for India is the only country in the world that nearly 12% of the world s stock. It also shares has both tigers and lions. The natural habitat between 5 and 8 per cent of the world s of the Indian lion is the Gir forest in Gujarat. amphibians, reptiles and mammals. Tigers are found in the forests of Madhya NATURAL VEGETATION AND WILDLIFE 43 Reprint 2025-26 Pradesh, the Sundarbans of West Bengal and the Himalayan region. Leopards, too, are members of the cat family. They are important among animals of prey.