regions were under the domination of the Bourbon kings of Spain. Even the Italian language had not acquired one common form and still had many regional and local variations. During the 1830s, Giuseppe Mazzini had sought to put together a coherent programme for a unitary Italian Republic. He had also formed a secret society called Young Italy for the dissemination of his goals. The failure of revolutionary uprisings both in 1831 and 1848 meant that the mantle now fell on Sardinia-Piedmont under its ruler King Victor Emmanuel II to unify the Italian states through war. In the eyes of the ruling elites of this region, a unified Italy offered them the possibility of economic development and political dominance. Reprint 2025-26 Fig. 13 Caricature of Otto von Bismarck in the German reichstag (parliament), from Figaro, Vienna, 5 March 1870. Describe the caricature. How does it represent the relationship between Bismarck and the elected deputies of Parliament? What interpretation of democratic processes is the artist trying to convey? Chief Minister Cavour who led the movement to unify the regions of Italy was neither a revolutionary nor a democrat. Like many other wealthy and educated members of the Italian elite, he spoke French much better than he did Italian. Through a tactful diplomatic alliance with France engineered by Cavour, Sardinia-Piedmont succeeded in defeating the Austrian forces in 1859. Apart from regular troops, a large number of armed volunteers under the leadership of Giuseppe Garibaldi joined the fray. In 1860, they marched into South Italy and the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies and succeeded in winning the support of the local peasants in order to drive out the Spanish rulers. In 1861 Victor Emmanuel II was proclaimed king of united Italy. However, much of the Italian population, among whom rates of illiteracy were very high, remained blissfully unaware of liberalnationalist ideology. The peasant masses who had supported Garibaldi in southern Italy had never heard of Ita/a,and believed that La Tala was Victor Emmanuel s wife! Fig. 14(a) Italian states before unification, 1858. Fig. 14(b) Italy after unification. The map shows the year in which different regions (seen in Fig 14(a) become part of a unified Italy. 4.3 The Strange Case of Britain X=] The model of the nation or the nation-state, some scholars have argued, is Great Britain. In Britain the formation of the nation-state Reprint 2025-26 Vu a [o) > jaa) in Nationalism S = = oO a s) a = Vu & < fe) 1S) (J) = = SS = Oo oes Ss & was not the result of a sudden upheaval or revolution. It was the result of a long-drawn-out process. There was no British nation prior to the eighteenth century. The primary identities of the people who inhabited the British Isles were ethnic ones such as English, Welsh, Scot or Irish. All of these ethnic groups had their own cultural and political traditions. But as the English nation steadily grew in wealth, importance and power, it was able to extend