them to identify with it. Marianne images were marked on coins and stamps. Similarly, Germania became the allegory of the German nation. In visual representations, Germania wears a crown of oak leaves, as the German oak stands for heroism. New words ANY Allegory When Cy. idea (for instance, greed, envy, freedom, liberty) is expressed through a person or a thing. An allegorical story has two meanings, one literal and one symbolic Reprint 2025-26 Fig. 16 Postage stamps of 1850 with the figure of Marianne representing the Republic of France. Fig. 717 Germania, Philip Veit, 1848. The artist prepared this painting of Germania on a cotton banner, as it was meant to hang from the ceiling of the Church of St Paul where the Frankfurt parliament was convened in March 1848. Box 3 Meanings of the symbols Attribute Significance Broken chains Being freed Breastplate with eagle Symbol of the German empire strength Crown of oak leaves Heroism Sword Readiness to fight Olive branch around the sword Willingness to make peace Black, red and gold tricolour Flag of the liberal-nationalists in 1848, banned by the Dukes of the German states Rays of the rising sun Beginning of a new era With the help of the chart in Box 3, identify the attributes of Veit s Germania and interpret the symbolic meaning of the painting. In an earlier allegorical rendering of 1836, Veit had portrayed the Kaiser s crown at the place where he has now located the broken chain. Explain the significance of this change. _ ~ at Fig. 78 The fallen Germania, Julius Hiibner, 1850. Describe what you see in Fig. 17. What historical events could Hubner be referring to in this allegorical vision of the nation? S = = oO a s) = Vu Z < fe) 1S) (J) = _ SS = Oo oes Ss = Reprint 2025-26 Fig. 719 Germania guarding the Rhine. In 1860, the artist Lorenz Clasen was commissioned to paint this image. The inscription on Germania s sword reads: The German sword protects the German Rhine. Look once more at Fig. 10. Imagine you were a citizen of Frankfurt in March 1848 and were present during the ) a [o) SS > jaa] e proceedings of the parliament. How would you (a) as a man seated in the hall of deputies, and (b) as a woman observing from the galleries, relate to the banner of Germania hanging from the ceiling? Nationalism Reprint 2025-26 S = = oO a s) = Vu Z < fe) 1S) (J) = ~ SS = Oo oes Ss = Nationalism and Imperialism By the last quarter of the nineteenth century nationalism no longer retained its idealistic liberal-democratic sentiment of the first half of the century, but became a narrow creed with limited ends. During this period nationalist groups became increasingly intolerant of each other and ever ready to go to war. The major European powers, in turn, manipulated the nationalist aspirations of the subject peoples in Europe to further their