had only one law and only one master. Source Summarise the attributes of a nation, as Renan understands them. Why, in his view, are nations important? The French Revolution and the Idea of the Nation The first clear expression of nationalism came with the French Revolution in 1789. France, as you would remember, was a full-fledged territorial state in 1789 under the rule of an absolute monarch. The political and constitutional changes that came in the wake of the French Revolution led to the transfer of sovereignty from the monarchy to a body of French citizens. 'The revolution proclaimed that it was the people who would henceforth constitute the nation and shape its destiny. From the very beginning, the French revolutionaries introduced various measures and practices that could create a sense of collective identity amongst the French people. The ideas of & patrie (the fatherland) and & citoyen (the citizen) emphasised the notion of a united community enjoying equal rights under a | Fig- 2 The cover of a German almanac Lo. . designed by the journalist Andreas Rebmann in constitution. A new French flag, the tricolour, was chosen to replace | 779g, the former royal standard. The Estates General was elected by the | 7he image of the French Bastille being stormed by the revolutionary crowd has been placed next to a similar fortress meant to represent the hymns were composed, oaths taken and martyrs commemorated, | 4astion of despotic rule in the German province of Kassel. Accompanying the illustration is the slogan: The people must seize their own was put in place and it formulated uniform laws for all citizens | freedom! Rebmann lived in the city of Mainz and was a member of a German Jacobin group. body of active citizens and renamed the National Assembly. New all in the name of the nation. A centralised administrative system within its territory. Internal customs duties and dues were abolished and a uniform system of weights and measures was adopted. Regional dialects were discouraged and French, as it was spoken and written in Paris, became the common language of the nation. The revolutionaries further declared that it was the mission and the destiny of the French nation to liberate the peoples of Europe from despotism, in other words to help other peoples of Europe to become nations. When the news of the events in France reached the different cities of Europe, students and other members of educated middle classes began setting up Jacobin clubs. Their activities and campaigns prepared the way for the French armies which moved into Holland, Belgium, Switzerland and much of Italy in the 1790s. With the outbreak of the revolutionary wars, the French armies began to carry the idea of nationalism abroad. Reprint 2025-26 go) = = > c & iS [o) lo) Q = ov) Pas] c (Ss) o) = ra] go) i os go) i ATLANTIC SEA MEDITERRANEAN SEA Within the wide swathe of territory that came under his control, Napoleon set about