a nation-state under a democratic constitution. Following the German peoples are the peoples of Austria, the Kingdom of the Two Sicilies, Lombardy, Poland, England, Ireland, Hungary and Russia. From the heavens above, Christ, saints and angels gaze upon the scene. They have been used by the artist to symbolise fraternity among the nations of the world. This chapter will deal with many of the issues visualised by Sorrieu in Fig, 1. During the nineteenth century, nationalism emerged as a force which brought about sweeping changes in the political and mental world of Europe. The end result of these changes was the emergence of the nation-state in place of the multi-national dynastic empires of Europe. The concept and practices of a modern state, in which a centralised power exercised sovereign control over a clearly defined territory, had been developing over a long period of time in Europe. But a nation-state was one in which the majority of its citizens, and not only its rulers, came to develop a sense of common identity and shared history or descent. This commonness did not exist from time immemorial; it was forged through struggles, through the actions of leaders and the common people. This chapter will look at the diverse processes through which nation-states and nationalism came into being in nineteenth-century Europe. Reprint 2025-26 Source A Ernst Renan, What is a Nation? In a lecture delivered at the University of Sorbonne in 1882, the French philosopher Ernst Renan (1823-92) outlined his understanding of what makes a nation. The lecture was subsequently published as a famous essay entitled Qu est-ce qu une nation? (What is a Nation? ). In this essay Renan criticises the notion suggested by others that a nation is formed by a common language, race, religion, or territory: A nation is the culmination of a long past of endeavours, sacrifice and devotion. A heroic past, great men, glory, that is the soci je, i which one bases a national common glories in the past ave a common will in the present, to have pare great deeds together, to wish still more, these are the essential conditions of being a people. a nation is scaly ge-scale solidarity .. a . A province is ite svone has the right to be ~ existence i _ inhabitant me rons he inhabitant. A nation never er in annexing or holding on to ou against its will. The existence of nations thing, a necessity even. Their existence is a guarantee of liberty, which would be lost if world had only one law and only one master. Source Summarise the attributes of a nation, as Renan understands them. Why, in his view, are nations important? The French Revolution and the Idea of the Nation The first clear expression of nationalism came with the French Revolution in 1789. France, as you would remember, was a full-fledged territorial state in 1789 under the rule of an absolute monarch. The political and constitutional changes that came in the wake of the French