of the monarchy and the military, supported by the large landowners (called Junkers) of Prussia. From then on, Prussia took on the leadership of the movement for national unification. Its chief minister, Otto von Bismarck, was the architect of this process carried out with the help of the Prussian army and bureaucracy. Three wars over seven years with Austtia, Denmark and France ended in Prussian victory and completed the process of unification. In January 1871, the Prussian king, William I, was proclaimed German Emperor in a ceremony held at Versailles. On the bitterly cold morning of 18 January 1871, an assembly comprising the princes of the German states, representatives of the army, important Prussian ministers including the chief minister Otto von Bismarck gathered in the unheated Hall of Mirrors in the Palace of Versailles to proclaim the new German Empire headed by Kaiser William I of Prussia. The nation-building process in Germany had demonstrated the dominance of Prussian state power. The new state placed a strong emphasis Fig. 17 The proclamation of the German empire in the Hall of Mirrors at Versailles, Anton von Werner. At the centre stands the and judicial systems in Germany. Prussian Kaiser and the chief commander of the Prussian army, General von Roon. Near them is Bismarck. This monumental work (2.7m x 2.7m) was completed and presented by the artist to Bismarck on the rest of Germany. the latter s 70th birthday in 1885. on modernising the currency, banking, legal measures and practices often became a model for Reprint 2025-26 mo} = = Oo [o) = Ss vu Y = = [o) U vu = = mo} iS} = o oO mo} iS} = NORTH SEA 4 et } SCHLESWIG. gots iS ~ le Le HANOVER. . BAVARIA BALTIC SEA (MN Prussia before 1866 eered by Prussia in Austro-Prussia War, 1 hasten rentores excluded from German Confederation 1867 Joined with Prussia to form German Confederation, 1867 South German states joining with Prussia to form German Empire, 1871 Won by Prussia in Franco-Prussia War, 1871 = Ea Eal al RUSSIAN EMPIRE Fig. 12 Unification of Germany (1866-77). 4.2 Italy Unified Like Germany, Italy too had a long history of political fragmentation. Italians were scattered over several dynastic states as well as the multi-national Habsburg Empire. During the middle of the nineteenth century, Italy was divided into seven states, of which only one, Sardinia-Piedmont, was ruled by an Italian princely house. The north was under Austrian Habsburgs, the centre was ruled by the Pope and the southern regions were under the domination of the Bourbon kings of Spain. Even the Italian language had not acquired one common form and still had many regional and local variations. During the 1830s, Giuseppe Mazzini had sought to put together a coherent programme for a unitary Italian Republic. He had also formed a secret society called Young Italy for the dissemination of his goals. The failure of revolutionary uprisings both in 1831 and 1848 meant that the mantle now fell on