At the top, angels are shown carrying the banner of freedom. In the foreground, Britannia the symbol of the British nation is triumphantly sitting over the globe. The colonies are represented through images of tigers, elephants, forests and primitive people. The domination of the world is shown as the basis of Britain s national pride. Nationalism, aligned with imperialism, led Europe to disaster in 1914. But meanwhile, many countries in the world which had been colonised by the European powers in the nineteenth century began to oppose imperial domination. The anti-imperial movements that developed everywhere were nationalist, in the sense that they all struggled to form independent nation-states, and were inspired by a sense of collective national unity, forged in confrontation with imperialism. European ideas of nationalism were nowhere replicated, for people everywhere developed their own specific variety of nationalism. But the idea that societies should be organised into nation-states came to be accepted as natural and universal. Reprint 2025-26 Vu Q [o) =) jaa] in Nationalism Write in brief 1. Write a note on: a) Guiseppe Mazzini b) Count Camillo de Cavour c) The Greek war of independence d) Frankfurt parliament e) The role of women in nationalist struggles 2. What steps did the French revolutionaries take to create a sense of collective identity among the French people? 3. Who were Marianne and Germania? What was the importance of the way in which they were portrayed? 4. Briefly trace the process of German unification. 5. What changes did Napoleon introduce to make the administrative system more efficient in the territories ruled by him? 1. Explain what is meant by the 1848 revolution of the liberals. What were the political, social and economic ideas supported by the liberals? 2. Choose three examples to show the contribution of culture to the growth of nationalism in Europe. 3. Through a focus on any two countries, explain how nations developed over the nineteenth century. 4. How was the history of nationalism in Britain unlike the rest of Europe? 5. Why did nationalist tensions emerge in the Balkans? Find out more about nationalist symbols in countries outside Europe. For one or two countries, collect examples of pictures, posters or music that are symbols of nationalism. How are these different from European examples? Ze) = oO a [oe = Vu oa] = 1S) (J) = ~ Zo) = Oo oes ee) = Reprint 2025-26