new conservative order in Europe. Conservative regimes set up in 1815 were autocratic. They did not tolerate criticism and dissent, and sought to curb activities that questioned the legitimacy of autocratic governments. Most of them Discuss = = | imposed censorship laws to control what was said in newspapers, ; ; ; ; . ; What is the caricaturist trying to depict? books, plays and songs and reflected the ideas of liberty and freedom ] Fig. 6 The Club of Thinkers, anonymous caricature dating to c. 1820. The plaque on the left bears the inscription: The most important question of today s meeting: How long will thinking be allowed to us? The board on the right lists the rules of the Club which include the following: 1. Silence is the first commandment of this learned society. 2. To avoid the eventuality whereby a member of this club may succumb to the temptation of speech, muzzles will be distributed to members upon entering. Reprint 2025-26 S = = oO a s) = Vu Z < fe) 1S) (J) = _ SS = Oo oes Ss = associated with the French Revolution. The memory of the French Revolution nonetheless continued to inspire liberals. One of the major issues taken up by the liberal-nationalists, who criticised the new conservative order, was freedom of the press. 2.4 The Revolutionaries ma During the years following 1815, the fear of repression drove many liberal-nationalists underground. Secret societies sprang up in many European states to train revolutionaries and spread their ideas. To be revolutionary at this time meant a commitment to oppose monarchical forms that had been established after the Vienna Congress, and to fight for liberty and freedom. Most of these revolutionaries also saw the creation of nation-states as a necessary part of this struggle for freedom. One such individual was the Italian revolutionary Giuseppe Mazzini. Born in Genoa in 1805, he became a member of the secret society of the Carbonari. As a young man of 24, he was sent into exile in 1831 for attempting a revolution in Liguria. He subsequently founded two more underground societies, first, Young Italy in Marseilles, and then, Young Europe in Berne, whose members were like-minded young men from Poland, France, Italy and the German states. Mazzini believed that God had intended nations to be the natural units of mankind. So Italy could not continue to be a patchwork of small states and kingdoms. It had to be forged into a single unified republic within a wider alliance of nations. This unification alone could be the basis of Italian liberty. Following his model, secret societies were set up in Germany, France, Switzerland and Poland. Mazzini s relentless opposition to monarchy and his vision of democratic republics frightened the conservatives. Metternich described him as the most dangerous enemy of our social order . Reprint 2025-26 Fig. 7 Giuseppe Mazzini and the founding Young Europe in Berne 1833. Print by Giacomo Mantegazza. RI The Age of Revolutions: 1830-1848 As conservative regimes