remember, you must look after them yourself and collect the dew with your own hands. Let us discuss 1. What did Rama Natha believe? 2. How did the sage help Rama Natha? 3. Do you think Rama Natha will be able to collect the dew? Give a reason. Fables and Folk Tales Unit 1.indd 3 09-Dec-24 3:47:58 PM Reprint 2025-26 Poorvi Grade 6 II Rama Natha went home, and after talking to his wife started cleaning his large fields, which had been lying empty all these years. There he planted rows and rows of banana plants. He tended them carefully and during the winter months collected the dew that formed on them with great care. His wife helped him too. Madhumati gathered the banana crop, took it to the market and got a good price for it. Over the years, Rama Natha planted more and more plants and they had a huge banana plantation. At the end of six years, he finally had his five litres of dew. tended: looked after Unit 1.indd 4 09-Dec-24 3:47:59 PM Reprint 2025-26 Fables and Folk Tales Carefully, he took the bottle to the sage. The sage smiled and muttered something over the water. Then he returned the bottle and said, Try it out. Rama Natha sprinkled a few drops on a copper vessel and waited for it to turn to gold. To his surprise nothing happened! This is cheating, he told the sage. I have wasted six precious years of my life. But sage Mahipati only smiled and called Madhumati to come forward. She came with a big box. When she opened it, inside shined stacks of gold coins! Now the sage turned to the very surprised Rama Natha and said, There is no magic potion that can turn things into gold. You worked hard on your land and created this plantation. While you looked after the trees, your wife sold the fruits in the market. That s how you got this money. It was your hard work that created this wealth, not magic. If I had told you about this earlier, you would have not listened to me, so I played a trick on you. Rama Natha understood the wisdom behind these words and worked even harder on his plantation from that day on. sudha MurTy muttered: spoke in a low voice wisdom: deep understanding precious: valuable Let us discuss 1. Why was Rama Natha angry? 2. How did Rama Natha and Madhumati create wealth? Unit 1.indd 5 09-Dec-24 3:47:59 PM Reprint 2025-26 Poorvi Grade 6 Let us think and reflect I Read the following lines and answer the questions that follow. 1.He spent all his time to learn about the magic potion. People cheated him often, promising to tell him about it, but he did not give up. His wife, Madhumati, was tired of this and also worried because she saw how much money Rama Natha was spending. She was sure that soon they would be without money. (i) Complete the