were as common and renowned as men in the 1940s. D. Women were not allowed to study sciences or pursue scientific careers. sy vg Cat \ POORVI i) = ~ >) 3. (iii) In the phrase celebrated Nobel Laureate, the word celebrated refers to all of the following EXCEPT someone who is A. famous and highly respected B. frequently seen in public C. renowned for their achievements D. well-regarded in their field (iv) Complete the following sentence suitably. The phrase She has an eye for Cosmic Rays suggests that . The journey from Bibha Chowdhuri s era to today s women scientists has been long and arduous, but it is also inspiring. The struggles Chowdhuri faced are a stark reminder of how far we ve come and how much further we have to go. But with every cosmic achievement be it landing on the moon or reaching Mars these women prove that the journey is well worth it. Bibha Chowdhuri s legacy lives on. Her story continues to inspire young women to pursue their passions, break barriers, and leave their mark on the world. As the stars of Indian science shine brighter, Bibha Chowdhuri, the beacon beam of light, will always guide the way. (i) What can be inferred about the challenges faced by women scientists today, as compared to Bibha Chowdhuri s era? A. Women scientists no longer face any barriers. B. The challenges remain, but progress has been made. C. The struggles have become more difficult over time. D. The struggles are the same as they were for Chowdhuri. (ii) The phrase Bibha Chowdhuri s legacy lives on suggests that (iii) Why is Bibha Chowdhuri referred to as a beacon and a beam of light in the extract? (iv) State whether the following sentence is a fact or an opinion. Bibha Chowdhuri was the beacon, the beam of light whose story continues to inspire young women. II Answer the following questions. 1. 2. Why is Bibha Chowdhuri considered a pioneer in the field of science? What does Bibha Chowdhuri s nomination by Erwin Schrodinger tell us about her abilities? Bibha Chowdhuri never worked for awards or recognition. Support this statement with evidence from the text. SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY 4. How does the renaming of a star as Bibha serve as both a literal and symbolic recognition of her contributions to science? 5. How do the roles of women in ISRO today reflect broader changes in societal attitudes towards women in STEM in India? 6. What is the writer s purpose of highlighting the contributions of Bibha Chowdhuri and other modern women scientists? 7. How might this text help shape people s perception of the role of women in other traditionally male-dominated fields? Let us learn I Complete the crossword puzzle by filling in the antonyms from the clues given below in the table. You may refer to the text. Acore i teeffortless POORVI Ese jie a8 f II III Substitute the underlined phrase in the sentences with the