We all waited in hushed silence while he held Claribel against his ear in an attempt to detect any heartbeat. Presently he shook his head. I can t hear anything, but that doesn t prove she s dead. I ve never listened to a canary s heart, he added rather apologetically. Give her a shot of oxygen, suggested somebody, pointing to the green-banded emergency cylinder in its recess beside the door. Everyone agreed that this was an excellent idea, and Claribel was tucked snugly into a face mask that was large enough to serve as a complete oxygen tent for her. To our delighted surprise, she revived at once. Beaming broadly, Sven removed the mask, and she hopped onto his finger. She gave her series of Come to the cookhouse, boys trills then promptly keeled over again. I don t get it, lamented Sven. What s wrong with her? She s never done this before. For the last few minutes, something had been tugging at my memory. My mind seemed to be very sluggish that morning, as if I was still unable to cast off the burden of sleep. I felt that I could do with some of that oxygen but before I could reach the mask, understanding exploded in my brain. I whirled on the duty engineer and said urgently: Jim! There s something wrong with the air! That s why Claribel s passed out. I ve just remembered that miners used to carry canaries down to warn them of gas. SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY Nonsense! said Jim. The alarms would have gone off. We ve got duplicate circuits, operating independently. Er the second alarm circuit isn t connected up yet, his assistant reminded him. That shook Jim; he left without a word, while we stood arguing and passing the oxygen bottle around like a pipe of peace. He came back ten minutes later with a sheepish expression. It was one of those accidents that couldn t possibly happen; we d had one of our rare eclipses by _ Earth s shadow that night; part of the air purifier had frozen up, and the single alarm in the circuit had failed to go off. Half a million dollars worth of chemical and electronic engineering had let us down completely. Without Claribel, we should soon have been slightly dead. So now, if you visit any space station, don t be surprised if you hear an inexplicable snatch of birdsong. There s no need to be alarmed; on the contrary, in fact. It will mean that you re being doubly safeguarded, at practically no extra expense. ARTHUR C. CLARKE Let us discuss I Identify whether the following statements from parts I and II are true or false. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. 1. The alarm at the space station failed to work properly because they were not connected. 2. Claribel was brought to the space station for an official experiment on animal behaviour in space. sheepish: embarrassed inexplicable: unexplainable