observations of the Chief Guest and other visitors? Points to remember: 1. Write the report in past tense, passive voice, and third person. 2.Follow proper format with a headline, reporter s name, and three paragraphs. I II SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY Let us explore \__ <i DS ra In the recent times, Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality are changing the way students learn. Let us know more about them. e Augmented reality (AR) enhances a person s environment by adding digital elements to what can be seen in real time, usually through a smartphone camera. Virtual reality (VR) offers a fully immersive experience, replacing the real world with a simulated one. Through AR and VR, the students can see and interact with things that they could not interact with in real life. This enables younger students to understand difficult ideas easily. To keep up with the times, NCERT has developed the e-Pathshala AR (Augmented Reality) App under the aegis of MHRD, Government of India. This App aims to enable students to go beyond textbooks and four walls of the classrooms and learn concepts by directly experimenting rather than only through reading and memorisation. This revolutionary effort will change most students from passive listeners to active learners. This effort is in line with the Prime Minister s Digital India vision to empower varied sectors using technology and addressing the triple need of skill, scale, and speed. Gear up for the new age education! https://ciet.ncert.gov.in/ar-vr The Government of India has come out with a new set of National Awards in the field of Science, Technology, and Innovation known as Rashtriya Vigyan Puraskar . The objective of the Rashtriya Vigyan Puraskar (RVP) is to recognise the notable and inspiring contribution made by the scientists, technologists, and innovators individually or in teams in various fields of science, technology, and technology-led innovation. 1. Vigyan Ratna (VR) award will recognise lifetime achievements and contributions made in any field of science and technology. 2. Vigyan Shri (VS) award will recognise distinguished contributions in any field of science and technology. POORVI 3. Vigyan Yuva-Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar (VY-SSB) award will recognise and encourage young scientists up to the age of 45 years, who have made , an exceptional contribution in any field of science and technology. 4, Vigyan Team (VT) award to be given to a team comprising three or more scientists/researchers/innovators, who have made an exceptional contribution working in a team in any field of science and technology. https://pib.gov.in/PressReleaselframePage.aspx?PRID=1959262 III A glimpse of women pioneers from different fields. Renu Swaroop Establishment of India s to head a missile largest microbial resource Project in India centre, Microbial Culture Computer Scientist & Collection Director of the Indian Statistical Institute Gupta Gagandeep Kang Aditi Sen De Soumya Swaminathan Youngest woman First woman First woman Youngest person First Indian woman First female physicist First Indian to become scientist to receive president of the President of the to ever receive to be elected as a awarded the Shanti WHO's Deputy Director Shanti Swarop _