types mixed together girders: long, thick piece of steel or concrete are" that supports a large structure precisely: exactly dovetailed: fitted together garbs: clothing of a special kind handiwork: creation . abruptly: unexpectedly/ suddenly a POORVI aboard: on an aircraft cubbyhole: a small enclosed space or room ceased: stopped canary: a popular bird which people love to keep as pets; found in open areas with small trees and shrubs wits: ability to think quickly flicks: sudden, quick movements concealing: hiding ventilating shafts: passageways or ducts that allow fresh air ina closed space bulkheads: dividing walls or barriers between separate compartments in an aircraft selection was very sensible. Claribel weighed practically nothing, her food requirements were tiny and she was not worried, as most animals would have been, by the absence of gravity. I first became aware that Claribel was aboard when I was sitting in the little cubbyhole laughingly called my office, checking through my lists of technical stores to decide what items we d be running out of next. When I heard the musical whistle beside my ear, I assumed that it had come over the station intercom, and waited for an announcement to follow. It didn t; instead, there was a long and involved pattern of melody that made me look up with such a start that I forgot all about the angle beam just behind my head. When the stars had ceased to explode before my eyes, I had my first view of Claribel. She was a small yellow canary, hanging in the air as motionless as a hummingbird and with much less effort, for her wings were quietly folded along her sides. We stared at each other for a minute; then, before I had quite recovered my wits, she did a curious kind of backward loop I m sure no earthbound canary had ever managed, and departed with a few leisurely flicks. It was quite obvious that she d already learned how to operate in the absence of gravity, and did not believe in doing unnecessary work. Sven didn t confess to her ownership for several days, and by that time it no longer mattered, because Claribel was a general pet. He had smuggled her up on the last ferry from Earth, when he came back from leave partly, he claimed, out of sheer scientific curiosity. He wanted to see just how a bird would operate when it had no weight but could still use its wings. Claribel thrived and grew fat. On the whole, we had little trouble concealing our guest when VIPs from Earth came visiting. A space station has more hiding places than you can count; the only problem was that Claribel got rather noisy when she was upset, and we sometimes had to think fast to explain the curious peeps and whistles that came from ventilating shafts and storage bulkheads. There were a couple of narrow escapes but then who would dream of looking for a canary in a space station? SCIENCE