Swaroop Establishment of India s to head a missile largest microbial resource Project in India centre, Microbial Culture Computer Scientist & Collection Director of the Indian Statistical Institute Gupta Gagandeep Kang Aditi Sen De Soumya Swaminathan Youngest woman First woman First woman Youngest person First Indian woman First female physicist First Indian to become scientist to receive president of the President of the to ever receive to be elected as a awarded the Shanti WHO's Deputy Director Shanti Swarop _ _Indian National Astronomical the Shanti Swarup Fellow of the Royal Swarup Bhatnagar Prize General, and also its first Bhatnagar Awardin = Science Academy Society of india Bhatnagar Prize at Society chief scientist Chemical Sciences (INSA) (ASD the age of 35 Source: https://www.indiascienceandtechnology.gov.in/sites/all/themes/ vigyan/images/Women's_Scientist_Brochure_Low_Res.pdf 1 TRANSCRIPTS Let us listen (refer to page 217) I You will listen to a conversation between Monika and Toby. Toby is a Martian and is stranded on Earth. He has become Monika s friend. As you listen, put a tick mark against the correct statements and a cross against the wrong ones. MONIKA TOBY MONIKA TOBY MONIKA TOBY MONIKA TOBY MONIKA TOBY MONIKA TOBY MONIKA : Hi, Toby! Do you miss your planet? : Very much, Monika! I miss my people and home. : Oh! I wish I could do something about it! But I am happy to have you as my friend. : Thank you, Monika! : Er...could youtellme something more about yourself? : Why not! What do you want to know about me, Monika? : What do you eat for breakfast? : Well, we Martians don t need to eat anything. We get our energy from the Sun. : Oh! Don t you ever feel like having ice creams and chocolates? I can t think of life without them! : No, Monika! We are made of different stuff. : Okay, tell me one thing. How are you able to see with only one eye? I see only one big eye in the centre of your face. : My friend, we Martians need only one eye to see clearly. In fact, I can see even with my eye closed. I can see beyond mountains and clouds, wood and even metals. I can see that you are carrying a toy in your pocket. It s a blue aeroplane. Isn t it? And yes! That apple you just had for breakfast is going round-and-round in your stomach right now! : (gasps in disbelief) Oh my goodness! ~ &) > II Listen to the conversation again and fill in the blanks with the exact words you hear. By) Let us listen (refer to page 227) I You will listen to a conversation between a father and daughter about lesser-known Indian inventions. As you listen, mark the four true statements from 1-6 given below. DAUGHTER : FATHER DAUGHTER : FATHER DAUGHTER : FATHER DAUGHTER : Papa, everyone talks about how yoga and the concept of zero came from India, but I recently found out there are so many more