an inch of moss A forest flowers and trees; A drop of water Like hive of bees. I lie in wait and watch How the deft spider jets The woven web-silk From his spinnerets; The tigerish claws he has! And oh! the silly flies The stumble into his net With all those eyes! Not even the tiniest thing But this my glass Will make more marvellous And itself surpass. Yes, and with lenses like it, Eyeing the moon, Twould seem you d walk there In an afternoon! WALTER DE LA MARE th Let us discuss I Complete the summary of the poem given below with suitable words from the poem. The poem describes the magic of seeing the world through a 1. . It reveals how tiny things like 2. and 3. can appear vast and complex. Even a 4. of water can seem , like a hive of 5. . The poet is impressed at how the spider spins its 6. from its 7. . The poem ends with the idea that, through lenses, the 8. could seem within reach. yf II Fill in the blanks by choosing the correct answer from the brackets. = (a / 1. The main idea of the poem is the transformative power of (wonders in nature/close observation) through the magnifying glass. 2. The tone of the poem is . (wonder and curiosity/peaceful and emotional) 3. The poem has stanzas with lines in each stanza. Hence, it is a quatrain. (four; six/six; four) 4. The rhyme scheme of the poem is . (ABCD; ABCB) POORVI . = ~ >) III Pick examples from the poem for the following poetic devices. 1. Simile 2. Alliteration 3. Metaphor IV The poem is rich in visual imagery, painting vivid pictures of small, everyday things magnified into something grand. 1. In the line, A myriad shells show in a scrap of chalk , the magnifying glass reveals 2. In the line, A forest flowers and trees the poet uses the imagery of nature to emphasise V Complete the following sentences with a reason. 1.The poet uses exclamation marks in lines, The tigerish claws he has! , With all those eyes! and In an afternoon! because it 2. In the phrase, Magic talk the poet uses personification to describe the magnifying glass because it 3. Each stanza follows a repetitive pattern of introducing a small or ordinary object and then describing the extraordinary details revealed through magnification. This is because it supports the theme of as the speaker reveals 4. In the final stanza the poet shifts from small, everyday objects being magnified to a celestial body like moon because oC? fo Let us think and reflect I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow. 1. With this round glass Ican make Magic talk A myriad shells show Ina scrap of chalk; Of but an inch of moss A forest flowers and trees; (i) Identify whether the following statement is true or false. The poet uses