had little trouble concealing our guest when VIPs from Earth came visiting. A space station has more hiding places than you can count; the only problem was that Claribel got rather noisy when she was upset, and we sometimes had to think fast to explain the curious peeps and whistles that came from ventilating shafts and storage bulkheads. There were a couple of narrow escapes but then who would dream of looking for a canary in a space station? SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY PN Let us discuss 7 CG I Answer the following questions briefly. 4 \ 1. Why did the narrator think Sven had sneaked a bird aboard? What was Sven s scientific reason? 2. How did Claribel adjust to the new surroundings? 3. What made the narrator mistake the musical whistle for a sound from the intercom? 4. Do you think the presence of the canary would lead the spacers into trouble? If yes, why? If no, why not? , I * We were now on twelve-hour watches, which was not as bad as . = it sounds, since you need little sleep in space. Though of course ~ ee there is no day and night when you are floating in permanent - Cay sunlight, it was still convenient to stick to the terms. Certainly / when I woke that morning it felt like 6:00 a.m. on Earth. I had = a nagging headache, and vague memories of fitful, disturbed nagging: . dreams. It took me ages to undo my bunk straps, and I was still persistently only half awake when I joined the remainder of the duty crew Painful in the mess. Breakfast was unusually quiet, and there was one seat vacant. POORVI retort: answer/ respond clenched: pressed together tightly hushed: quiet snugly: cosily keeled: collapsed/ fainted tugging at: causing to remember something - sluggish: % inactive \ Where s Sven? I asked, not very much caring. He s looking for Claribel, someone answered. Says he can t find her anywhere. She usually wakes him up. Before I could retort that she usually woke me up, too, Sven came in through the doorway, and we could see at once that something was wrong. He slowly opened his hand, and there lay a tiny bundle of yellow feathers, with two clenched claws sticking pathetically up into the air. What happened? we asked, all equally distressed. T don t know, said Sven mournfully. I just found her like this. Let's have a look at her, said Jock Duncan, our cook-doctor-dietitian. We all waited in hushed silence while he held Claribel against his ear in an attempt to detect any heartbeat. Presently he shook his head. I can t hear anything, but that doesn t prove she s dead. I ve never listened to a canary s heart, he added rather apologetically. Give her a shot of oxygen, suggested somebody, pointing to the green-banded emergency cylinder in its recess beside the door. Everyone agreed that this was an excellent idea, and