s purpose of highlighting the contributions of Bibha Chowdhuri and other modern women scientists? 7. How might this text help shape people s perception of the role of women in other traditionally male-dominated fields? Let us learn I Complete the crossword puzzle by filling in the antonyms from the clues given below in the table. You may refer to the text. Acore i teeffortless POORVI Ese jie a8 f II III Substitute the underlined phrase in the sentences with the suitable words from the box given below. physicist luminaries pioneers peers barriers persistence . They are considered to be the first people to start the online markets. . A scientist who studies matter, energy, light, etc. . Most of my friends are my classmates and are my age. re WwW NY . We first welcomed all the famous and important people in folk song for the award ceremony. 5. My brother finally succeeded in his business because of his continuous efforts and determination. 6.We should remove all the things that block our way in achieving success. The words professorship , mentorship , and leadership are used in the text. These words are made by adding the suffix -ship to the words professor , mentor and leader . Similarly, we can make words by adding -ment and -hood to certain words. Now, make words by adding suitable suffixes -ship, -ment, and -hood to the words given below. One example has been done for you. achieve + ment = achievement 1. member + = 2. govern + = 3. partner + = 4. child + = 5. citizen + = 6. entertain + = 7. brother + = 8. agree + = SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY IV The abbreviations ISRO and STEM used in the text are called acronyms because they are read or pronounced as full words. 6, The grid given below has acronyms for the following. Circle the acronyms e in the grid. 1. National Aeronautics and Space Administration 2. All India Institute of Medical Sciences 3. Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, and Homoeopathy 4. National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research 5. World Health Organization og > Clipping The short form of laboratory is lab. In making this short form, the front part of the word is retained and the end part is removed or clipped. Clipping is a method of making words from larger words in English. There are three clipping methods. 1. Back clipping: a word is made by removing the end part of a word and retaining the front part (exam examination, ad advertisement, gas gasoline, memo memorandum, gym gymnasium, photo photograph, etc.). 2. Front clipping: a word is made by removing the front part of a word and retaining the end part (phone telephone, net internet, bike motorbike, net internet, etc.). 3. Middle clipping: a word is made by removing the front and the end parts of the word and retaining the middle part (flu influenza, fridge refrigerator, etc.). POORVI V Read the following sentence