It is called a merged word as it is made by combining the parts of two words internal and communication . Merged words are made by combining two words. Combine the words in Column 1 with the words in Column 2 to make merged words. Write the merged word and its meaning. One example has been done for you. breakfast lunch G) brunch meal eaten between breakfast and lunch It will mean that you re being doubly safeguarded. In the given sentence, will denotes SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY III Read the following sentence from the text and fill in the blank. ___ (past/present/future) time. There are several ways to use verbs to talk about the future in English. The following table lists some of the usages of future time references. S. No. Tense 1. will [Note: also common in offers, promises, and orders expressing willingness, certainty or obligations] 2. Simple Present Tense os Present Progressive Tense 4. Going to 5. Future Perfect (will have + Past Participle) Usage When we provide information about future events or discuss possible future occurrences. When we talk about the future only in situations that are a part of a regular schedule or planned action. When we use for future actions and events mostly for personal arrangements and fixed plans. Present Progressive Tense of go This is common in informal style, especially in speech or conversation. When we say that something will be finished or completed by a certain time in future. Examples e J think the Kailash House will win. My school reopens on 03 January. My exams are getting over this weekend. I am visiting my grandparents during the vacation. We're going to get a new motorbike soon. The teacher says, she will have completed the portions by next month. POORVI Future Progressive (will + be + -ing) When we say that something will be in progress ata This time tomorrow I will be relaxing at home. particular moment in the future. I had no time to shop as I was leaving for Chennai in an hour. (instead of am leaving ) Future in the Past | Sometimes, when we talk about the past, we need to mention something that was still in the future at that time something that had not happened yet. Last time I saw you, you were going to start a new business. (instead of are going to ) In 2024, I arrived in a town where I would spend the rest of my life. (instead of will spend ) IV Fill in the blanks with the correct form (Simple Present, Present Progressive, will , or going to ) to indicate future time. 1. Our flight (leave) at 10.00 a.m. tomorrow. 2. They (finish) the project by the end of this week. 3. The weather forecast says it ___ (rain) later today. 4. We (move) into our new house next month. 5. I (start) my new hobby class next Monday. 6. She (go) to the mall this afternoon. 7. The