teacher. | > (Sant pepe aes] | [|i occ ll POORVI trailblazers: people who are the first to do something that other people do later TT, equitable: treating everyone fairly and in the same way defied the odds: achieved something despite difficulties towering: very high or great persistence: ability to keep doing something al difficult delved: examined something in detail to find information 2 e a . * g oe se z Cif Let us read ZZ In a world where women s potential in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) is being recognised beyond doubt, India has seen its share of trailblazers who paved the way. Today, the women behind ISRO s Mars Orbiter Mission and Chandrayaan-3 are celebrated for their brilliance and achievements. However, the foundation was laid by early pioneers like Bibha Chowdhuri India s first woman physicist who carved a path in the male-dominated field of physics. At a time when Indian women struggled to seek knowledge and equitable access to education, Bibha Chowdhuri emerged as a rare beam of light a woman who defied the odds and lit a path for others to follow. Born in 1913 in Kolkata, in an India that still followed the traditional path. Bibha s story was anything but ordinary. She was a scientist who rose not only against the societal expectations of women but also amidst the towering giants of science men whose names the world would come to celebrate, while hers was whispered only in the halls of those who recognised her brilliance. Bibha s persistence eventually earned her a place at the Bose Institute. She had already begun to chip away at the walls of exclusion, becoming the first Indian woman to excel in high-energy particle physics. Breaking Boundaries In 1945, Bibha s academic journey took her to the University of Manchester. Under the guidance of the celebrated Nobel Laureate, Patrick M.S. Blackett, she delved deeper into the field of cosmic rays. Her Ph.D. thesis on cosmic rays earned local recognition, with newspapers introducing her as India s SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY New Woman Scientist She has an eye for Cosmic Rays . This title reflected the awe she inspired in a world still sceptical of sceptical: her capabilities. doubtful J), In an era marked by towering scientific discoveries, Bibha was often on the cusp of greatness but remained in the shadows of her male counterparts. Her most notable contribution was the discovery of pi-mesons, a subatomic particle. Her nomination for a Nobel Prize in 1950 by Erwin Schrodinger, though unsuccessful, reflected her remarkable talent. Her life, full of challenges and struggles, was marked by an uphill battle to be heard and seen in the field of science. Chowdhuri never received any awards during her lifetime, but continued her work tirelessly. notable: remarkable In 1949, upon her return to India, she became the first woman faculty member at the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR), personally selected by Homi J. Bhabha. Chowdhuri s contributions spanned across research institutes