do not see or notice 3. keep an eye on something or | (iii) something that happens very somebody quickly 4. turn a blind eye (iv) an overall look at something 5. see eye to eye (v) aperson whois very precious or important 6. bird s-eye view (vi) agree with each other IV The poet uses the adjective form tigerish in the poem by adding the suffix - ish to the noun tiger . In the same way, we can make adjectives by adding the suffix - ish to some nouns. Choose the nouns to which you can add the suffix - ish to make adjectives. girl glass book silk boy water moon scrap ] ] 1 J SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY "6 Let us listen I You will listen to a conversation between a father and daughter about lesser-known Indian inventions. As you listen, mark the four true statements from (1)-(6) given below. (Transcript for teacher on page 250) 1. The father is surprised by the fact that India was involved in the invention of radio broadcasting and fibre optics. . The daughter appears indifferent when learning the origins of the USB port. . The father shows little interest in the information about the origin of snakes and ladders. . The father was simply confirming all the facts shared by the daughter. . The daughter expresses pride and admiration for India s role in global inventions. . The daughter is excited as she shares new discoveries about India s contributions with her father. Papa, everyone talks about how yoga and the concept of zero came from India. POORVI I II II S) Let us speak When pronouncing /v/ and /f/, the lower lip lightly touches the edge of the upper teeth. Air flows through the small gap, creating a soft friction sound. Note the difference between /v/ and /f/. When we pronounce words with /v/sound, there is a vibration, whereas /f/ sound has no vibration. Both the sounds can occur in the beginning, middle, or at the end of words. Read these words aloud with the help of your teacher. beginning sound /f/: forest flowers from middle sound /f/: deft afternoon end sound /f/: of itself beginning sound /Vv/: vase valour victory middle sound /Vv/: woven even marvellous end sound /v/: hive If you could travel to space, which planet would you like to visit? Why? What preparations would you like to make? Speak about any five things that you would like to take along. If you could invent something, what would you like to invent and how? Give reasons for the choice of your invention. Speak about your wonder invention. SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY Let us write I In a conversation, we communicate through dialogues. While writing a conversation, we need to ensure that the dialogues are engaging and serve a purpose. Points to remember: Mention where, when, and with whom the conversation is taking place. Identify the word choice and tone formal or informal. Include key information, points of