It will mean that you re being doubly safeguarded, at practically no extra expense. ARTHUR C. CLARKE Let us discuss I Identify whether the following statements from parts I and II are true or false. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. 1. The alarm at the space station failed to work properly because they were not connected. 2. Claribel was brought to the space station for an official experiment on animal behaviour in space. sheepish: embarrassed inexplicable: unexplainable safeguarded: protected 2a POORVI 3. The canary s suffering helped the crew discover a problem with the ~ _ air purifier. y 5 & ~ 4. The air purifier froze because there was a rare eclipse. 5. Claribel could fly gracefully in the space station, performing loops in E the air. 6. The space station crew was uninterested in Claribel and hardly noticed her presence after she was discovered. . Claribel had fainted and had to be revived with oxygen supply. Let us think and reflect I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow. 1. Sven was one of our best construction men, and excelled at the tricky and specialised work of collecting assorted girders as they floated around in free fall, making them do the slow-motion, three-dimensional ballet that would get them into their right positions, and fusing the pieces together when they were precisely dovetailed into the intended pattern: it was a skilled and difficult job, for a space suit is not the most convenient of garbs in which to work. (i) What can be inferred about Sven s abilities from his job description? A. He is good at following instructions but lacks creativity. B. He possesses a strong understanding of working in space. C. He struggles with the complexities of construction in space. D. He prefers working on simpler tasks rather than complex jobs. (ii) How can we conclude that Sven was working in zero gravity? (iii) Select the option that is correct for both (Assertion) A and (Reason) R. (A): Sven sjob required him to make girders perform a three-dimensional ballet in space. (R): Working in zero gravity allows objects to float, making precise Nw, positioning more challenging. 4 A. Both (A) and (R) are true, and (R) is the correct explanation of (A). > . 4 B. Both (A) and (R) are true, but (R) is not the correct explanation of (A). C. (A) is true, but (R) is false. D. (A) is false, but (R) is true. (iv) Replace the underlined word with a word similar in meaning from the extract. During the festival, people wore colourful outfits that represented Se their culture. I -_ SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY 2. Jim! There s something wrong with the air! That s why Claribel s passed out. I ve just remembered that miners used to carry canaries down to warn them of gas. Nonsense! said Jim. The alarms would have gone off. We ve got duplicate circuits, operating independently. Er the second alarm circuit