energy? (i) AI is optimising the placement of wind turbines and solar panels in cities. (ii) AI is promoting alternative energy from wind turbines and solar panels. (iii) Alis improving the performance of wind turbines and solar panels. 4. What does AI offer to teachers in the field of education? (i) Helps teachers assign grades more quickly. (ii) Allows teachers to communicate better with students. (iii) Helps teachers analyse student performance. 5. What is one of the user-friendly features that AI is enhancing for people with disabilities? (i) Helps them find better jobs in the mainstream. (ii) Improves speech recognition and voice command technologies. (iii) Trains individuals to interact with robots. SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY Impact of e : Mobile Phones 2 I Forma group of five. Conduct a panel discussion on the topic, Evaluating the Impact of Mobile Phones Beneficial or Harmful . Each student will take on one of the following roles. Moderator (initiates and directs the flow of the discussion inviting the speakers to share their views on the subject; at the end sums up the points of discussion and thanks the members of the group) Principal (opposed to focus on discipline in school) Teacher (in favour of partially in favour, educational use with limitations) Parent (opposed to concerned about health and social effects on children) Student (in favour of highlighting the benefits like connectivity and learning) POORVI You may use the cues given below and add your own ideas when speaking. eo. Principal Teacher 4 As a Principal, I strongly From an educator s believe mobile phones are perspective, I think mobile is largely disruptive because... phones can be valuable but... a; Py Parent Student As a parent, I m concerned As a student, I feel mobile that mobile phones phones are essential pose certain risks to because... children s health and social development... Let us write I Your school recently hosted the Zonal Science Exhibition, in which teams of students from 25 schools participated enthusiastically. As the student editor, write a report on the exhibition to be published in your school magazine. Use the cues given below with your own ideas to compose this report. Who was the organiser and who hosted the exhibition? When (date and time) and where was it held? Why was it held? Who participated? Who was the Chief Guest? What were the competitions held? For example: Science Quiz, Science Models, etc. What were the topics of models exhibited? Give details. Which team got the trophy for best exhibit? What were the observations of the Chief Guest and other visitors? Points to remember: 1. Write the report in past tense, passive voice, and third person. 2.Follow proper format with a headline, reporter s name, and three paragraphs. I II SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY Let us explore \__ <i DS ra In the recent times, Augmented Reality and Virtual Reality are changing the way students learn. Let us know more about them. e Augmented reality (AR) enhances a person s environment by adding digital