and some can be heated in an oven. They also eat ready-to-eat items, such as nuts, breads, and fruits. . Sleep: Astronauts can sleep on a floor, wall, or ceiling as there s no distinction between up and down but they may gradually float away while sleeping. Therefore, they need to restrain their bodies in small sleeping compartments or sleeping bags. Did you know that animals can save humans from natural calamities? Animals can sense natural calamities. Read the following examples and decide if this is true. In 2004, before a tsunami could hit the coastline of Indonesia, some animals made efforts to flee elephants ran for higher ground, flamingos abandoned low-lying nesting areas, and dogs refused to go outdoors. Minutes before the Naples quake of 1805, oxen, sheep, dogs, and geese started making alarm calls in unison. Migratory birds crossing the Pacific are able to dodge storms and other hazards. In the Gulf of Mexico, sharks sense the drop in barometric pressure that precedes hurricanes and tend to swim to deeper waters as a result. Dolphins have also been observed swimming away from storm-prone areas. Scientists have studied this behaviour and found that when severe stresses arise in deep rock before the earthquake, ultra-low frequency electromagnetic waves are generated that animals can sense. IV Salim Ali, the Birdman of India , was an Indian ornithologist (a person who studies birds). He was the first Indian to conduct systematic bird surveys across India and wrote several books on birds. He was awarded the Padma Bhushan in 1958 and the Padma Vibhushan in 1976. V We need to conserve our feathered friends. Work in groups of four. Look at the pictures and make a bird feeder with cardboard, chart paper, etc. UY NS raw SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY MAGNIFYING GLASS Let us do these activities before we read. I Work in pairs. Answer the questions that follow the pictures given below. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. 1. What is common in all these pictures? 2. Select the pictures you are familiar with. 3. Why do you think the people in the pictures need to use a magnifying glass? 4. What other instruments magnify objects? II If you have a magnifying glass, what would you like to use it for and why? Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. PE Vet usread pms a; With this round glass C ) I can make Magic talk = A myriad shells show 4 In a scrap of chalk; ai Of but an inch of moss A forest flowers and trees; A drop of water Like hive of bees. I lie in wait and watch How the deft spider jets The woven web-silk From his spinnerets; The tigerish claws he has! And oh! the silly flies The stumble into his net With all those eyes! Not even the tiniest thing But this my glass Will make more marvellous And itself surpass. Yes, and with lenses like it, Eyeing the moon, Twould seem