in the blanks with the exact words you hear. By) Let us listen (refer to page 227) I You will listen to a conversation between a father and daughter about lesser-known Indian inventions. As you listen, mark the four true statements from 1-6 given below. DAUGHTER : FATHER DAUGHTER : FATHER DAUGHTER : FATHER DAUGHTER : Papa, everyone talks about how yoga and the concept of zero came from India, but I recently found out there are so many more inventions that people don t really know about! Oh really? Like what? Well, did you know that radio broadcasting has roots in India? We usually credit Marconi, but Jagadish Chandra Bose, a Bengaliscientist, actually conducted an experiment using microwaves before Marconi. Wow, I didn t know that! That s incredible. I can recollect something about fibre optics. Yes! You re absolutely right Papa. Can you imagine life without fibre optics? No fast internet, no clear communication... And guess what? It was pioneered by Narinder Kapany, an Indian physicist from Punjab. He s called the father of fibre optics. That s something I use every day, but I just had an idea that the origins were in India. What about fun things? Any of those that you ve found out about? Yes indeed! You'll love this one Snakes and Ladders! It was actually invented as a game to teach children values, with ladders representing virtues and snakes representing evil. It wasn t just a board game like we think today. It had a spiritual meaning in ancient times. FATHER : So even that simple game had such deep roots. Let me tell you about one that I just remembered. DAUGHTER : Of course! I d love to know. FATHER : Well, the USB port, something we rely on all the time to connect devices, was invented by Ajay Bhatt. He s an Indian-born engineer who helped revolutionise the way we use technology. DAUGHTER : That s amazing. USB is such a basic part of life now. It s hard to imagine a time without it. FATHER : That s incredible. And all this from India. I definitely learned a lot from this conversation. Adapted from https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/articles/SrnsYs1QcPB7CsyjzvTcmjf/7-surprising-things-india-has-given-the-world 2 @ Let us listen (refer to page 244) I You will listen to a podcast about Artificial Intelligence. As you listen, answer the following questions by selecting the correct options. Hello and welcome to Tech Talks, the podcast where we explore how technology is shaping our world! I m Faizy, your host, and today we re diving into the fascinating topic of artificial intelligence, or AI, and how it s benefiting humankind. AI is often seen as futuristic, but it s already making everyday tasks easier and more efficient. Let s look at some of the incredible Vi, ways AI is improving our lives in four of the many segments. ~ {e) \ _ Let s begin with Segment 1: Healthcare Transformation AI systems can analyse medical data much faster and more accurately than