US, that has become one of the most important in the world because of its outstanding observational conditions. The Mauna Kea Observatory is operated by the University of Hawaii and lies at an elevation of 4,205 metres (13,796 feet) atop the peak of Mauna Kea, a dormant volcano on north-central Hawaii island. The summit hosts a worldrenowned collection of astronomical research facilities and large telescope observatories, including the Keck Observatory and Subaru Telescope, for optical, infrared, and submillimeter astronomy. The observatories are set up here because of Mauna Kea s high elevation, dry environment, and stable airflow that make it a prime location for astronomical observation. The focus is scientific research across the electromagnetic spectrum. Public Access: The Onizuka Center for International Astronomy provides visitor information and exhibits about the mountain and its observatories, and offers guided tours of the summit. Find out more about them from the internet and discuss with your science teacher and classmates. SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY III Read about ancient Indian scholars. 1. One of the eminent astronomers of the ancient India was Aryabhata. + His work Aryabhatiyam, laid the groundwork for various astronomers s to develop in subsequent centuries and continues to be an important work even today. Aryabhata proposed a heliocentric model of the solar system centuries before Copernicus. He also gave a scientific explanation of lunar and solar eclipses. awe arate pet 2. Varamihira, the sixth-century CE astronomer, philosopher, and mathematician wrote the astronomical treatise Pafichasiddhantika (Fine Treatises), a compendium of Greek, Egyptian, Roman, and Indian astronomy. POORVI 3. The tenth-century CE mathematician-astronomer Bhaskaracharya II contributed significantly to the advancement of astronomical concepts. His works Siddhantasiromani and Karanakutuhala, include compiled data on planetary positions, conjunctions, and eclipses. https://indianculture.gov.in/timeless-trends/unveiling-cosmos-journey-throughhistory-astronomy-india IV Jantar Mantar in New Delhi is an astronomical observatory. It has large-scale astronomical instruments designed for precise calculations and measurements of celestial movements. It was built in 1724 by Maharaja Sawai Jai Singh II. The observatory is a UNESCO World Heritage Site. Five such observatories were built by Jai Singh IJ, the other four are located in Ujjain, Mathura, Varanasi, and Jaipur. BripHA CHOWDHURI Tue Beam oF LIGHT THAT LIT THE PATH FOR WOMEN IN INDIAN SCIENCE Let us do these activities before we read. I Work in pairs. What qualities do you associate with a scientist? Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. Complete the word web given below. II Some pictures of women scientists are given below. What do you know about their work? Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. | > (Sant pepe aes] | [|i occ ll POORVI trailblazers: people who are the first to do something that other people do later TT, equitable: treating everyone fairly and in the same way defied the odds: achieved something despite difficulties towering: very high or great persistence: ability to keep doing something al difficult delved: examined something in detail to find information 2 e a . * g oe se z Cif Let us read ZZ In a world