the effects of light on plant my growth. I placed various plants under different light conditions and measured their growth over several weeks. I recorded data daily to track the height of each plant. At the end of the experiment, I analysed the 4 results and found that plants exposed to natural light grew significantly | taller than those under artificial light. I concluded that sunlight plays a crucial role in plant development. I presented my findings to the class, highlighting the importance of light in enhancing photosynthesis and overall plant health. You may begin like this. An experiment was conducted... VII Read the instructions given in the box on landing of Chandrayaan. Complete the passage by choosing the correct answer from the options given. Launch the spacecraft towards the Moon from Earth. * Position the spacecraft to enter the Moon s orbit. Adjust the spacecraft s path for landing. Slow down the spacecraft as it nears the Moon s surface. * Release the rover to explore the surface and collect valuable data. Chandrayaan s landing mission involves several key Steps. First, the spacecraft 1. towards the Moon from the Earth. Then, it 2. to enter the Moon s orbit. After reaching the Moon s orbit, the spacecraft s path 3. for landing. Next, the spacecraft 4. as it nears the Moon s surface. Finally, the rover 5. to explore the surface and collect valuable data. (i) A. launched B. were launched C. was launched D. is launched (ii) A. position B. was positioned C. is positioned D. has positioned (iii) A. adjusted B. was adjusted C. is adjusted D. were adjusted POORVI (iv) A. slowed down B. was slowed down C. is slowed down D. were slowed down (v) A. is released B. has released C. were released D. was released Let us listen I You will listen to a podcast about Artificial Intelligence. As you listen, answer the following questions by selecting the correct options. (Transcript for teacher on page 251) 1. What is one of the key benefits of AI in the healthcare sector? (i) Helps doctors communicate faster with patients. (ii) Provides personalised treatments and faster diagnoses. (iii) Focuses on cosmetic surgeries to improve appearance. 2. How did AI play a crucial role during the global pandemic? (i) Al robots monitored patient behaviour in hospitals. (ii) AI assisted in speeding up the discovery of new medicines. (iii) AI developed different types of vaccines by itself. 3. What example was given regarding Al s role in renewable energy? (i) AI is optimising the placement of wind turbines and solar panels in cities. (ii) AI is promoting alternative energy from wind turbines and solar panels. (iii) Alis improving the performance of wind turbines and solar panels. 4. What does AI offer to teachers in the field of education? (i) Helps teachers assign grades more quickly. (ii) Allows teachers to communicate better with students. (iii) Helps teachers analyse student performance. 5. What is one of the user-friendly features that