IV Fill in the blanks with the correct form (Simple Present, Present Progressive, will , or going to ) to indicate future time. 1. Our flight (leave) at 10.00 a.m. tomorrow. 2. They (finish) the project by the end of this week. 3. The weather forecast says it ___ (rain) later today. 4. We (move) into our new house next month. 5. I (start) my new hobby class next Monday. 6. She (go) to the mall this afternoon. 7. The team (have) a meeting at 3.00 p.m. tomorrow. 8.1 (help) you with your homework after dinner. SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY V Fill in the blanks with the suitable forms of verbs given in brackets to V7 express future time reference. ~ {p) \ By 2040, artificial intelligence 1. (revolutionise) medical treatments. Researchers 2. (develop) Al-powered diagnostic tools that 3. (transform) healthcare by the end of this decade. Next week, the International Science Congress 4. (open) to ~ showcase advancements in AI and robotics. In the coming years, robots / ~ 5. (assist) surgeons in performing complex operations. Years ago, 4 \ experts had predicted that AI would reshape our world, and now, as we approach the future, this 6. (be) our new reality. Let us listen I You will listen to a conversation between Monika and Toby. Toby is a Martian and is stranded on Earth. He has become Monika s friend. As you listen, put a tick mark (v) against the correct statements and a cross against the wrong ones. (Transcript for teacher on page 249) 1. Toby misses his school. 2. Monika accepts Toby as her friend. 3. Monika asks Toby about one of his facial features. 4. Toby tells Monika that she had a banana for breakfast. 5. Toby shares that he can see much clearer with a closed eye. POORVI II Listen to the conversation again and fill in the blanks with the exact words you hear. w 1. Toby: I miss my and home. 2. Toby: Well, we _ don t need to eat anything. We get our P from the Sun. 3. Monika: Oh! Don t you ever feel like having ice-creams and i ! s 4. Monika: Okay, tell me one thing. How are you able to see only with eye? 5. Toby: I can see beyond mountains and , woods and even Let us speak ge I Read the following words from the text aloud and circle the letters that are not pronounced (silent letters). ballet (ba-lay) [ba pronounced asin bat] whistle (wi-sl) alarm (uh-laam) psychologist (sai-ko-luh-juhst) Now, read some more words with silent letters. As you read, circle the letters that are not pronounced. receipt debris pneumonia almond foreign A) island wreck aisle campaign fasten II Work in pairs. Use the given situations to ask for and give suggestions. Youneed to makea model ofthe solar system for the Science Exhibition but don t know what materials to use. Ask your friend for suggestions. Youneed to prepare for the inter-class quiz on the