word with a word similar in meaning from the extract. During the festival, people wore colourful outfits that represented Se their culture. I -_ SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY 2. Jim! There s something wrong with the air! That s why Claribel s passed out. I ve just remembered that miners used to carry canaries down to warn them of gas. Nonsense! said Jim. The alarms would have gone off. We ve got duplicate circuits, operating independently. Er the second alarm circuit isn t connected up yet, his assistant reminded him. That shook Jim; he left without a word, while we stood arguing and passing the oxygen bottle around like a pipe of peace. (i) Fill in the blank by selecting the correct option from those given in the brackets. The narrator references canaries and miners in order to (highlight the historical use of canaries as warning systems/explain the reason that caused Claribel to faint suddenly) (ii) Complete the following sentence with a suitable reason. Jim initially dismisses the warning about the air because (iii) What does the phrase shook Jim mean in the context of the information in the extract? Jim was A. physically pushed by someone B. startled by unexpected information C. cold and needed to warm up D. trying to shake off sleepiness (iv) What does the crew s action of passing the oxygen bottle around like a pipe of peace suggest about their response to the situation? Answer the following questions. 1. What was the purpose of the alarm? What had caused its failure? 2. How does the crew s reaction to Claribel change over the course of the story? 3. What does the last part of the story tell us about the significance of unusual ways of problem solving? 4. Justify the appropriateness of the title of the story. 5. Without Claribel, we should soon have been slightly dead. What does this line suggest about uncertainty of life in space? 6. Explain how has the writer presented science fiction with a touch of humour. 7. How would Sven reflect on his experience of almost losing Claribel and for saving the lives of the entire crew? POORVI AY 2h Let us learn I Choose the appropriate adjectives from the box given below to match with the words 1-8 that follow. nagging vague delighted narrow sluggish hushed inexplicable sheepish reason traffic voices ono FF wn [o) fo) yr expression Now, underline the sentences that use these adjectives in the text. II The word intercom is used in the text. It is called a merged word as it is made by combining the parts of two words internal and communication . Merged words are made by combining two words. Combine the words in Column 1 with the words in Column 2 to make merged words. Write the merged word and its meaning. One example has been done for you. breakfast lunch G) brunch meal eaten between breakfast and lunch It will mean that you re being doubly safeguarded. In the