alarm (uh-laam) psychologist (sai-ko-luh-juhst) Now, read some more words with silent letters. As you read, circle the letters that are not pronounced. receipt debris pneumonia almond foreign A) island wreck aisle campaign fasten II Work in pairs. Use the given situations to ask for and give suggestions. Youneed to makea model ofthe solar system for the Science Exhibition but don t know what materials to use. Ask your friend for suggestions. Youneed to prepare for the inter-class quiz on the topic Chandrayaan-3. Ask your friend for advice on how to prepare. You may use the prompts given below. | Asking for Advice Giving Advice What should I do... ? I feel you should... e What are the best ways... ? * It s good to prepare yourself... wy What should I... ? * It is best to use... SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY Now, write an article titled The Importance of Internet with the help of the social media web. Points to remember: Heading/Title Name of the writer PARAGRAPH 1: Give a general introduction to the topic. PARAGRAPH 2: Explain the uses of the internet and why it is important. Give examples to support your view. PARAGRAPH 3: End with a comment and leave the reader with a thoughtful idea or quote. Let us explore A canary in the coal mine is a popular phrase to describe early signs of potential danger. I Coal miners in places like Arunachal Pradesh used canary birds to detect the presence of carbon monoxide. Such gases are a potential risk to the life of the miners. These little birds are particularly sensitive to carbon monoxide and can prevent mining accidents. Zao POORVI II Astronauts living in space stations have to do things differently. Read how they manage the routine tasks in the absence of gravity. You may find out more information about it from the internet. III 1. Write: Astronauts use a special Space Pen which has a cartridge with ink combined with resin. The ink remains solid until friction with the ball at the point of the pen liquefies it. It works in all positions, in extreme heat and cold, and in atmospheres ranging from pure oxygen to vacuum. . Exercise: Astronauts use resistance exercise equipment. Weight training is done by applying a load using vacuum cylinders. Running on the treadmill is made possible with the bodies held down using rubber straps. . Eat: Astronauts eat preserved foods which is dried, canned, vacuum-packed, and frozen. These can be prepared by adding cold or hot water, and some can be heated in an oven. They also eat ready-to-eat items, such as nuts, breads, and fruits. . Sleep: Astronauts can sleep on a floor, wall, or ceiling as there s no distinction between up and down but they may gradually float away while sleeping. Therefore, they need to restrain their bodies in small sleeping compartments or sleeping bags. Did you know that animals can save humans from natural calamities? Animals can sense natural calamities. Read the following