in pushing India s space programme forward. From Shadows to the Stars The journey from Bibha Chowdhuri s era to today s women scientists has been long and arduous, but it is also inspiring. The struggles Chowdhuri faced are a stark reminder of how far we ve come and how much further we have to go. But with every cosmic achievement be it landing on the moon or reaching Mars these women prove that the journey is well worth it. Bibha Chowdhuri s legacy lives on. Her story continues to inspire young women to pursue their passions, break barriers, and leave their mark on the world. Whether exploring cosmic rays or sending rockets to Mars, India s women scientists are writing the next chapter in a story that Bibha Chowdhuri helped begin. As the stars of Indian science shine brighter, Bibha Chowdhuri, the beacon- beam of light, will always guide the way. SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY Let us discuss I Arrange the following events from Bibha Chowdhuri s life in the correct order of occurrence. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. 1. The International Astronomical Union (IAU) honoured her legacy by renaming a star in the constellation Leo HD 86081 as Bibha . 2. She became the first woman faculty member at the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR). 3. Bibha Chowdhuri was born in pre-independent India. 4.The Government of India declared a chair professorship in Bibha s name. 5. She joined the University of Manchester under the guidance of the \ celebrated Nobel Laureate, Patrick M.S. Blackett. _ 6. She was nominated for a Nobel Prize by Erwin Schrodinger. Let us think and reflect I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow. 1. In 1945, Bibha s academic journey took her to the University of Manchester. Under the guidance of the celebrated Nobel Laureate, Patrick M.S. Blackett, she delved deeper into the field of cosmic rays. Her Ph.D. thesis on cosmic rays earned local recognition, with newspapers introducing her as India s New Woman Scientist She has an eye for Cosmic Rays . (i) Why is the mention of Patrick M.S. Blackett, a Nobel Laureate, significant in this extract? (ii) What can be inferred about the public perception of women scientists in the 1940s from the title given to her by the press India s New Woman Scientist ? A. Women scientists were widely accepted and celebrated at that time. B. The world was still doubtful about the capabilities of women scientists. C. Women scientists were as common and renowned as men in the 1940s. D. Women were not allowed to study sciences or pursue scientific careers. sy vg Cat \ POORVI i) = ~ >) 3. (iii) In the phrase celebrated Nobel Laureate, the word celebrated refers to all of the following EXCEPT someone who is A. famous and highly respected B. frequently seen in public C. renowned for their achievements D. well-regarded in their field (iv) Complete the following sentence suitably. The phrase