what would you like to invent and how? Give reasons for the choice of your invention. Speak about your wonder invention. SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY Let us write I In a conversation, we communicate through dialogues. While writing a conversation, we need to ensure that the dialogues are engaging and serve a purpose. Points to remember: Mention where, when, and with whom the conversation is taking place. Identify the word choice and tone formal or informal. Include key information, points of agreement and disagreement, etc. Use words in brackets to express emotions or actions, such as (joyfully) (sits down). You may use filler words like Uff, Er... , Ugh, etc. Deepa and Asma, members of the Science Club have a conversation to take a decision about making a model for an upcoming Science Fair. Create this conversation between Deepa and Asma. You may begin the conversation like this. DEEPA: Hi Asma! Our Science teacher mentioned that you have a wonderful idea for the Science Fair project. ASMA: _ (hesitatingly) Yes, I do. But I m not sure if it is good enough. DEEPA: (encouragingly) Don t worry... Let us explore I Children with low vision may benefit from different types of visual aids, such as magnifying spectacles, stand magnifiers, hand-held magnifiers, and telescopes. Magnifying spectacles are used for reading, threading a needle or doing other close-up tasks. Stand magnifiers rest above the object and are hands-free and help to keep the magnifying lens at a proper distance. Hand-held magnifiers with and without built-in lights, are usually smaller and lighter to move over printed material. They can be moved more easily. Telescopes are used to see objects or signs far away. Some telescopes can even be attached to eyeglasses. POORVI II Did you know that telescopes also use lenses? 1. The largest telescope in India for studying celestial objects is located in the district of Nainital, Uttarakhand. Commissioned in 2016, it is maintained and operated by ARIES (Aryabhata Research Institute of Observational Sciences). 2.The Indian Astronomical Observatory (IAO) is a_ high-altitude astronomy station located in Hanle, Ladakh, India. It is situated at an elevation of 4,500 meters (14,764 ft), and supports optical, infrared, and gamma-ray telescopes. 3. The largest, most powerful, and most complex telescope ever launched into space is the James Webb Space Telescope. NASA launched it on, 25 December 2021. It orbits the Sun at a distance of 1.5 million kilometres from Earth. To learn more, visit the link below. https://science.nasa.gov/mission/webb/ 4. The Mauna Kea Observatory, astronomical observatory in Hawaii, US, that has become one of the most important in the world because of its outstanding observational conditions. The Mauna Kea Observatory is operated by the University of Hawaii and lies at an elevation of 4,205 metres (13,796 feet) atop the peak of Mauna Kea, a dormant volcano on north-central Hawaii island. The summit hosts a worldrenowned collection of astronomical research facilities and large telescope observatories, including the Keck Observatory and Subaru Telescope, for optical, infrared, and submillimeter astronomy. The