FEATHERED FRIEND Let us do these activities before we read. I Work in pairs and discuss the questions given below. Share your / answers with your classmates and teacher. 1. Who can a feathered friend be? 2. Which feathered friend do you like? Why? 3. If you have a choice between a feathered and a furry friend, who would you choose? Why? 4. Do you think a feathered or a furry friend can accompany astronauts to space? If yes, why? If no, why not? E/ ny es POORVI II Complete the words given below by inserting vowels. Refer to their ~ meanings given alongside. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. o 1. official rule that controls how something is done: R_G_L_T__N 2. to not allow something: F_RB_D 3. join or blend to form a single entity: F_S_ 4.suddenly:_ BR_PTLY 5. admit one s mistake:C _NF_SS 6. a person who advises what to eat to keep healthy: D__T_T__N ath SN pa: = U AN \ _\ SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY I To the best of my knowledge, there s never been a regulation that forbids one to keep pets in a space station. No one ever thought it was necessary and even had such a rule existed, I am quite certain that Sven Olsen would have ignored it. Actually he was a wiry little fellow, like most of the early spacers, and managed to qualify easily for the 150-pound bonus that kept so many of us on a reducing diet. Had he been built otherwise, his chances of getting a job in space would have been very slim. Sven was one of our best construction men, and excelled at the tricky and specialised work of collecting assorted girders as they floated around in free fall, making them do the slow-motion, three-dimensional ballet that would get them into their right positions, and fusing the pieces together when they were precisely dovetailed into the intended pattern: it was a skilled and difficult job, for a space suit is not the most convenient of garbs in which to work. However, Sven s team had one great advantage over the construction groups you see putting up skyscrapers down on Earth. They could step back and admire their handiwork without being abruptly parted from it by gravity. Don t ask me why Sven wanted a pet, or why he chose the one he did. I m not a psychologist, but I must admit that his wiry: thin but a strong py assorted: consisting of various types mixed together girders: long, thick piece of steel or concrete are" that supports a large structure precisely: exactly dovetailed: fitted together garbs: clothing of a special kind handiwork: creation . abruptly: unexpectedly/ suddenly a POORVI aboard: on an aircraft cubbyhole: a small enclosed space or room ceased: stopped canary: a popular bird which people love to keep as pets; found in open areas with small trees and shrubs wits: ability to think quickly flicks: sudden, quick movements concealing: hiding