retaining the front part (exam examination, ad advertisement, gas gasoline, memo memorandum, gym gymnasium, photo photograph, etc.). 2. Front clipping: a word is made by removing the front part of a word and retaining the end part (phone telephone, net internet, bike motorbike, net internet, etc.). 3. Middle clipping: a word is made by removing the front and the end parts of the word and retaining the middle part (flu influenza, fridge refrigerator, etc.). POORVI V Read the following sentence from the text and the table that follows. .... the foundation was laid by early pioneers like Bibha Chowdhuri... The foundation early pioneers like Bibha Chowdhuri... Here the verb is expressed in passive form. Verbs can be expressed in either active voice or passive voice. When the subject performs the action, the sentence is said to be in active voice. On the other hand, when the subject receives the action, the sentence is in passive voice. Generally, sentences written in active voice are considered effective. However, passive voice is used when the * action is more important than the doer, A cure for the disease was discovered. (The focus is on the discovery, not on who discovered it.) doer of the action (agent) is obvious, The national anthem is sung at the beginning of the event. (It is clear that people sing it, so mentioning the doer is unnecessary.) doer of the action is unknown. The car was stolen last night. (The identity of the thief is unknown.) Now, complete the following news report with the passive form of verbs given in the box below. (Remember that the verb must agree with the subject.) [oF a Q < o) ao -) n los fo) fet) n Ss lo) ce) Ss a Ee n By (o>) a jor ot % >) we ewe eB ee ee eB ee ee ee ee ee eB eB eB eB eB eB eB ee eB eB eB eB eB eB ee eB eB eB ee ee ee ee Ke Last year, significant advancements in medical science 1. in leading medical journals when a new vaccine for malaria 2. The vaccine 3. through several clinical trials and results 4. in those journals. During the trials, blood samples 5. regularly from participants to monitor their immune response. The amount of antibodies produced 6. carefully to assess the effectiveness of the vaccine. SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY VI Read the following report of an experiment. Rewrite the report using passive verbs wherever necessary. , I conducted an experiment to investigate the effects of light on plant my growth. I placed various plants under different light conditions and measured their growth over several weeks. I recorded data daily to track the height of each plant. At the end of the experiment, I analysed the 4 results and found that plants exposed to natural light grew significantly | taller than those under artificial light. I concluded that sunlight plays a crucial role in plant development. I presented my findings to the class,