4. In the final stanza the poet shifts from small, everyday objects being magnified to a celestial body like moon because oC? fo Let us think and reflect I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow. 1. With this round glass Ican make Magic talk A myriad shells show Ina scrap of chalk; Of but an inch of moss A forest flowers and trees; (i) Identify whether the following statement is true or false. The poet uses his magical powers to make the round glass powerful. SCIENCE AND CURIOSITY (ii) Select the line from the extract that expresses the presence of intricate patterns in ordinary objects. (iii) What does the comparison of an inch of moss to a forest suggest about the speaker s view of the world through the magnifying glass? . (iv) How does the poet feel about the ability of the magnifying glass to reveal hidden wonders? A. Satisfied B. Fascinated C. Grateful D. Determined II Answer the following questions. 1. What is the significance of the spider in the poem? oe, 2. How might the speaker s view of the natural world change if there t me was no use of a magnifying glass? lh 3. Why does the poem end with the idea of the moon being within reach? 2 4.What is the speaker s attitude towards nature and the act . of observation? 5. Which is your favourite part of the poem? Why? woven myriad deft I I stumble surpass marvellous 1] With his 1. description, the author has written the story beautifully 2. with fascinating details. When you read the story, you will surely enjoy the 3. storytelling technique that attracts all kinds of readers. What makes the story interesting is the superb way of describing the 4. ___emotions and feelings of the characters. The reader will 5. upon the unexpected twists and turns that 6. all our understanding and make us wonder at the narrative power of the author. POORVI II The collective noun a hive of bees , is used in the poem. Match the phrases in Column 1 with suitable words in Column 2 to make collective nouns. (ships Gi)_soldiers III The poet uses the expression eyeing the moon in the poem. Match the idiomatic expressions with eye given in Column 1 with their meanings in Column 2. You may refer to a dictionary. 1. apple of one s eye (i) watch something or someone closely in the blink of an eye (ii) act as if you do not see or notice 3. keep an eye on something or | (iii) something that happens very somebody quickly 4. turn a blind eye (iv) an overall look at something 5. see eye to eye (v) aperson whois very precious or important 6. bird s-eye view (vi) agree with each other IV The poet uses the adjective form tigerish in the poem by adding the suffix - ish to the noun tiger . In the same way, we can