The Value of Work CHAPTER When you are doing any work, do not think of anything beyond. Do it as worship, as the highest worship, and devote your whole life to it for the time being. Swami Vivekananda . What are the different types of The Big ] activities that people engage in? Questions @ . What ts their contribution to our everyday lives? 0681CH13 Anu and Kabir were playing in the park when they saw & their neighbour, Geeta Aunty, getting out of a taxi. She was returning home from work and was in her uniform. A pilot in the Indian Air Force, she is the pride of the whole town. Kabir, Aunty s uniform looks a lot like the one I saw at your house yesterday, but the colour is different. Wain f That uniform on the hanger belongs to my grandfather. ss He retired from the Border SS Security Force and now spends his time ... w Re o ~ Reprint 2025-26 chapter13.indd 183 & 03-02-2025 0510146 | ... providing free Geography classes to the neighbourhood kids ... ... tending to our vegetable garden, and... My parents run a shop that sells uniforms and other ready-made garments. Appa leaves early in the morning and Maa joins him in the shop after we leave for school. Maa is usually back by the time we return home from school. She also contributes to a voluntary group that teaches knitting to the women in the community. Wow, Anu, everyone around us does SO many things every day! Reprint 2025-26 chapter13.indd 184 & Do you remember my elder brother Rohan? You met him when he came to pick me up from school. He is a software engineer and works in a company that makes computer applications. On the weekends he volunteers to teach computer skills to those who have joined the youth development programme of the nearby college. 03-02-2025 05:01:48 | LET'S EXPLORE What activities did the people in Anu s and Kabir s story engage in? Mention them in the table given below: Character in the Activities they are engaged in Different types of activities, like the ones discussed above, are divided into two groups or categories: economic activities and non-economic activities. Economic activities are those that involve money or are performed in exchange for money or money s worth for the Money s parties involved. For example, a business person selling worth: The : . . monetary school bags in the market, a farmer selling produce in value that the market, a lawyer arguing a case and earning a fee, a a person . . places on truck driver transporting goods from one place to another, an object x workers employed in a car manufacturing factory, etc. based onthe 3 benefit that % theyderive from it. Market: A place where people engage Fee: A payment made to a 2 in the exchange of goods and services. person or organisation in 1 People may exchange goods and exchange for professional