the market, a lawyer arguing a case and earning a fee, a a person . . places on truck driver transporting goods from one place to another, an object x workers employed in a car manufacturing factory, etc. based onthe 3 benefit that % theyderive from it. Market: A place where people engage Fee: A payment made to a 2 in the exchange of goods and services. person or organisation in 1 People may exchange goods and exchange for professional advice a) services for other goods but in most or services. For example, a fee markets these are exchanged for money. paid to a doctor and a lawyer. Reprint 2025-26 | chapter13.indd 185 & 03-02-2025 0510149 | Non-economic activities are those that do not generate income or wealth but are done out of feelings like gratitude, Left to right, top to bottom: A business person selling school bags in the market Farmers selling their harvest in the market A lawyer arguing a case A truck driver transporting goods from one place to another Workers employed in a car manufacturing factory love, care and respect. For instance, parents cooking food for the family or helping their children with schoolwork, youth taking care of the grandparents, family members helping in the renovation of the house, etc. ToT Cc fe) > 3) [oa) 2 Left to right: 035 Parents cooking food ze for the family Fae Mother helping her ge children with Ou schoolwork E ge x vo Lu Lu | Reprint 2025-26 | chapter13.indd 186 & 03-02-2025 05:01:51 | Left to right: Youth taking care of the grandparents Family members helping in the renovation of the house LET'S EXPLORE In the table given on page 185, did you notice the third empty column? Label this column economic / non-economic activity . Now classify them according to the nature of activity. In Anu s and Kabir s story, Geeta Aunty, the Air Force pilot, Salary: A fixed receives a salary. She serves the country and performs an regular economic activity too. Anu s brother, Rohan, works for a ee generally software company and is given a salary for it. Over the paid monthly weekend, he also volunteers at the youth development by an | programme of the nearby college, where he teaches wo pos computer skills to young adults. This is a non-economic employee. activity. vy THINK ABOUT IT chapter13.indd 187 When Kabir s grandfather voluntarily teaches the neighbourhood kids for free, is that an economic activity or a non-economic activity? How is it different from your teachers teaching you at school? Discuss with your classmates. What are some non-economic activities that are important to you and your family? Why are they valuable? Reprint 2025-26 13 The Value of Work 03-02-2025 05:01:51 | Types of Economic Activities Kavya was excited to go to her aunt s house in the village of Kamlapur. On the way, she saw that a highway was being built near the village, and the construction site was abuzz with