it different from your teachers teaching you at school? Discuss with your classmates. What are some non-economic activities that are important to you and your family? Why are they valuable? Reprint 2025-26 13 The Value of Work 03-02-2025 05:01:51 | Types of Economic Activities Kavya was excited to go to her aunt s house in the village of Kamlapur. On the way, she saw that a highway was being built near the village, and the construction site was abuzz with activity. Large machines, such as excavators and bulldozers, were being operated by dedicated technicians. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us _ oo oo chapter13.indd 188 This new highway promised to reduce the travel time to the nearest town from five hours to just two hours. Kavya thought that she would be able to visit her aunt more often once the highway was ready, since it would take less time to travel there. Happy with this thought, Kavya ran to greet her aunt and to eat the delicious jalebis that she had made. They were joined by Kavya s uncle, who had just returned home from work. He is a technician in a construction company and operates a bulldozer. He receives a monthly salary for his services. The next day, Kavya s aunt woke up early to finish her share of the household chores and left for work. She is Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:01:52 | employed at the village post office and is paid a monthly salary. In the evening, after her office work, she also conducts online classes to help students prepare for school exams. She charges a weekly fee for these classes. On the weekend, Kavya visited a local mango orchard with her aunt to have some delicious mangoes. There she saw Sahil, a farm labourer who was using a tractor to till a farmer s land nearby. He earns a daily wage for his efforts. He gets some payment for his work in cash, and the remaining part of the payment in the form of mangoes of equal value. The mangoes that he receives as a part of his work are called payment in kind. Y THINK ABOUT IT On your way from home to school today, can you recall the various economic activities that people are engaged in? In what ways do you think those people are paid? As we now understand, economic activities are those that have value in terms of money. Economic activities also add value at each stage of the process of transforming something into another form. This is called value addition. Reprint 2025-26 chapter13.indd 189 & Wage: A payment made by the employer to the worker for a specific period of time. Payment in kind: A non-cash payment that is received for the work performed. 13 The Value of Work 03-02-2025 05:01:53 | Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us chapter13.indd 190 Let us take the example of Kavya s father, Rajesh, to understand this. The wood for