a stick of the same height as the plant in the other pot. = Cover the soil in both pots with a plastic sheet so that moisture cannot escape by evaporation. = Cover both sets, one with the plant and the other with the stick, with plastic sheets and place in bright sunlight for half an hour. = Do you observe any difference in the two cases? Provided that the plant has an adequate supply of water, the water which is lost through the stomata is replaced by water from the xylem vessels in the leaf. In fact, evaporation of water molecules from the cells of a leaf creates a suction which pulls water from the xylem cells of roots. The loss of water in the form of vapour from the aerial parts of the plant is known as transpiration. Thus, transpiration helps in the absorption and upward movement of water and minerals dissolved in it from roots to the leaves. It also helps in temperature regulation. The effect of root pressure in transport of water is more important at night. During the day when the stomata are open, the transpiration pull becomes the major driving force in the movement Figure 5.12 of water in the xylem. Movement of water during transpiration in a tree Transport of food and other substances So far we have discussed the transport of water and minerals in plants. Now let us consider how the products of metabolic processes, particularly photosynthesis, are moved from leaves, where they are formed, to other parts of the plant. This transport of soluble products of photosynthesis is called translocation and it occurs in the part of the vascular tissue known as phloem. Besides the products of photosynthesis, the phloem transports amino acids and other substances. These substances are especially delivered to the storage organs of roots, fruits and seeds and to growing organs. The translocation of food and other substances takes place in the sieve tubes with the help of adjacent companion cells both in upward and downward directions. Unlike transport in xylem which can be largely explained by simple physical forces, the translocation in phloem is achieved by utilising Life Processes 95 Reprint 2025-26 energy. Material like sucrose is transferred into phloem tissue using energy from ATP. This increases the osmotic pressure of the tissue causing water to move into it. This pressure moves the material in the phloem to tissues which have less pressure. This allows the phloem to move material according to the plant s needs. For example, in the spring, sugar stored in root or stem tissue would be transported to the buds which need energy to grow. Q U ES TION S What are the components of the transport system in human beings? What are the functions of these components? Why is it necessary to separate oxygenated and deoxygenated blood in mammals and birds? What are the components of the transport system in highly organised plants? How are water and minerals transported in plants?