some parts such as leaves. Many plant waste products are stored in cellular vacuoles. Waste products may be stored in leaves that fall off. Other waste products are stored as resins and gums, especially in old xylem. Plants also excrete some waste substances into the soil around them. Q U ES TION S$ Describe the structure and functioning of nephrons. What are the methods used by plants to get rid of excretory products? How is the amount of urine produced regulated? What you have learnt Movement of various types can be taken as an indication of life. Maintenance of life requires processes like nutrition, respiration, transport of materials within the body and excretion of waste products. Autotrophic nutrition involves the intake of simple inorganic materials from the environment and using an external energy source like the Sun to synthesise complex high-energy organic material. Heterotrophic nutrition involves the intake of complex material prepared by other organisms. In human beings, the food eaten is broken down by various steps along the alimentary canal and the digested food is absorbed in the small intestine to be sent to all cells in the body. Science Reprint 2025-26 During the process of respiration, organic compounds such as glucose are broken down to provide energy in the form of ATP. ATP is used to provide energy for other reactions in the cell. Respiration may be aerobic or anaerobic. Aerobic respiration makes more energy available to the organism. In human beings, the transport of materials such as oxygen, carbon dioxide, food and excretory products is a function of the circulatory system. The circulatory system consists of the heart, blood and blood vessels. In highly differentiated plants, transport of water, minerals, food and other materials is a function of the vascular tissue which consists of xylem and phloem. In human beings, excretory products in the form of soluble nitrogen compounds are removed by the nephrons in the kidneys. Plants use a variety of techniques to get rid of waste material. For example, waste material may be stored in the cell-vacuoles or as gum and resin, removed in the falling leaves, or excreted into the surrounding soil. EXERCISE The kidneys in human beings are a part of the system for (a) nutrition. (c) excretion. (b) respiration. (d) transportation. The xylem in plants are responsible for (a) _ transport of water. (c) transport of amino acids. (b) transport of food. (d) transport of oxygen. The autotrophic mode of nutrition requires (a) carbon dioxide and water. (c) sunlight. (b) chlorophyll. (d) allofthe above. The breakdown of pyruvate to give carbon dioxide, water and energy takes place in (a) cytoplasm. (c) chloroplast. (b) mitochondria. (d) nucleus. How are fats digested in our bodies? Where does this process take place? What is the role of saliva in the digestion of food? What are the necessary conditions for autotrophic nutrition and what are its byproducts? What are the differences between aerobic and anaerobic respiration? Name some organisms that use the anaerobic mode of respiration.