For example, in the spring, sugar stored in root or stem tissue would be transported to the buds which need energy to grow. Q U ES TION S What are the components of the transport system in human beings? What are the functions of these components? Why is it necessary to separate oxygenated and deoxygenated blood in mammals and birds? What are the components of the transport system in highly organised plants? How are water and minerals transported in plants? How is food transported in plants? 5.5 EXCRETION We have already discussed how organisms get rid of gaseous wastes generated during photosynthesis or respiration. Other metabolic activities generate nitrogenous materials which need to be removed. The biological process involved in the removal of these harmful metabolic wastes from the body is called excretion. Different organisms use varied strategies to do this. Many unicellular organisms remove these wastes by simple diffusion from the body surface into the surrounding water. As we have seen in other processes, complex multi-cellular organisms use specialised organs to perform the same function. Left renal artery Left kidney 5.5.1 Excretion in Human Beings Left renal vein The excretory system of human beings (Fig. 5.13) includes a pair of kidneys, a pair of ureters, a urinary bladder and a urethra. Kidneys are located in the abdomen, one on either side of the backbone. Urine produced in the kidneys passes through the ureters into the urinary bladder where it is stored until it is released through the urethra. How is urine produced? The purpose of making urine is to filter out waste products from the blood. Just as CO, is removed from the blood in the lungs, nitrogenous waste such as urea or uric acid are Aorta Left ureter <A Vena cava Urinary bladder Urethra Figure 5.13 Excretory system in human beings removed from blood in the kidneys. It is then no surprise that the basic filtration unit in the kidneys, Science Reprint 2025-26 like in the lungs, is a cluster of very thin-walled blood capillaries. Each capillary cluster in the kidney is associated with the cup-shaped end of a coiled tube called Bowman s capsule that collects the filtrate Glomerulus Bowman's capsule Tubular part of Branch of renal (Fig. 5.14). Each kidney has large numbers of these artery filtration units called nephrons packed close together. Some substances in the initial filtrate, such as glucose, amino acids, salts and a major amount of water, are selectively re-absorbed as the urine flows along the tube. The amount of water re-absorbed depends on how much excess water there is in the body, and on how much of dissolved waste there is to be excreted. The urine forming in each kidney eventually enters a long tube, the ureter, which connects the kidneys with the urinary bladder. Urine is stored in the urinary bladder until the pressure of the expanded bladder leads to the urge to pass it out through the urethra. The bladder is muscular, so it is under nervous control, as