the lungs designed in human beings to maximise the area for exchange of gases? 5.4 TRANSPORTATION 5.4.1 Transportation in Human Beings = Visit a health centre in your locality and find out what is the normal range of haemoglobin content in human beings. = Is it the same for children and adults? = Is there any difference in the haemoglobin levels for men and women? = Visit a veterinary clinic in your locality. Find out what is the normal range of haemoglobin content in an animal like the buffalo or cow. = Is this content different in calves, male and female animals? = Compare the difference seen in male and female human beings and animals. = How would the difference, if any, be explained? We have seen in previous sections that blood transports food, oxygen and waste materials in our bodies. In Class IX, we learnt about blood being a fluid connective tissue. Blood consists of a fluid medium called plasma in which the cells are suspended. Plasma transports food, carbon dioxide and nitrogenous wastes in dissolved form. Oxygen is carried by the red blood corpuscles. Many other substances like salts, are also transported by the blood. We thus need a pumping organ to push blood around the body, a network of tubes to reach all the tissues and a system in place to ensure that this network can be repaired if damaged. Life Processes 91 Reprint 2025-26 Vena Cava from upper Right atrium | Vena Cava from lower body Right ventricle Septum (dividing wall) Figure 5.10 Schematic sectional view of the human heart Pulmonary artery to lungs Vena cava From body Vein Figure 5.11 Lung . capillaries RP Capillaries in body organs apart from the lungs Our pump the heart Aorta The heart is a muscular organ which is as big as our fist (Fig. 5.10). Because both oxygen and carbon dioxide have to be transported by the blood, the heart Pulmonary veins has different chambers to prevent the oxygen-rich blood from mixing with the Left atrium blood containing carbon dioxide. The carbon dioxide-rich blood has to reach the lungs for the carbon dioxide to be removed, and the oxygenated blood from the lungs has to be brought back to the heart. This oxygen-rich blood is then pumped to the rest of the body. We can follow this process step by step (Fig. 5.11). Oxygen-rich blood from the lungs comes to the thin-walled upper chamber of the heart on the left, the left atrium. The left atrium relaxes when it is collecting this blood. It then contracts, while the next chamber, the left ventricle, relaxes, so that the blood is transferred to it. When the muscular left ventricle contracts in its turn, the blood is pumped out to the body. De-oxygenated blood comes from the body to the upper chamber on the right, the right atrium, as it relaxes. As the right atrium contracts, the corresponding lower chamber, the right ventricle, dilates. This transfers blood to the right ventricle,