From her very childhood Bholi was neglected at home. Why did her teacher take special interest in her? Did Bholi measure up to her teacher s expectations? 1060CHOS READ AND FIND OUT Why is Bholi s father worried about her? For what unusual reasons is Bholi sent to school? HER name was Sulekha, but since her childhood everyone had been calling her Bholi, the simpleton. She was the fourth daughter of Numberdar Ramlal. When she was ten months old, she had fallen off the cot on her head and perhaps it had damaged some part of her brain. That was why she remained a backward child and came to be known as Bholi, the simpleton. At birth, the child was very fair and pretty. But when she was two years old, she had an attack of small-pox. Only the eyes were saved, but the entire body was permanently disfigured by deep black pockmarks. Little Sulekha could not speak till she was five, and when at last she learnt to speak, she stammered. The other children often made fun of her and mimicked her. As a result, she talked very little. Ramlal had seven children three sons and four daughters, and the youngest of them was Bholi. It was a prosperous farmer s household and there was plenty to eat and drink. All the children except Bholi were healthy and strong. The sons had been sent to the city to study in schools and later in colleges. Of the daughters, Radha, the eldest, had already been married. The second daughter Mangla s marriage had also been settled, and when that was done, Ramlal would think of the third, Champa. They were good-looking, healthy girls, and it was not difficult to find bridegrooms for them. But Ramlal was worried about Bholi. She had neither good looks nor intelligence. Reprint 2025-26 Bholi was seven years old when Mangla was married. The same year a primary school for girls was opened in their village. The Tehsildar sahib came to perform its opening ceremony. He said to Ramlal, As a revenue official you are the representative of the government in the village and so you must set an example to the villagers. You must send your daughters to school. That night when Ramlal consulted his wife, she cried, Are you crazy? If girls go to school, who will marry them? But Ramlal had not the courage to disobey the Tehsildar. At last his wife said, I will tell you what to do. Send Bholi to school. As it is, there is little chance of her getting married, with her ugly face and lack of sense. Let the teachers at school worry about her. READ AND FIND OUT Does Bholi enjoy her first day at school? Does she find her teacher different from the people at home? The next day Ramlal caught Bholi by the hand and said, Come with me. I will take you to school. Bholi was frightened. She did not 49 Foolprials without