shameless girl! We all thought she was a harmless dumb cow. Bholi turned violently on the old woman, Yes, Aunty, you are right. You all thought I was a dumb-driven cow. That s why you wanted to hand me over to this heartless creature. But now the dumb cow, the stammering fool, is speaking. Do you want to hear more? Bishamber Nath, the grocer, started to go back with his party. The confused bandsmen thought this was the end of the ceremony and struck up a closing song. Ramlal stood rooted to the ground, his head bowed low with the weight of grief and shame. The flames of the sacred fire slowly died down. Everyone was gone. Ramlal turned to Bholi and said, But what about you, no one will ever marry you now. What shall we do with you? And Sulekha said in a voice that was calm and steady, Don t you worry, Pitaji! In your old age I will serve you and Mother and I will teach in the same school where I learnt so much. Isn t that right, Ma am? The teacher had all along stood in a corner, watching the drama. Yes, Bholi, of course, she replied. And in her smiling eyes was the light of a deep satisfaction that an artist feels when contemplating the completion of her masterpiece. K.A. ABBAS GLOSSARY simpleton: a foolish person easily tricked by others numberdar: an official who collects revenue matted: entangled squatted: sat on their heels scurried: ran or moved hurriedly ginning: separating raw cotton from its seeds downeast: looking downwards 54 Foolprials without Fea Reprint 2025-26 Think about iL 1. Bholi had many apprehensions about going to school. What made her feel that she was going to a better place than her home? 2. How did Bholi s teacher play an important role in changing the course of her life? 3. Why did Bholi at first agree to an unequal match? Why did she later reject the marriage? What does this tell us about her? 4. Bholi s real name is Sulekha. We are told this right at the beginning. But only in the last but one paragraph of the story is Bholi called Sulekha again. Why do you think she is called Sulekha at that point in the story? 5. Bholi s story must have moved you. Do you think girl children are not treated at par with boys? You are aware that the government has introduced a scheme to save the girl child as the sex ratio is declining. The scheme is called Beti Bachao Beti Padhao, Save the Girl Child. Read about the scheme and design a poster tae in groups of four and display on the schoo] Misty ofWomen & Child Development notice board. Talk about 1. Bholi s teacher helped her overcome social barriers by encouraging and motivating her. How do you think you can contribute towards changing the social attitudes illustrated in this story? 2. Should girls be aware