school. As it is, there is little chance of her getting married, with her ugly face and lack of sense. Let the teachers at school worry about her. READ AND FIND OUT Does Bholi enjoy her first day at school? Does she find her teacher different from the people at home? The next day Ramlal caught Bholi by the hand and said, Come with me. I will take you to school. Bholi was frightened. She did not 49 Foolprials without Feat Reprint 2025-26 know what a school was like. She remembered how a few days ago their old cow, Lakshmi, had been turned out of the house and sold. N-n-n-n NO, no-no-no, she shouted in terror and pulled her hand away from her father s grip. What s the matter with you, you fool? shouted Ramlal. I am only taking you to school. Then he told his wife, Let her wear some decent clothes today, or else what will the teachers and the other schoolgirls think of us when they see her? New clothes had never been made for Bholi. The old dresses of her sisters were passed on to her. No one cared to mend or wash her clothes. But today she was lucky to receive a clean dress which had shrunk after many washings and no longer fitted Champa. She was even bathed and oil was rubbed into her dry and matted hair. Only then did she begin to believe that she was being taken to a place better than her home! When they reached the school, the children were already in their classrooms. Ramlal handed over his daughter to the headmistress. Left alone, the poor girl looked about her with fear-laden eyes. There were several rooms, and in each room girls like her squatted on mats, reading from books or writing on slates. The headmistress asked Bholi to sit down in a corner in one of the classrooms. Bholi 49 Reprint 2025-26 r\ Bholi did not know what exactly a school was like and what happened there, but she was glad to find so many girls almost of her own age present there. She hoped that one of these girls might become her friend. The lady teacher who was in the class was saying something to the girls but Bholi could understand nothing. She looked at the pictures on the wall. The colours fascinated her the horse was brown just like the horse on which the Tehsildar had come to visit their village; the goat was black like the goat of their neighbour; the parrot was green like the parrots she had seen in the mango orchard; and the cow was just like their Lakshmi. And suddenly Bholi noticed that the teacher was standing by her side, smiling at her. What s your name, little one? Bh-Bho-Bho-. She could stammer no further than that. Then she began to cry and tears flowed from her eyes in a helpless flood. She kept her head down as she sat