a red silken bridal dress, was led to the bride s place near the sacred fire. Garland the bride, one of his friends prompted Bishamber Nath. The bridegroom lifted the garland of yellow marigolds. A woman slipped back the silken veil from the bride s face. Bishamber took a quick glance. The garland remained poised in his hands. The bride slowly pulled down the veil over her face. Have you seen her? said Bishamber to the friend next to him. She has pock-marks on her face. So what? You are not young either. Maybe. But if I am to marry her, her father must give me five thousand rupees. Ramlal went and placed his turban his honour at Bishamber s feet. Do not humiliate me so. Take two thousand rupees. No. Five thousand, or we go back. Keep your daughter. Be a little considerate, please. If you go back, I can never show my face in the village. Then out with five thousand. Tears streaming down his face, Ramlal went in, opened the safe and counted out the notes. He placed the bundle at the bridegroom s feet. 52 Foolprials wibhout Feat Reprint 2025-26 On Bishamber s greedy face appeared a triumphant smile. He had gambled and won. Give me the garland, he announced. Once again the veil was slipped back from the bride s face, but this time her eyes were not downcast. She was looking up, looking straight at her prospective husband, and in her eyes there was neither anger nor hate, only cold contempt. Bishamber raised the garland to place it round the bride s neck; but before he could do so, Bholi s hand struck out like a streak of lightning and the garland was flung into the fire. She got up and threw away the veil. Pitaji! said Bholi in a clear loud voice; and her father, mother, sisters, brothers, relations and neighbours were startled to hear her speak without even the slightest stammer. Pitaji! Take back your money. I am not going to marry this man. r\ Bholi 53 Reprint 2025-26 Ramlal was thunderstruck. The guests began to whisper, So shameless! So ugly and so shameless! Bholi, are you crazy? shouted Ramlal. You want to disgrace your family? Have some regard for our izzat! For the sake of your izzat, said Bholi, I was willing to marry this lame old man. But I will not have such a mean, greedy and contemptible coward as my husband. I won't, I won't, I won't. What a shameless girl! We all thought she was a harmless dumb cow. Bholi turned violently on the old woman, Yes, Aunty, you are right. You all thought I was a dumb-driven cow. That s why you wanted to hand me over to this heartless creature. But now the dumb cow, the stammering fool, is speaking. Do you want to hear more? Bishamber Nath, the grocer, started to go back with his party. The confused bandsmen thought this was the end of