you. People will listen to you with respect and you will be able to speak without the slightest stammer. Understand? Now go home, and come back early tomorrow morning. Bholi felt as if suddenly all the bells in the village temple were ringing and the trees in front of the school-house had blossomed into big red flowers. Her heart was throbbing with a new hope and a new life. READ AND FIND OUT Why do Bholi s parents accept Bishamber s marriage proposal? Why does the marriage not take place? Thus the years passed. The village became a small town. The little primary school became a high school. There were now a cinema under a tin shed and a cotton ginning mill. The mail train began to stop at their railway station. One night, after dinner, Ramlal said to his wife, Then, shall I accept Bishamber s proposal? Yes, certainly, his wife said. Bholi will be lucky to get such a well-to-do bridegroom. A big shop, a house of his own and I hear several thousand in the bank. Moreover, he is not asking for any dowry. That s right, but he is not so young, you know almost the same age as I am and he also limps. Moreover, the children from his first wife are quite grown up. \ | Bick sl S Reprint 2025-26 So what does it matter? his wife replied. Forty-five or fifty it is no great age for a man. We are lucky that he is from another village and does not know about her pock-marks and her lack of sense. If we don t accept this proposal, she may remain unmarried all her life. Yes, but I wonder what Bholi will say. What will that witless one say? She is like a dumb cow. May be you are right, muttered Ramlal. In the other corner of the courtyard, Bholi lay awake on her cot, listening to her parents whispered conversation. Bishamber Nath was a well-to-do grocer. He came with a big party of friends and relations with him for the wedding. A brass-band playing a popular tune from an Indian film headed the procession, with the bridegroom riding a decorated horse. Ramlal was overjoyed to see such pomp and splendour. He had never dreamt that his fourth daughter would have such a grand wedding. Bholi s elder sisters who had come for the occasion were envious of her luck. When the auspicious moment came the priest said, Bring the bride. Bholi, clad in a red silken bridal dress, was led to the bride s place near the sacred fire. Garland the bride, one of his friends prompted Bishamber Nath. The bridegroom lifted the garland of yellow marigolds. A woman slipped back the silken veil from the bride s face. Bishamber took a quick glance. The garland remained poised in his hands. The bride slowly pulled down the veil over her face. Have you seen her? said Bishamber to the friend next to him.