What is a Molecule? A molecule is in general a group of two or more atoms that are chemically bonded together, that is, tightly held together by attractive forces. A molecule can be defined as the smallest particle of an element or a compound that is capable of an independent existence and shows all the properties of that substance. Atoms of the same element or of different elements can join together to form molecules. SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 3.3.1 MOLECULES OF ELEMENTS The molecules of an element are constituted by the same type of atoms. Molecules of many elements, such as argon (Ar), helium (He) etc. are made up of only one atom of that element. But this is not the case with most of the nonmetals. For example, a molecule of oxygen consists of two atoms of oxygen and hence it is known as a diatomic molecule, O,. If 3 atoms of oxygen unite into a molecule, instead of the usual 2, we get ozone, O,. The number of atoms constituting a molecule is known as its atomicity. Metals and some other elements, such as carbon, do not have a simple structure but consist of a very large and indefinite number of atoms bonded together. Let us look at the atomicity of some non-metals. Table 3.3 : Atomicity of some elements Name Atomicity Type of Element Monoatomic | _Monoato ic Daley rao Diatomic - Tetra-atomic Diatomic Poly-atomic 3.3.2 MOLECULES OF COMPOUNDS Atoms of different elements join together in definite proportions to form molecules of compounds. Few examples are given in Table 3.4. ATOMS AND MOLECULES Molecules of some compounds Table 3.4: Compound Combining Elements Water (H,O) Hydrogen, Oxygen 1:8 Ammonia (NH,) Nitrogen, Hydrogen 14:3 Carbon dioxide (CO,) Carbon, Oxygen 3:8 Activity e Refer to Table 3.4 for ratio by mass of atoms present in molecules and Table 3.2 for atomic masses of elements. Find the ratio by number of the atoms of elements in the molecules of compounds given in Table 3.4. e The ratio by number of atoms for a water molecule can be found as follows: e Thus, the ratio by number of atoms for water is H:O = 2:1. 3.3.3, WHAT IS AN ION? Compounds composed of metals and nonmetals contain charged species. The charged species are known as ions. Ions may consist of a single charged atom or a group of atoms that have a net charge on them. An ion can be negatively or positively charged. A negatively charged ion is called an anion and the positively charged ion, a cation . Take, for example, sodium chloride (NaCl). Its constituent particles are positively charged sodium ions (Na*) and negatively charged Reprint 2025-26 chloride ions (CI). A group of atoms carrying a charge is known as a polyatomic ion (Table 3.6). We shall learn more about the formation of ions in Chapter 4. Table 3.5: Some ionic compounds Ionic Compound Constituting Elements Calcium oxide Calcium and oxygen De} Magnesium Magnesium sulphide and sulphur 3:4 Sodium Sodium