Chapter3 Ancient Indian and Greek philosophers have always wondered about the unknown and unseen form of matter. The idea of divisibility of matter was considered long back in India, around 500 BC. An Indian philosopher Maharishi Kanad, postulated that if we go on dividing matter (padarth), we shall get smaller and smaller particles. Ultimately, a stage will come when we shall come across the smallest particles beyond which further division will not be possible. He named these particles Parmanu. Another Indian philosopher, Pakudha Katyayama, elaborated this doctrine and said that these particles normally exist in a combined form which gives us various forms of matter. Around the same era, ancient Greek philosophers Democritus and Leucippus suggested that if we go on dividing matter, a stage will come when particles obtained cannot be divided further. Democritus called these indivisible particles atoms (meaning indivisible). All this was based on philosophical considerations and not much experimental work to validate these ideas could be done till the eighteenth century. By the end of the eighteenth century, scientists recognised the difference between elements and compounds and naturally became interested in finding out how and why elements combine and what happens when they combine. Antoine L. Lavoisier laid the foundation of chemical sciences by establishing two important laws of chemical combination. 3.1 Laws of Chemical Combination The following two laws of chemical combination were established after 0964CHO3 ATOMS AND MOLECULES much experimentations by Lavoisier and Joseph L. Proust. 3.1.1 LAW OF CONSERVATION OF MASS Is there a change in mass when a chemical change (chemical reaction) takes place? Activity __ e Take one of the following sets, X and Y of chemicals x Y (i) copper sulphate sodium carbonate (ii) barium chloride sodium sulphate (iii) lead nitrate sodium chloride Prepare separately a 5% solution of any one pair of substances listed under X and Y each in 10 mL in water. e Take a little amount of solution of Y in a conical flask and some solution of X in an ignition tube. e Hang the ignition tube in the flask carefully; see that the solutions do not get mixed. Put a cork on the flask (see Fig. 3.1). Cork Thread Conical flask Small ignition tube Solution of X Solution of Y Fig. 3.1: Ignition tube containing solution of X, dipped in a conical flask containing solution of Y Reprint 2025-26 e Weigh the flask with its contents carefully. e Now tilt and swirl the flask, so that the solutions X and Y get mixed. e =>: Weigh again. e What happens in the reaction flask? e Do you think that a chemical reaction has taken place? e Why should we put a cork on the mouth of the flask? e Does the mass of the flask and its contents change? Law of conservation of mass states that mass can neither be created nor destroyed in a chemical reaction. 3.1.2 Law OF CONSTANT PROPORTIONS Lavoisier, along with other scientists, noted that many compounds were composed of