atoms are constant in a given compound. You will study in the next chapter that all atoms are made up of still smaller particles. uestions 1. In a reaction, 5.3 g of sodium carbonate reacted with 6 g of acetic acid. The products were 2.2 g of carbon dioxide, 0.9 g water and 8.2 g of sodium acetate. Show that these Reprint 2025-26 observations are in agreement with the law of conservation of mass. sodium carbonate + acetic acid + sodium acetate + carbon dioxide + water 2. Hydrogen and oxygen combine in the ratio of 1:8 by mass to form water. What mass of oxygen gas would be required to react completely with 3 g of hydrogen gas? 3. Which postulate of Dalton s atomic theory is the result of the law of conservation of mass? 4. Which postulate of Dalton s atomic theory can explain the law of definite proportions? 3.2 What is an Atom? Have you ever observed a mason building walls, from these walls a room and then a collection of rooms to form a building? What is the building block of the huge building? What about the building block of an ant-hill? It is a small grain of sand. Similarly, the building blocks of all matter are atoms. How big are atoms? Atoms are very small, they are smaller than anything that we can imagine or compare with. More than millions of atoms when stacked would make a layer barely as thick as this sheet of paper. We might think that if atoms are so insignificant in size, why should we care about them? This is because our entire world is made up of atoms. We may not be able to see them, but they are there, and constantly affecting whatever we do. Through modern techniques, we can now produce magnified images of surfaces of elements showing atoms. Fig. 3.2: An image of the surface of silicon 3.2.1 WHAT ARE THE MODERN DAY SYMBOLS OF ATOMS OF DIFFERENT ELEMENTS? Dalton was the first scientist to use the symbols for elements in a very specific sense. When he used a symbol for an element he also meant a definite quantity of that element, that is, one atom of that element. Berzilius suggested that the symbols of elements be made from one or two letters of the name of the element. ) Hydrogen Carbon C) Oxygen Phosphorus ac Sulphur Qa) Iron (c) (1) Lead (s) Silver <) Gold (P) Platina ) Mercury Fig. 3.3: Symbols for some elements as proposed by Dalton O Copper SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 In the beginning, the names of elements were derived from the name of the place where they were found for the first time. For example, the name copper was taken from Cyprus. Some names were taken from specific colours. For example, gold was taken from the English word meaning yellow. Now-a-days, IUPAC (International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry) is an international scientific organisation which approves names of elements, symbols