iron and copper are metals, and are written on the left. e incompounds formed with polyatomic ions, the number of ions present in the compound is indicated by enclosing the formula of ion in a bracket and writing the number of ions outside the bracket. For example, Mg (OH),. In case the number of polyatomic ion is one, the bracket is not required. For example, NaOH. 3.4.1 FORMULAE OF SIMPLE COMPOUNDS The simplest compounds, which are made up of two different elements are called binary compounds. Valencies of some ions are given in Table 3.6. You can use these to write formulae for compounds. While writing the chemical formulae for compounds, we write the constituent elements and their valencies as shown below. Then we must crossover the valencies of the combining atoms. Examples 1. Formula of hydrogen chloride Symbol H Cl Valency 1 1 Formula of the compound would be HCI. 2. Formula of hydrogen sulphide Symbol H Ss Valency 1 2 Formula : H,S ATOMS AND MOLECULES 3. Formula of carbon tetrachloride Symbol C Cl Valency 4 ] Formula : CCl, For magnesium chloride, we write the symbol of cation (Mg *) first followed by the symbol of anion (Cl). Then their charges are criss-crossed to get the formula. 4. Formula of magnesium chloride Symbol Mg Cl Charge 2+ 1Formula : MgCl, Thus, in magnesium chloride, there are two chloride ions (CI) for each magnesium ion (Mg?*). The positive and negative charges must balance each other and the overall structure must be neutral. Note that in the formula, the charges on the ions are not indicated. Some more examples (a) Formula for aluminium oxide: Symbol Al O Charge 3+ Xe, Formula : Al,O, (b) Formula for calcium oxide: Symbol Ca O Charge 2+ 2 Here, the valencies of the two elements are the same. You may arrive at the formula Ca,O,. But we simplify the formula as CaO. Reprint 2025-26 (c) Formula of sodium nitrate: Symbol/ Formula Na NO, Charge 1+ 1 Formula : NaNO 3 (d) Formula of calcium hydroxide: Symbol/ a OH Formula x Charge 924 1Formula : Ca(OH), Note that the formula of calcium hydroxide is Ca(OH), and not CaOH,. We use brackets when we have two or more of the same ions in the formula. Here, the bracket around OH with a subscript 2 indicates that there are two hydroxyl (OH) groups joined to one calcium atom. In other words, there are two atoms each of oxygen and hydrogen in calcium hydroxide. (e) Formula of sodium carbonate: Symbol/ Na Formula CO; Charge 1+ Xy, Formula : Na,CO, In the above example, brackets are not needed if there is only one ion present. ()} Formula of ammonium sulphate: Formula NH, SO, Charge 14 2Formula : (NH,),SO, uestions 1. Write down the formulae of fi) sodium oxide di) aluminium chloride (iii) sodium sulphide (iv) magnesium hydroxide 2. Write down the names of compounds represented by the following formulae: @ ALSO), fii) CaCl, (iii) K,SO, (iv) KNO, (v)