Mass. e In a pure chemical compound, elements are always present in a definite proportion by mass. This is known as the Law of Definite Proportions. e An atom is the smallest particle of the element that cannot usually exist independently and retain all its chemical properties. e A molecule is the smallest particle of an element or a compound capable of independent existence under ordinary conditions. It shows all the properties of the substance. e A chemical formula of a compound shows its constituent elements and the number of atoms of each combining element. Clusters of atoms that act as an ion are called polyatomic ions. They carry a fixed charge on them. e The chemical formula of a molecular compound is determined by the valency of each element. e In ionic compounds, the charge on each ion is used to determine the chemical formula of the compound. ATOMS AND MOLECULES 35 Reprint 2025-26 oo A 0.24 g sample of compound of oxygen and boron was found by analysis to contain 0.096 g of boron and 0.144 g of oxygen. Calculate the percentage composition of the compound by weight. When 3.0 g of carbon is burnt in 8.00 g oxygen, 11.00 g of carbon dioxide is produced. What mass of carbon dioxide will be formed when 3.00 g of carbon is burnt in 50.00 g of oxygen? Which law of chemical combination will govern your answer? What are polyatomic ions? Give examples. Write the chemical formulae of the following. (a) Magnesium chloride (b) Calcium oxide (c) Copper nitrate (d) Aluminium chloride (e) Calcium carbonate. Give the names of the elements present in the following compounds. (a) Quick lime (b) Hydrogen bromide (c) Baking powder (d) Potassium sulphate. Calculate the molar mass of the following substances. (a) Ethyne, C,H, (b) Sulphur molecule, S, (c) Phosphorus molecule, P, (Atomic mass of phosphorus = 31) (d) Hydrochloric acid, HCl (e) Nitric acid, HNO, mu Group Activity Play a game for writing formulae. Examplel : Make placards with symbols and valencies of the elements separately. Each student should hold two placards, one with the symbol in the right hand and the other with the valency in the left hand. Keeping the symbols in place, students should criss-cross their valencies to form the formula of a compound. SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 Example 2 : A low cost model for writing formulae: Take empty blister packs of medicines. Cut them in groups, according to the valency of the element, as shown in the figure. Now, you can make formulae by fixing one type of ion into other. For example: Na* SO, PO,* 4 4 ~ IFIWe J LI Le J LI LI Le Formula for sodium sulphate: 2 sodium ions can be fixed on one sulphate ion. Hence, the formula will be: Na,SO, Do it yourself : Now, write the formula of sodium phosphate. ATOMS AND MOLECULES 37 Reprint 2025-26