about elements. Do not bother to memorise all in one go. With the ATOMS AND MOLECULES Element Symbol Nitrogen N Oxygen O Potassium K Silicon Si Silver Ag Sodium Na Sulphur Ss Uranium U Zinc Zn assign carbon an atomic mass of 1.0 u and oxygen an atomic mass of 1.33 u. However, it is more convenient to have these numbers as Reprint 2025-26 whole numbers or as near to a whole numbers as possible. While searching for various atomic mass units, scientists initially took 1/ 16 of the mass of an atom of naturally occurring oxygen as the unit. This was considered relevant due to two reasons: e oxygen reacted with a large number of elements and formed compounds. e this atomic mass unit gave masses of most of the elements as whole numbers. However, in 1961 for a universally accepted atomic mass unit, carbon-12 isotope was chosen as the standard reference for measuring atomic masses. One atomic mass unit is a mass unit equal to exactly one-twelfth (1/12) the mass of one atom of carbon-12. The relative atomic masses of all elements have been found with respect to an atom of carbon-12. Imagine a fruit seller selling fruits without any standard weight with him. He takes a watermelon and says, this has a mass equal to 12 units (12 watermelon units or 12 fruit mass units). He makes twelve equal pieces of the watermelon and finds the mass of each fruit he is selling, relative to the mass of one piece of the watermelon. Now he sells his fruits by relative fruit mass unit (fmu), as in Fig. 3.4. (a) (b) (c) (d) Fig. 3.4 : (a) Watermelon, (b) 12 pieces, (c) 1/12 of watermelon, (d) how the fruit seller can weigh the fruits using pieces of watermelon Similarly, the relative atomic mass of the atom of an element is defined as the average mass of the atom, as compared to 1/12" the mass of one carbon-12 atom. Table 3.2: Atomic masses of a few elements Element Atomic Mass (u) Hydrogen 1 Carbon 12 Nitrogen 14 Oxygen 16 Sodium 23 Magnesium 24 Sulphur 32 Chlorine 35.5 Calcium 40 3.2.3 How DO ATOMS EXIST? Atoms of most elements are not able to exist independently. Atoms form molecules and ions. These molecules or ions aggregate in large numbers to form the matter that we can see, feel or touch. uestions 1. Define the atomic mass unit. 2. Why is it not possible to see an atom with naked eyes? 3.3 What is a Molecule? A molecule is in general a group of two or more atoms that are chemically bonded together, that is, tightly held together by attractive forces. A molecule can be defined as the smallest particle of an element or a compound that is capable of an independent existence and shows all the properties of that substance. Atoms of the same element or of different elements can join together to form molecules. SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 3.3.1 MOLECULES OF