the positively charged ion, a cation . Take, for example, sodium chloride (NaCl). Its constituent particles are positively charged sodium ions (Na*) and negatively charged Reprint 2025-26 chloride ions (CI). A group of atoms carrying a charge is known as a polyatomic ion (Table 3.6). We shall learn more about the formation of ions in Chapter 4. Table 3.5: Some ionic compounds Ionic Compound Constituting Elements Calcium oxide Calcium and oxygen De} Magnesium Magnesium sulphide and sulphur 3:4 Sodium Sodium chloride and chlorine ORS) 3.4 Writing Chemical Formulae The chemical formula of a compound is a symbolic representation of its composition. The chemical formulae of different compounds can be written easily. For this exercise, we need to learn the symbols and combining capacity of the elements. The combining power (or capacity) of an element is known as its valency. Valency can be used to find out how the atoms of an element will combine with the atom(s) of another element to form a chemical compound. The valency of the atom of an element can be thought of as hands or arms of that atom. Human beings have two arms and an octopus has eight. If one octopus has to catch hold of a few people in such a manner that all the eight arms of the octopus and both arms of all the humans are locked, how many humans do you think the octopus can hold? Represent the octopus with O and humans with H. Can you write a formula for this combination? Do you get OH, as the formula? The subscript 4 indicates the number of humans held by the octopus. The valencies of some common ions are given in Table 3.6. We will learn more about valency in the next chapter. Table 3.6: Names and symbols of some ions Name of ion Symbol Nonmetallic Polyatomic Symbol ions element Ammonium Hydroxide OH Nitrate NO, Hydrogen carbonate HCO; Carbonate CO, Sulphite SO, Sulphate So,7 Phosphate PO,* * Some elements show more than one valency. A Roman numeral shows their valency in a bracket. SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 The rules that you have to follow while writing a chemical formula are as follows: e the valencies or charges on the ion must balance. e whenacompound consists of a metal and a non-metal, the name or symbol of the metal is written first. For example: calcium oxide (CaO), sodium chloride (NaCl), iron sulphide (FeS), copper oxide (CuO), etc., where oxygen, chlorine, sulphur are nonmetals and are written on the right, whereas calcium, sodium, iron and copper are metals, and are written on the left. e incompounds formed with polyatomic ions, the number of ions present in the compound is indicated by enclosing the formula of ion in a bracket and writing the number of ions outside the bracket. For example, Mg (OH),. In case the number of polyatomic ion is one, the bracket is not required. For example, NaOH. 3.4.1 FORMULAE OF SIMPLE COMPOUNDS The simplest compounds, which are made up of two