a right circular cone is 9856 cm . If the diameter of the base is 28 cm, find (i) height of the cone (ii) slant height of the cone (iil) curved surface area of the cone 7. Aright triangle ABC with sides 5 cm, 12 cm and 13 cm is revolved about the side 12 cm. Find the volume of the solid so obtained. 8. Ifthe triangle ABC in the Question 7 above is revolved about the side 5 cm, then find the volume of the solid so obtained. Find also the ratio of the volumes of the two solids obtained in Questions 7 and 8. 9. A heap of wheat is in the form of a cone whose diameter is 10.5 m and height is 3 m. Find its volume. The heap is to be covered by canvas to protect it from rain. Find the area of the canvas required. Reprint 2025-26 148 MATHEMATICS 11.4 Volume of a Sphere Now, let us see how to go about measuring the volume of a sphere. First, take two or three spheres of different radii, and a container big enough to be able to put each of the spheres into it, one at a time. Also, take a large trough in which you can place the container. Then, fill the container up to the brim with water [see Fig. 11.13(a)]. Now, carefully place one of the spheres in the container. Some of the water from the container will over flow into the trough in which it is kept [see Fig. 11.13(b)]. Carefully pour out the water from the trough into a measuring cylinder (1.e., a graduated cylindrical jar) and measure the water over flowed [see Fig. 11.13(c)]. Suppose the radius of the immersed sphere is 7 (you can find the radius by measuring the diameter of the sphere). Then evaluate 3 mr . Do you find this value almost equal to the measure of the volume over flowed? (a) (b) (c) Fig. 11.13 Once again repeat the procedure done just now, with a different size of sphere. Find the radius R of this sphere and then calculate the value of ym. Once again this value is nearly equal to the measure of the volume of the water displaced (over flowed) by the sphere. What does this tell us? We know that the volume of the sphere is the same as the measure of the volume of the water displaced by it. By doing this experiment repeatedly with spheres of varying radii, we are getting the same result, namely, the volume of a sphere is equal to 37 times the cube of its radius. This gives us the idea that Volume of a Sphere = rule where r is the radius of the sphere. Later, in higher classes it can be proved also. But at this stage, we will just take it as true. Reprint 2025-26 SURFACE AREAS AND VOLUMES 149 Since a hemisphere is half of a sphere, can you guess what