us wind a string around the ball. When you have reached the fullest part of the ball, use pins to keep the string in place, and continue to wind the string around the remaining part of the ball, till you have completely covered the ball [see Fig. 11.7(a)]. Mark the starting and finishing points on the string, and slowly unwind the string from the surface of the ball. Now, ask your teacher to help you in measuring the diameter of the ball, from which you easily get its radius. Then on a sheet of paper, draw four circles with radius equal to the radius of the ball. Start filling the circles one by one, with the string you had wound around the ball [see Fig. 11.7(b)]. (b) Fig. 11.7 What have you achieved in all this? The string, which had completely covered the surface area of the sphere, has been used to completely fill the regions of four circles, all of the same radius as of the sphere. So, what does that mean? This suggests that the surface area of a sphere of radius r = 4 times the area of a circle of radius r = 4 x (1 r ) So, Surface Area of a Sphere = 4 2 7 Reprint 2025-26 SURFACE AREAS AND VOLUMES 143 where r is the radius of the sphere. How many faces do you see in the surface of a sphere? There is only one, which is curved. Now, let us take a solid sphere, and slice it exactly through the middle with a plane that passes through its centre. What happens to the sphere? Yes, it gets divided into two equal parts (see Fig. 11.8)! What will each half be called? It is called a hemisphere. (Because hemi also means half ) Fig. 11.8 And what about the surface of a hemisphere? How many faces does it have? Two! There is a curved face and a flat face (base). The curved surface area of a hemisphere is half the surface area of the sphere, which is > of 427 . Therefore, | Curved Surface Area of a Hemisphere = 2x where r is the radius of the sphere of which the hemisphere is a part. Now taking the two faces of a hemisphere, its surface area 277 + mr? So,| Total Surface Area of a Hemisphere = 327 Example 4 : Find the surface area of a sphere of radius 7 cm. Solution : The surface area of a sphere of radius 7 cm would be Anr = 4 x > x 7x 7 cm? = 616 cm? Example 5 : Find (1) the curved surface area and (ii) the total surface area of a hemisphere of radius 21 cm. Solution : The curved surface area of a hemisphere of radius 21 cm would be = 2nr=2 x 7 x 21 x 21 em? = 2772 cm? Reprint 2025-26 144 MATHEMATICS (11) the total surface area of the hemisphere would be