extra length of material that will be required for stitching margins and wastage in cutting is approximately 20 cm (Use m = 3.14). 6. The slant height and base diameter of a conical tomb are 25 m and 14 m respectively. Find the cost of white-washing its curved surface at the rate of 210 per 100 m . 7. Ajoker s cap is in the form of a right circular cone of base radius 7 cm and height 24 cm. Find the area of the sheet required to make 10 such caps. 8. A bus stop is barricaded from the remaining part of the road, by using 50 hollow cones made of recycled cardboard. Each cone has a base diameter of 40 cm and height 1 m. If the outer side of each of the cones is to be painted and the cost of painting is 12 per m , what will be the cost of painting all these cones? (Use m = 3.14 and take V1.04 = 1.02) 11.2 Surface Area of a Sphere What is a sphere? Is it the same as a circle? Can you draw a circle on a paper? Yes, you can, because a circle is a plane closed figure whose every point lies at a constant distance (called radius) from a fixed point, which is called the centre of the circle. Now if you paste a string along a diameter of a circular disc and rotate it as you had rotated the triangle in the previous section, you see a new solid (see Fig 11.6). What does it resemble? A ball? Yes. It is called a sphere. Fig. 11.6 Reprint 2025-26 142 MATHEMATICS Can you guess what happens to the centre of the circle, when it forms a sphere on rotation? Of course, it becomes the centre of the sphere. So, a sphere is a three dimensional figure (solid figure), which is made up of all points in the space, which lie at a constant distance called the radius, from a fixed point called the centre of the sphere. Note : A sphere is like the surface of a ball. The word solid sphere is used for the solid whose surface is a sphere. Activity : Have you ever played with a top or have you at least watched someone play with one? You must be aware of how a string is wound around it. Now, let us take a rubber ball and drive a nail into it. Taking support of the nail, let us wind a string around the ball. When you have reached the fullest part of the ball, use pins to keep the string in place, and continue to wind the string around the remaining part of the ball, till you have completely covered the ball [see Fig. 11.7(a)]. Mark the starting and finishing points on the string, and slowly unwind the string from the surface of the ball. Now, ask your teacher to help you in measuring the diameter of