will. Thank you for your time today! Neem Baba : Bless you, my child! Adapted from Neem Baba By S. I. FAroogt Let us discuss 1. How is neem useful to farmers? 2. Mention some of the uses of the neem tree. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 3.indd 80 18-Mar-25 2:36:56 PM NurturinGc Nature . Let us think and reflect I You just read about the neem tree. Write any two facts that surprised you the most. II Complete the following sentences. 1. Amber played in the shade of 2. Neem seed powder protects crops from _ 3. is a cost-effective method to stop mosquitoes from breeding in stagnant water. 4. One reason why doctors advise us to use neem leaves for someone suffering from measles is III Which parts of the neem tree are used to make medicines? IV Why is the story of neem tree thought-provoking? Ld iol Let us learn I Study these words from the text. * something * neem oil cleanliness-parting well known * grandmother seed powder * childhood * well trained * thought-provoking Put the compound words given above in their trees. These words are known as compound words. There are three types of compound words, based on how the words are separated. e Open compound words: spaces between the words. Closed compound words: no spaces between the words. Hyphenated compound words: hyphens between the words. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 3.indd 81 09-Dec-24 3:52:08 PM Poorvi GRabDE 6 You may add some more words: Hyphenated compound words II Words that tell us what a person is doing are called verbs. In the table given below, match the verbs in the first column showing action in the present to verbs in the second column showing action in the past. Make a sentence with any one form of the verb. One has been done for you. Past A eC Sentence I want to become a teacher 1. become (i) made 1. (iv) when I grow up. 2. find (ii) gave 3. make (iii) told 4, discover (iv) became 5. tell (v) found 6. give (vi) discovered Reprint 2025-26 Unit 3.indd 82 18-Mar-25 2:37:30 PM NurturinGc Nature III Amber speaks to Neem Baba as if speaking to a person. This figure of speech is called personification. Let us look at some more examples. The leaves whispered in the wind. The flowers danced merrily in the breeze. Now, discuss it with your classmates and teacher. > Let us listen You will now listen to a boy speaking to his mother. As you listen, select the correct statements. (refer to page 101 for transcript) 1. The mother was surprised to know that Peepal Baba had planted trees all over the country. 2. The mother disliked the work being done by Peepal Baba. 3. The mother wanted to know more about Peepal Baba. 4. The boy decided to take care of trees by listening to Peepal Baba s journey. 5. The boy was worried about what his teacher had told him. Let us