(black pepper) is also helpful in digestion and can give us relief from body pain. You may have seen that at the end of a meal, saunf (fennel seeds) and ajwain (carom seeds) are served. It is because they help in the digestion of food. Elaichi (cardamom) also helps us with digestion and respiratory troubles in addition to curing bad breath. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 3.indd 94 09-Dec-24 3:52:32 PM NurturinGc Nature ee Psi ey Fameeee 5 Uys I Read the given lines and answer the following questions. When I was a child, I learnt them from my grandmother. She used to find cures for most of the weather-related common illnesses in the kitchen. 1. Where exactly in the kitchen did her grandmother find the cures? 2. Give one example of weather-related common illnesses. 3. What kind ofrelationship did the speaker have with her grandmother? II Fill in the blanks to complete the sentence. Daadi soaked methi seeds overnight and drank the water in the morning to manage and III Circle the spice that is not useful for body pain according to Daadi s letter. 1. Turmeric 2. Fennel seeds 3. Ginger 4. Black pepper IV Why did Daadi ask Vikram and Vaibhavi to share the natural cures with their friends? V What was Daadi s final advice to Vikram and Vaibhavi? VI How do we know that natural cures are passed from one generation to another? VII Why do you think we should know about the healing properties of spices? Reprint 2025-26 Unit 3.indd 95 09-Dec-24 3:52:33 PM Poorvi GRabDE 6 I You have read the uses of spices in the letter. Complete the following table with the help of your teacher. You may use the words from the box given below. Part of the plant: root/bark/leaves/flower buds/fruit/seeds Texture: rough/soft/silky Taste: bitter/sweet/sour/salty/spicy Part of the plant Colour Texture Turmeric Fenugreek Cinnamon Clove Black pepper Cardamom II Read the sentences given below. You may share them with your friends. You should try to remember these cures. * It can help control cough and cold. You must consult an elder before you use them. I need to soak the methi seeds overnight. I used to put heeng water on your tummy. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 3.indd 96 09-Dec-24 3:52:34 PM Unit 3.indd 97 NurturinGc Nature The underlined words are known as helping verbs. These are called modal verbs or modals. Each modal verb has a different function. 1. The words given in Column A are helping verbs. Match the helping verbs in Column A with their functions in Column B. Column A Helping verbs (i) may Column B Functions A. past habit Gi) should B. suggestion Gii) can C. compulsion (iv) must D. advice (v) need to E. ability (vi) used to F. necessity 2. Complete the following dialogues with any four modals from the table given above. (Use a modal only once.) Ajay: Anand had fever last week. He (i) rest. Suman : Yes, he (ii) Ajay: He (iii) Suman : Yes,