fact sheet based on what Neem Baba told her. Unit 3.indd 77 Reprint 2025-26 A 09-Dec-24 3:52:08 PM | Poorvi GRabDE 6 LET US KNOW OUR NEEM Il Amber :I know that people clean their teeth with your twigs and protect clothes with your leaves. Sometime back, when my brother had measles, the doctor told us to put neem leaves on his bed and make him lie down on them. Can you explain why? Neem Baba: The doctors know that neem leaves have chemical properties that destroy germs. Measles cause itching all over the body. Neem leaves give comfort and do not allow germs to breed. Neem leaves, bark, flowers, fruits and even roots can be used to make medicines to cure many diseases. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 3.indd 78 09-Dec-24 3:52:08 PM Amber Neem Baba Amber Neem Baba Amber Unit 3.indd 79 : Yes, I once had a cough and I could not breathe properly. My grandmother cured me with a medicine made from neem bark. And when my father had itching in the eyes, she prepared a kajal from neem flowers, which cured him. : Oh, little Amber, you know so much. Remember, these remedies are to be used only by people who are well trained and have a lot of experience. : Yes, I will. Tell me Neem Baba, is there any use of neem for the farmers? : Yes. If the powder of neem seeds is mixed in water and sprayed on plants and trees, then locusts don t eat them. If it is used in rice fields, where water remains standing, it stops mosquito breeding and helps to increase crop yield. It also saves the crop from termites, which eat roots of the crop, and it also stops breeding of other insects that eat crops. : That means, if we put the powder of neem seeds in stagnant water around our homes, mosquitoes Reprint 2025-26 NurturinGc Nature a 09-Dec-24 3:52:08 PM | Poorvi GRabDE 6 won't breed in them! This must be a cost-effective method to stop mosquitoes from breeding. Please tell me other uses of neem in our daily life. Neem Baha : Ofcourse. People save their stored grains from insects by adding neem seed powder to them. Neem oil is also used to make soaps and toothpaste. Furniture made from neem wood is not eaten by termites. Neem also purifies the air. There are many qualities yet to be discovered. Will you discover them when you grow up? Amber : Yes, Neem Baba. I will. Thank you for your time today! Neem Baba : Bless you, my child! Adapted from Neem Baba By S. I. FAroogt Let us discuss 1. How is neem useful to farmers? 2. Mention some of the uses of the neem tree. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 3.indd 80 18-Mar-25 2:36:56 PM NurturinGc Nature . Let us think and reflect I You just read about the neem tree. Write any two facts that surprised you the most. II Complete the following sentences.