NEEM BABA 0673CHO3 Let us do these activities before we read. I A tree is useful to us in many ways. Mention some of these uses. Write them in the picture given below. Q Some parts of trees are used beeeeeeeeeeeeneeeeeeeeees in preparing medicines II Neem is a common tree in our country. Discuss in groups of four and fill Columns 1 and 2 with what you know about the neem tree and what you want to know. Column 1. Column 2. What do you know? What do you want to know? Reprint 2025-26 Unit 3.indd 75 18-Mar-25 2:35:56 PM Poorvi GRabDE 6 Let us read Amber returned from : school and sat down in the shade of the neem tree in her courtyard. She felt that the tree was whispering to her. She looked at the tree and spoke to the tree. Amber : Namaste! I am Amber. I would like to talk to you. May I? Neem Baba : Sure, dear Amber. I know you. You played in my shade in your childhood. You may call me Neem Baba . Amber : Ihave seen you almost everywhere. Please tell me something more about yourself. Neem Baba :I am very old. I was born millions of years ago somewhere in North India or Myanmar. Soon, my family spread outside India. Amber : Outside India? Where else can neem be found? Neem Baha : My family can be found in many Asian and African countries and even in some parts of America. Amber : That s wonderful! Who gave you your name? Reprint 2025-26 Unit 3.indd 76 09-Dec-24 3:52:08 PM Neem Baba : Amber Neem Baba : Amber Neem Baba : The story of my name is very thought-provoking. I was born in India and given Sanskrit names such as Arishta (the one who cures diseases), Nimba and Nimbaca. The name Neem is given by the Iranians. : Really? Yes, in Hindi, my name is Nimb. In India, I have other names Nim, Leemba, Nimori, Nimbamond, Nimbe and Nimo. : You are so well known! That is wonderful. Dear Amber, we become well known for what we do. People find us useful and that is why they know us. Scientists call us bitter grace of God , nature s gift to man , and cleanliness-parting tree . Some even call us magic tree and the tree of the twentieth century . Let us discuss NurturinGc Nature Amber found many facts about the neem tree from Neem Baba. Fill up the fact sheet based on what Neem Baba told her. Unit 3.indd 77 Reprint 2025-26 A 09-Dec-24 3:52:08 PM | Poorvi GRabDE 6 LET US KNOW OUR NEEM Il Amber :I know that people clean their teeth with your twigs and protect clothes with your leaves. Sometime back, when my brother had measles, the doctor told us to put neem leaves on his bed and make him lie down on them. Can you explain why? Neem Baba: The doctors know that