A with their functions in Column B. Column A Helping verbs (i) may Column B Functions A. past habit Gi) should B. suggestion Gii) can C. compulsion (iv) must D. advice (v) need to E. ability (vi) used to F. necessity 2. Complete the following dialogues with any four modals from the table given above. (Use a modal only once.) Ajay: Anand had fever last week. He (i) rest. Suman : Yes, he (ii) Ajay: He (iii) Suman : Yes, we (iv) take good or he will fall ill again. take grandmother s natural cures. remember how effective they are. Reprint 2025-26 09-Dec-24 3:52:34 PM Poorvi GRabDE 6 Let us listen You will listen to the benefits of Tulsi (Holy Basil), a common herb. As you listen, complete the fact sheet given below. (refer to page 102 for transcript) 1. Name THE WONDER HERB Tulsi Family: 2. First found in 3. Now found everywhere in India 4. Known as The of herbs 5. Can decrease levels of and cholesterol 6. Used to treat disorders of breathing and 7. Is used to make Let us speak 8. We can have Tulsi leaves by mouth wash and eating them while making or adding them 1. Daadi told Vikram and Vaibhavi about many spices. Choose one spice and introduce yourself as that spice to the class. 2. Before you speak, make a spicy headband for the spice you chose. Follow the steps given below. Cut out strips of a paper 2 inches wide. Unit 3.indd 98 <= Join two ends to make a band ===> card witha that can fit your head. Reprint 2025-26 ne Make a small Attach the card on your picture ofa headband. spice. Colour it. 18-Mar-25 2:41:15 PM NurturinGc Nature Use the headband while introducing yourself as the spice. 3. Mention the following while speaking. * your name * part of the plant * colour * texture e taste benefits Sw Let us write I Vikram s grandmother shared two natural cures to cure his cough in her earlier letter. It was kept outside and a few drops of rain fell on it. Some of the words got washed away by the rain. Help Vikram complete the natural cures. Use the phrases given in the box below. There are two phrases that you do not need. ! some leaves of basil for cough amount of honey : the mixture for high fever a piece of fresh ginger ' you can have it grind to get home remedy Natural Cures for Cough 1. To prepare this home remedy, you just need ginger and honey. First, take , grate it and take the juice from it. Take about two teaspoons of this juice and add about two and half teaspoons of honey to it. Mix it properly. Warm ___slightly on very low heat for a minute. Then about three to four times a day to get relief from cough. Have patience to see the effect as natural cures with ginger and