read. I A spice is any seed, fruit, root, bark, leaf or any other part of a plant used to give taste and colour to our food. Try to recall the names of three spices that are used for cooking in your home. Write them below and share your answers with your teacher. 1. 2. 3. II Given below are pictures of some spices. Work in pairs and write what you call them in your language. Their names in English are given in the last column. Share your answers with your teacher. Name in your language Turmeric Fenugreek Cumin seeds Asafoetida Cinnamon Clove Ginger Black pepper Fennel seeds Cardamom Reprint 2025-26 Unit 3.indd 93 09-Dec-24 3:52:27 PM Poorvi GRabDE 6 III Do you know if these spices can be used for something else other than cooking? Let us find out by reading the letter given below. Dear Vikram and Vaibhavi, Namaste! I just got your message that you are better now. I am happy that the natural cures that I had shared, helped you. You should try to remember these cures and may share them with your friends. When I was a child, I learnt them from my grandmother. She used to find home remedies for most of the weather-related common illnesses. Let me share some of the benefits of the spices that most of us have in our kitchen. Let mestart with haldi, which is called turmeric in English. It helps in improving our energy level and digestion. It helps in reducing body pain too. Next, let us take methi, which is called fenugreek in English. You will be surprised to know that it helps me in keeping my sugar level and my body weight in control. [need to soak the methi seeds overnight and drink the water in the morning. * Jeera (cumin) seeds soaked in water overnight can also improve digestion and help cure sleeplessness. You know, when you were babies and had gas in your tummy, I used to put heeng (asafoetida) water on your tummy to give you some relief. Heeng can also help in controlling cough and cold. e Dalchini (cinnamon) and laung (clove) give relief when we have toothache till we can consult a dentist. e Adrak (ginger) is another herb that can help us when we have cough and cold. It also gives relief from pain. Do you know, ginger has been used in cooking for more than 4000 years? Even today, it is extensively used in cooking Indian food. Kali mirch (black pepper) is also helpful in digestion and can give us relief from body pain. You may have seen that at the end of a meal, saunf (fennel seeds) and ajwain (carom seeds) are served. It is because they help in the digestion of food. Elaichi (cardamom) also helps us with digestion and respiratory troubles in addition to curing bad breath. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 3.indd 94 09-Dec-24 3:52:32 PM NurturinGc Nature ee Psi ey Fameeee 5 Uys I Read the