you listen, select the correct statements. (refer to page 101 for transcript) 1. The mother was surprised to know that Peepal Baba had planted trees all over the country. 2. The mother disliked the work being done by Peepal Baba. 3. The mother wanted to know more about Peepal Baba. 4. The boy decided to take care of trees by listening to Peepal Baba s journey. 5. The boy was worried about what his teacher had told him. Let us speak Collect dry leaves of four different trees and plants around you. 1. Make one card as given below. On the top, draw the shape of the leaf looking at the dry leaf and colour it. Inside the card, write the name of the tree/plant the leaf is taken from and one of its uses. 2. Now, speak about the whole process of making the card in front of the class. 3. Ask your classmates to identify the leaf and tell them one of its uses. After they answer, open the card, and share what you have written. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 3.indd 83 09-Dec-24 3:52:12 PM Poorvi GRabDE 6 Let us write You have read about Neem Baba and learnt many things about the neem tree. Look at the trees in your neighbourhood and write a paragraph about any one tree that you like. Where it is (roadside/park, etc.) How it looks (height, tree trunk, leaves, flowers, etc.) Why you like it (shade, medicinal properties, shelter, beauty, etc.) * Give a title to your paragraph. Let us explore When people from Persia came to India and saw that a common tree of their country was freely growing here, they started calling the tree Azad Darakhte Hindi. So, the scientific name of Neem in Latin became Azadirachta indica. Neem has different names in the Indian languages. Discuss with your teacher and find out which Indian languages these names belong to. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 3.indd 84 09-Dec-24 3:52:12 PM NurturinGc Nature Wuat A Birp THOUGHT Let us do these activities before we read. I Look at the picture and discuss what you see in the picture with your teacher and classmates. Think of a time when you worked hard. What did you do then? How did it help you? How did it make you feel? Also, discuss in groups. II Where do you see birds? What do you see the birds doing? III Do you want to fly like a bird? Why? IV What does a baby bird think about its world? V Read the sentences and replace the underlined words with their correct meanings. Sentences Meanings 1. | The colour of the feather was not dark but at last pale. 2. |The butterfly moved lightly and quickly on light to the flower. 3. | Finally, I finished my bird painting after labour trying many times. 4. | The pretty flowers were the prize for the fluttered gardener s hard work. Reprint 2025-26 Yi Unit 3.indd 85 18-Mar-25 2:38:09 PM | Poorvi