Chapter 2.indd 27 Understanding the Weather [a Lu _ o. < U A change in the weather is sufficient to create the world and oneself anew. Marcel Proust, French novelist How can we measure and monitor the weather around us? How do weather predictions help us prepare for events like heavy rain, storms, drought and aes heat waves? Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 2.indd 28 Weather and its Elements You wake up one winter morning and shiver. You reach for thick clothes to keep yourself warm. In the summer, you choose clothes that keep you cool and comfortable. You are responding to your body s signals; your body is sensing the weather. What is weather? Weather is a state of the Earth s atmosphere at a particular time and place. But what is an atmosphere? In simple terms, it is the layer of gases that surround some planets in the case of our Earth, we call these gases air . The Earth s atmosphere may Fig. 2.2 be compared to a cake with several layers. The layer closest to the surface of the Earth is called the troposphere , and that is where all land-based plants and animals (including humans!) live and breathe. It is also where almost all weather phenomena, which we will explore in this chapter, take place. The troposphere extends to a height of 6 to 18 kilometres from the ground; it is less thick at the poles (where the cold air contracts) and thicker in the tropical zone (where the warmer air expands). You will study more about the other layers in your Science classes. We use many words to describe the weather hot, cold, rainy, cloudy, humid, snowy, windy, and so on. They describe the different ways in which we experience the elements of weather. LET S EXPLORE What are some of the words in your local language that you use to describe the weather? Hot, cold, warm, chilly, crisp, pleasant, and so on, are commonly used terms in English. 08-04-2025 12:42:20 Chapter 2.indd 29 The elements of weather are: = Temperature: How hot or cold the atmosphere is. = Precipitation: Any form of water, such as rain, snow, sleet or hail, that falls from the sky. = Atmospheric Pressure: The weight of the air above us, felt on the Earth s surface. = Wind: The movement of air, including its speed and direction. = Humidity: The amount of water vapour in the air. Y THINK ABOUT IT Let us imagine that Krishnan from Chennai is speaking with Amir in Kashmir. Krishnan tells Amir that it has become chilly in Chennai after it rained the previous night. Amir asks him how cold it is. How will Krishnan explain to Amir how cold it is? After all, what is cold for Krishnan may be quite pleasant for Amir! As you can see, it would be difficult for Krishnan to convey his sense of chillness to Amir unless there is a