us imagine that Krishnan from Chennai is speaking with Amir in Kashmir. Krishnan tells Amir that it has become chilly in Chennai after it rained the previous night. Amir asks him how cold it is. How will Krishnan explain to Amir how cold it is? After all, what is cold for Krishnan may be quite pleasant for Amir! As you can see, it would be difficult for Krishnan to convey his sense of chillness to Amir unless there is a commonly agreed way to measure the temperature. It is the same with other elements of the weather. In this chapter, we will learn how we measure the weather using common standards. LET'S EXPLORE What do you think could be some other reasons to measure the weather more precisely? (Hint: Think how knowing the weather a few hours or a few days in advance would help you plan some activities.) From early times, humans have closely observed Nature and learnt to read her signals to forecast the weather. Observing birds flying low, ants carrying eggs, squirrels gathering nuts, frogs croaking loudly, or even the opening and closing of pine cones, provided valuable information about coming rain or storms. This knowledge has been passed down from generation to generation. Even today, in many parts of India, people use traditional ways to predict the weather, especially the arrival of the monsoon. Sleet: Frozen or partly frozen rain. Hail: Small, hard balls of ice that fall from the sky like rain. Water vapour: Water vapour is water in gaseous instead of liquid form. Forecast: To predict or find out in advance (in our case, the weather). India and the World: Land and the People 2 - Understanding the Weather 08-04-2025 12:42:20 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Meteorology: Meteorology is the systematic study of weather and its evolution. This study is the basis for weather forecasting. Chapter 2.indd 30 Observing Nature s clues Fig. 2.3.1. Ants shifting their eggs to higher ground is a natural behaviour that indicates an expected change in the weather, especially heavy rain. Fig. 2.3.2. A frog croaking in a forest of the Western Ghats, in expectation of rain. Fig. 2.3.3. The opening and closing of pine cones are natural mechanisms driven by environmental humidity. Pine cones close in humid conditions to protect their seeds, and open in dry conditions to release them, ensuring they spread in favourable weather. LET'S EXPLORE Talk to elders in your neighbourhood and ask them how they predict the weather. What signs do they observe? Document any sayings in your regional language that refer to weather prediction. In the last few centuries, scientists have worked out methods to measure and monitor the elements of the weather with great | precision. Based on those inputs, meteorologists try to predict how the weather will behave in a particular region after a few hours or a few days, or even a few weeks. How do they do it? Do they just look up at