is lower, and there is less oxygen available for lower pressure (cooler air) Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Fig. 2.7 Chapter 2.indd 34 08-04-2025 12:42:29 your lungs to take in. With less oxygen getting into your blood, your body has to work harder to keep you moving! That s why people sometimes feel breathless, dizzy or tired at high altitudes. This does not mean that the atmospheric pressure is always high in the plains below or on the coast. In fact, it sometimes drops dramatically, resulting in what meteorologists call a depression or low-pressure system , which can sometimes develop into a storm or even a cyclone. Y THINK ABOUT IT Why do you think it would be important to measure atmospheric pressure? Who are the people most likely to use such measurements? The instrument used to measure atmospheric pressure is called a barometer. As with thermometers, there are several types of barometers. The unit they display is generally the millibar (abbreviated as mb). The normal atmospheric pressure at the sea coast is around 1013 mb; a pressure below 1000 mb indicates a depression. Y THINK ABOUT IT Chapter 2.indd 35 People who journey to places at a high altitude are advised to make pauses on the way to allow the body to acclimatise. Our army personnel serve in high-altitude places like Khardung la in Ladakh, which is over 5600 metres above sea level. It is hard to imagine how they live and work in places where the oxygen level is so low the atmospheric pressure there is generally , <a about 650 millibars! Fig. 2.8 Acclimatise: Adjust to a new climate or new condition India and the World: Land and the People 2 - Understanding the Weather 08-04-2025 12:42:30 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 2.indd 36 vy THINK ABOUT IT ad) Wind Wind is the movement of air from areas of high pressure to areas of low pressure. Speed and direction are two important factors when we describe the wind. Have you seen seeds like these flying in the wind? What would happen to the seeds if there was no wind? Fig. 2.9 The wind is an important element of the weather. Its direction and speed help in weather forecasting. Besides, air pilots and sailors need to be aware of wind data, as the wind has a great influence on flying or sailing. Farmers also use the wind direction to predict where rain might come from. Also, a greater wind speed will cause the soil to dry faster. So, how do we measure this direction and speed? A wind vane (or weather vane) has a rotating arm with a pointer at one end and a tail at the other. When the wind blows, the tail is pushed, and the pointer turns in the direction of the wind. It responds even to a light breeze. 08-04-2025 12:42:33 Chapter 2.indd 37 Fig. 2.10. Left: Wind vane on the tarmac. Right: