: = > Extremely Heavy Rain wa Ground Frost || No Warning 8 wes Heavy Snow ' * Strong Surface Winds || Watch (Be Updated) n [o)) = i i i Alert (Be Prepared 5 rd Hailstorm 9 Thunder & Lightning || ( pared) a Fe oe Dust Storm Pp Hot and Humid |_| Warning (Take Action) Fig. 2.13. India: weather warning for India on 19 May 2024 Chapter 2.indd 40 08-04-2025 12:42:38 Chapter 2.indd 41 Accurate predictions help us to be ready for such events. They also enable local governments to mobilise resources and prepare for any disasters. For example, if stormy weather is expected at sea, fishermen are warned about venturing out in their boats, or an entire coastal area might have to be evacuated if a cyclone is expected. LET'S EXPLORE Discuss, in pairs, different situations in which weather predictions are helpful. Make a list, and after you have completed it, share it and discuss it with the pair sitting next to you. How many different categories of situations have you been able to identify? Look carefully at the map of India above. This map was issued by the India Meteorological Department on 19 May 2024. Study the icons and connect them to the conditions shown on the map. LET'S EXPLORE > What do you observe happening on that day? What are the various weather conditions that the IMD is alerting people to? > Which states have warning signs? > Which parts of India are likely to be free from severe weather? > Whichstates are likely to face heat wave conditions? > What are the causes for warning in Tripura and Lakshadweep? Before we move on... > Temperature, humidity, precipitation, wind and atmospheric pressure together define the weather at a particular place. > The condition of these elements is measured using special instruments. Data collected from these help us to monitor and predict the weather. India and the World: Land and the People 2 - Understanding the Weather 08-04-2025 12:42:39 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 2.indd 42 > > In different times or situations, one of the elements is dominant for example, rainfall in July, the temperature in May and December, atmospheric pressure when a cyclone is moving, and wind when a loo (strong, hot and dusty winds that blow in north India in summers) is blowing, or forest fires are spreading. Weather is closely linked to climate. We will discuss this in the next chapter. Questions and activities 1. Match the instrument with the weather element it measures. Instrument used Element of the Weather ( ) 2) ) 5) 2. Jyotsna is deciding what clothes to pack for her school trip to Mumbai in June. She looks at the weather forecast, which predicts 29 C and 84% humidity. What would be your advice to her? . Imagine that a small group of students is setting up a rain gauge. Here are some options for the site. 1. The school vegetable