greater wind speed will cause the soil to dry faster. So, how do we measure this direction and speed? A wind vane (or weather vane) has a rotating arm with a pointer at one end and a tail at the other. When the wind blows, the tail is pushed, and the pointer turns in the direction of the wind. It responds even to a light breeze. 08-04-2025 12:42:33 Chapter 2.indd 37 Fig. 2.10. Left: Wind vane on the tarmac. Right: Anemometer This wind vane on the tarmac is called a wind sock . It gives pilots an indication of the direction of the wind during take-off and landing. Similar socks are used in industries that release ash or gases. The simplest instrument to measure the wind direction and speed is the anemometer. It has three or four metal cups that rotate on a vertical shaft when the wind blows the stronger the wind, the faster the rotation. A meter attached at the bottom counts how many times the anemometer spins in a certain period of time and calculates the wind speed in kilometres per hour (km/h). e) Humidity Humidity is the last element of the weather on our list. It refers to the amount of water vapour present in the air. It also depends on factors like temperature, wind, pressure and location. LET S EXPLORE Where do you think humidity is likely to be more, Kochi or Jaipur? You might guess that Kochi has higher humidity than Jaipur because it is located near the sea. But how will we know for sure? If we had to compare the humidity level between Kochi and Mangaluru, how would we do it? Discuss with your classmates. India and the World: Land and the People 2 - Understanding the Weather 08-04-2025 12:42:33 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 2.indd 38 We can answer these questions more precisely by learning how to measure humidity. Before we move forward, we need to remember our Science lesson from Grade 6 about the states of water. This will help us to understand how humidity is measured. LET'S REMEMBER > When water evaporates, it causes a cooling effect. > Ifthe amount of water in the air is already high (more humidity), water evaporates slowly. That is typically the case on a rainy day. Humidity of the air is measured as relative humidity: air that would contain absolutely no water vapour (which is impossible in natural conditions) is rated at 0%, while air saturated with water vapour will have a humidity of 100%. In practice, dry weather has a relative humidity range between 20% and 40%, while humid weather usually falls between 60% and 80% relative humidity. Y THINK ABOUT IT If the humidity in Delhi is at 52% while in Kochi it is 84%, in which of the two places are wet clothes likely to dry faster? And where are you likely to sweat more, assuming the temperature is the same in both places?