gl substances called elements. An element is a substance ( D EEPER ) that cannot be broken down into simpler substances, _ Presently 118 elements are known. These fe. elements are the basic building blocks of all matter. OQ Some are naturally occurring, while others are =m artificially made in the laboratory, and do not exist in nature. You will study more about elements in higher grades. 4.5 Are Non-metals Essential in Everyday Life? PS ehhh hb hihi ldihdd.dehitddghd ded hcg) You often observe many metals in your day-to-day lives because of their distinct properties, such as their lustrous nature, heat Chapter 4.indd 53 4/3/2025 4:52:18 PM and electrical conductivity, and high strength. However, this should not give an impression in your mind that non-metals are not important in our lives. We breathe in oxygen, which is a non-metal, and without it, we would not be able to survive. Can you think of any other uses of oxygen? Carbon is essential in everyday life because it is the building block of all life forms. It is a key component of proteins, fats, and carbohydrates, which are necessary for growth and energy. Nitrogen is used in the manufacturing of fertilisers and other chemicals. It is an essential nutrient for the growth of plants. Chlorine is a non-metal commonly used in water purification. A solution of iodine, a non-metal, is applied on wounds as an antiseptic. SCIENCE AND SOCIETY Do you know that many metals and their alloys (mixtures of two or more metals or a metal and a non-metal) are important for daily use as utensils and tools. These are also important for modern technologies and essential in almost every industry. Some special metals are also used in atomic energy (such as zirconium), aerospace (titanium), etc. In India, many metals, especially iron and aluminium, are recycled to minimise waste and contribute to sustainability. In a Nutshell (bp Da eed Metals and non-metals are differentiated based on their properties. Generally, metals are lustrous, whereas most non-metals are non-lustrous. Metals are generally malleable and ductile, while non-metals do not have these properties. Metals are good conductors of heat and electricity, but non-metals are generally poor conductors. Metals react with oxygen to produce metal oxides which are basic in nature. Non-metals react with oxygen to produce oxides which are acidic in nature. Generally, non-metals do not react with water. Metal objects get damaged when exposed to moist air, and the process is known as corrosion. Metals and non-metals have wide applications in everyday life. >, ~ >, ~ >, ~ >, ~ >, ~ >, ~ Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 >, ~ Chapter 4.indd 54 4/3/2025 4:52:19 PM Let Us Enhance Our Learning dein neAdd ede) 1. Which metal is commonly used to make food packaging materials as it is cheaper, and its thin sheets can be folded easily into any shape? (i) Aluminium (ii) Copper (iii) Iron (iv) Gold 2. Which of the following metal catches fire when it