with wood or other materials that do not conduct heat. You will learn more about this in the chapter Heat Transfer in Nature . Cd oO E LJ ij () GS Sj i] Ed oO = Lal GS = $ oO = = 4.1.5 Conduction of electricity Have you ever seen an electrician using a screwdriver? What type of material is used for making its handle? You may have also noticed the electrician wearing rubber gloves and shoes while working. What can be the reason for this? | Activity 4.4: Let us design and create i Design an electric circuit, like the tester circuit in the chapter Electricity: Circuits and their Components . Repeat the same activity using the materials listed below and record your observations in Table 4.2. * You may collect a few objects, such as a piece of aluminium foil, an iron nail, a lump of sulfur (pea-sized), a copper wire, a piece of coal, a piece of dry wood, a stone, an eraser made of rubber and a piece of nylon rope. + Predict which of these could make the bulb of the tester glow and which could not. Chapter 4.indd 47 4/3/2025 4:52:14 PM C) cS he rT) C) 15) < ao U n a] =) x td x = > 2 he = s) Table 4.2: Conduction of electricity by different objects or materials S.No. Observation Good conductor of Object/Material (bulb glows/does electricity or poor not glow) conductor of electricity Piece of aluminium foil Iron nail Lump of sulfur (pea-sized) You might have observed that objects made of aluminium, iron, and copper make the bulb glow, whereas sulfur, coal, wood, stone, eraser, and nylon rope could not make it glow. Do you see any pattern in the glowing of bulbs when using different materials in Activity 4.4? It is observed that all the materials that make the bulb glow are metals. Materials that allow electricity to flow through them easily are called good conductors of electricity. In contrast, materials that prevent the bulb from glowing by not allowing electricity to pass through them are called poor conductors of electricity. So, now we can understand that the plastic covering on screwdrivers and rubber gloves protect the electrician from electric shock because these materials are poor conductors of electricity. We learnt that metals are generally hard, lustrous, malleable, ductile, and good conductors of heat and electricity. Now, let us learn how metals behave in the presence of air and water. 4.2 Effect of Air and Water on Metals: Iron CSD ie hh hhh hdiallitlidad adi Ail dadeeihldadelydtt dds tty) You would have often noticed that iron objects develop brown deposits when left in the open for a few days. In which conditions would an iron object develop brown deposits? + When it comes into contact with dry air only. + When it comes into contact with water only. we te * When it comes into contact with both air and water. Chapter 4.indd 48 4/3/2025 4:52:14