effect of hammering on different objects or materials Appearance Effect of hammering S.No. Object/Material (lustrous/ Hard/Soft (flattens/breaks into non-lustrous) pieces) 1. Piece of copper 2. Piece of aluminium 3. Iron nail 4. Piece of coal Cd oO E LJ ij () GS Sj i] Ed oO = Lal GS = $ oO = = 5, Lump of sulfur (pea-sized) 6. Block of wood Analyse Table 4.1. Identify the objects that are lustrous in appearance and hard. You might have observed that objects made from copper, aluminium, and iron are lustrous in appearance and are hard. Lustre shown by metals is known as metallic lustre. Materials like copper, aluminium, and iron are known as metals, whereas, coal, sulfur, and wood are non-lustrous and not as hard as metals. Are all metals hard and solid? Not really; some metals like sodium and potassium are so soft that they can be cut with a knife. There is one metal, mercury, that is found in a liquid state at room temperature, which you might have seen in thermometers. Recall the chapter Temperature and its Measurement from the Grade 6 Science textbook Curiosity. Which objects did you find become flat on beating with a hammer? You must have observed that objects such as a piece of copper, an iron nail, and a piece of aluminium become flat when beaten; whereas other objects or materials behave differently. This property by which materials can be beaten into thin sheets is called malleability. Most metals possess this property. Can you give some examples of metal sheets? You might have seen thin silver foil on some sweets and aluminium foil used for wrapping food items. These are formed due to their malleability. Gold and silver are the most malleable metals. Chapter 4.indd 43 4/3/2025 4:52:08 PM Apiece of coal or alump of sulfur does not show this behaviour. They break into pieces and are said to be brittle. On the other hand, wood neither gets flattened into a sheet nor breaks into pieces. Therefore, wood is neither malleable nor brittle. HOLISTIC LENS The impact of iron on the progress of civilisation of India In the Grade 6 Social Science textbook Exploring Society India and Beyond, you learnt about the Harappans. They knew how to use metals like copper and gold. They used these metals to make various objects, from utensils to jewellery. However, you would hardly find any evidence of the Harappans using a very prominent metal iron, which you see a lot around you today. This is because it took a long time before iron was used in day-to-day activities. However, once the use of iron gained prominence in the times that followed, it contributed significantly to the progress of civilisation in Ss India. For instance, due to its strength, agricultural tools like ploughs vant made from iron were much superior to those used previously. 1 What could be the potential reason that it is generally considered =< that copper was discovered earlier as compared to iron? 4.1.2