Thread Iron nail 4/3/2025 4:52:14 PM What can you conclude from this experiment? It is observed in glass bottles A and B that the iron nails do not show any brown deposits. What does this observation indicate? This indicates that brown deposits or discolouration on the iron nails do not develop when the iron nail is kept in dry air alone (bottle A) or water alone (bottle B). However, in glass bottle C, the iron nail shows the presence of brown deposits. This indicates that the presence of both water and air is essential for these deposits to develop. Thus, moist air is responsible for the development of brown deposits on objects made of iron. This brown deposit is called rust. The process of formation of rust on objects made of iron is called rusting. Many other metals also exhibit discolouration when kept open in the atmosphere. Have you noticed the formation of a green coating on the surface of copper objects or a black coating on the surface of silver objects? Gradual deterioration of metal surfaces caused by air, water, or other substances is known as corrosion. Do you know that rusting of iron is a serious problem in our country? Every year, an enormous amount of money is spent to replace or repair iron structures damaged due to rusting. The rusting of iron can be prevented by several methods such as painting, oiling, greasing, and applying a protective layer of zinc metal on iron (galvanisation). We will learn about this in higher grades. FASCINATING FACTS The wonder of ancient Indian metallurgy! The Iron Pillar of Delhi was made in the time of Chandragupta II more than 1600 years ago. It is about 8 metres high and weighs more than 6000 kilograms. What is interesting about this iron pillar is that despite all these years of facing winds, rainfall, and intense weather, it has barely any rust. EPH Y A33ak In other words, it has been made in iE Mii TATRA a way that it resists rusting. This tells us TT about the skills that were developed in } metal technology in India. + & e eNererere's 4 4 + Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 Chapter 4.indd 50 4/3/2025 4:52:15 PM 4.3 Effect of Air and Water on Other Metals | Activity 4.6: Let us investigate (demonstration activity) | The teacher may demonstrate this activity. Caution It is advisable for students to wear protective eyeglasses and keep safe distance. .7 + Take a magnesium ribbon about 3-4 centimetres long. Clean it by rubbing with a piece of sandpaper. Hold it with a pair of tongs. Ignite the other end using a spirit lamp or a candle (Fig. 4.5). >, ~ Cd oO E LJ ij () GS Sj Ed oO = Lal GS = $ oO = = >, ~ Let the magnesium ribbon burn. >, ~ What do you observe? Fig. 4.5: Burning magnesium ribbon >, ~ You must have observed that magnesium ribbon burns