be harmful if inhaled. Take a small amount of powdered sulfur in a deflagrating spoon (it is a long-handled metal spoon used in experiments to safely heat and burn substances Fig. 4.7a). If a deflagrating spoon is not available, you may take a metallic cap of any bottle, wrap a metallic wire around it and give it the shape as shown in Fig. 4.7b. Heat it on a flame, and as soon as the sulfur starts burning, introduce the deflagrating spoon into a gas jar or glass tumbler (Fig. 4.7c). Cover the gas jar or glass tumbler with a lid to ensure that the gas produced does not escape. Remove the lid after 3-4 minutes and take out the deflagrating spoon. Add a small quantity of water into the gas jar, quickly place the lid back and shake it so that the gas dissolves. Again, recall the chapter Exploring Substances: Acidic, Basic, and Neutral . Using an acid-base indicator, check whether the solution obtained after the addition of water to the gas jar is acidic or basic or neutral. What do you observe? 4/3/2025 4:52:17 PM , tae, Blue litmus You would observe that it is acidic in paper nature (Fig. 4.7d). On burning sulfur in air (oxygen), Reaper sulfur dioxide gas is formed. On dissolving sulfur dioxide gas in water, sulfurous acid is formed. Watch glass Does sulfur behave in water the same way metals do? = Fig. 4.7(d): Testing of solution with [ Activity 4.8: Let us explore | litmus papers + Take some sulfur powder in a glass tumbler. + Add asmall amount of water to it. + What do you observe? You may have noticed that there is no reaction when sulfur is placed in water. Substances like sulfur and phosphorus behave differently with air and water than metals. Phosphorus is stored in water as it catches fire when exposed to atmospheric air. These substances are usually soft and dull in appearance. They are neither malleable nor ductile, and they are not sonorous. They are also poor conductors of heat and electricity. These are called non-metals. Their oxides are acidic in nature. Some other non-metals are oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, carbon, etc. These must not be confused with materials such as plastic, glass, wood, rubber, and paper. These materials are not classified as metals or non-metals because they are not elements. Cd oO E LJ ij () GS Sj Ed oO = Lal GS = $ oO = = Metals and non-metals are sub-categories of VA IVE gl substances called elements. An element is a substance ( D EEPER ) that cannot be broken down into simpler substances, _ Presently 118 elements are known. These fe. elements are the basic building blocks of all matter. OQ Some are naturally occurring, while others are =m artificially made in the laboratory, and do not exist in nature. You will study more about elements in higher grades. 4.5 Are Non-metals Essential in Everyday Life? PS ehhh hb hihi ldihdd.dehitddghd ded