on the use of digital services in their daily life. Develop an opionnaire to collect opinions of about forty people in your neighbourhood. Divide the work among four to collect the opinions, tabulate the ideas and write a report about the use of digital devices. Once the project is completed, each group may present it to the whole class. Charts may be created and displayed on the notice board. s 14 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 The Road Not Taken This well-known poem is about making choices, and the choices that shape us. Robert Frost is an American poet who writes simply, but insightfully, about common, ordinary experiences. Two roads diverged in a yellow wood, And sorry I could not travel both And be one traveller, long I stood And looked down one as far as I could To where it bent in the undergrowth; Then took the other, just as fair, And having perhaps the better claim, Because it was grassy and wanted wear; Though as for that the passing there Had worn them really about the same. And both that morning equally lay In leaves no step had trodden black. Oh, I kept the first for another day! Yet knowing how way leads on to way, I doubted if I should ever come back. I shall be telling this with a sigh Somewhere ages and ages hence; Two roads diverged in a wood, and I I took the one less travelled by, And that has made all the difference. ROBERT FROST Reprint 2025-26 * bs GLOSSARY diverged: separated and took a different direction undergrowth: dense growth of plants and bushes wanted wear: had not been used hence: here, in the future * % Thinking about the Poem I. 1. Where does the traveller find himself? What problem does he face? 2. Discuss what these phrases mean to you. (i) a yellow wood (ii) it was grassy and wanted wear (iii) the passing there (iv) leaves no step had trodden black (v) how way leads on to way 3. Is there any difference between the two roads as the poet describes them (i) in stanzas two and three? (ii) in the last two lines of the poem? 4. What do you think the last two lines of the poem mean? (Looking back, does the poet regret his choice or accept it?) II. 1. Have you ever had to make a difficult choice (or do you think you will have difficult choices to make)? How will you make the choice (for what reasons)? 2. After you have made a choice do you always think about what might have been, or do you accept the reality? Time is not measured by the passing of years but by what one does, what one feels, and what one achieves. JAWAHARLAL NEHRU _| % s 16 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26