the Word Master (Orient Longman), or any good dictionary of their choice. The Speaking exercise asks the students to imagine introducing a celebrity guest to an audience. It can be made an authentic activity if students are given a couple of minutes during the morning assembly to speak to their fellow-pupils about such a person. This would give them practice in facing an audience, and encourage them to prepare seriously, by: (i) noting down the important points about the person to be introduced, (ii) using appropriate phrases to introduce the person (students should be allowed to think what phrases they want to use). 4 The Writing Task is an exercise in comparison. Hard work is a trait common to Evelyn Glennie (Part I, para 5) and Bismillah Khan (Part II, para 5). Help children identify the paragraphs that tell us about the two musicians goals. After they read and understand these parts of the text, they can organise the ideas in two paragraphs, one on each musician. 3. THE LITTLE GIRL ap 4 The aim in this unit is to first read through the story at one go, not worrying about difficult words or difficult language. Students can read the story for homework and come to class; or the teacher can read out the story in class; or the students can read out parts of the story in the class, one after the other. Let them retell the story again, if necessary, in parts. 4 The dictionary exercise in this unit shows how a very small common word can be used in different ways. Students might be interested in thinking about how they use words in their own language to express these meanings. They may also think of other words like same, small, give and take to convey different kids of meaning. Encourage them to consult a dictionary. 4 This is a story about the changing attitude of a girl child towards her father. The Speaking and Writing exercises encourage the students to think about the relationship between children and parents. The students should be encouraged to say or write what they think, and not what the teacher thinks they should say or write. The aim is not to arrive at a correct answer, but to let every child voice an opinion and express her/his ideas. It is hoped that children will find the topic of personal relevance. This will help their ideas and language to flow freely. s 4 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 1. ~*,| % * 1. The Fun They Had Oh BeroreE You READ mnt e The story we shall read is set in the future, when books and schools as we now know them will perhaps not exist. How will children study then? The diagram below may give you some ideas. mr Learning through computers Virtual classroom *. Schools of the Future ed Moving 1) teacher J ie e-text e In pairs, discuss three things that you like best about your school and three things about