accident unless he drives more slowly. Complete the following conditional sentences. Use the correct form of the verb. 1. IfI don t go to Anu s party tonight, 2. If you don t telephone the hotel to order food, 3. Unless you promise to write back, I 4. If she doesn t play any games, Unless that little bird flies away quickly, the cat * ge Writing A new revised volume of Issac Asimov s short stories has just been released. Order one set. Write a letter to the publisher, Mindfame Private Limited, 1632 Asaf Ali Road, New Delhi, requesting that a set be sent to you by Value Payable Post (VPP), and giving your address. Your letter will have the following parts. s 12 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 e Addresses of the sender and receiver e The salutation e The body of the letter e The closing phrases and signature Your letter might look like this: Your address Date ____ESSSSs (DD /MM YY) The addressee s address Dear Sir/Madam, Yours sincerely, Your signature Remember that the language of a formal letter is different from the colloquial style of personal letters. For example, contracted forms such as T ve or can t are not used. The Fun They Had / 13 # Reprint 2025-26 Pi *, Ke Speaking In groups of four discuss the following topic. The Schools of the Future Will Have No Books and No Teachers! Your group can decide to speak for or against the motion. After this, each group will select a speaker to present its views to the entire class. You may find the following phrases useful to present your argument in the debate. In my opinion ... I/we fail to understand why ... I wholeheartedly support/oppose the view that ... e At the outset let me say... I d/we d like to raise the issue of/argue against ... e I should like to draw attention to... My/our worthy opponent has submitted that ... On the contrary ... I firmly reject... Do a Project Nowadays use of digital devices has increased and digital services have made our cash transactions easier and smoother. Government of India has taken initiatives to digitalise cash transactions to buy things and pay bills. Following are some of the digital initiatives to make people use digital services. We Will build Digitar. INDIA by providing Digital Literacy Skills to a a= LAUNCH OF INNOVATIONS At #DIGITALINDIAWEEK estevices @2eae / Take up a project in groups of four to collect opinions of people on the use of digital services in their daily life. Develop an opionnaire to collect opinions of about forty people in your neighbourhood. Divide the work among four to collect the opinions, tabulate the ideas and write a report about the use of digital devices. Once the project is completed, each group may present it to the whole class. Charts may be created and displayed on the notice board. s 14 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 The Road Not Taken This