another with the homework and talk about it. And the teachers were people... The mechanical teacher was flashing on the screen: When we add fractions % and 4... Margie was thinking about how the kids must have loved it in the old days. She was thinking about the fun they had. Isaac ASIMOV Reprint 2025-26 The Fun They Had / 9 # c; I ag * SK Thinking about the Text _ Activity Calculate how many years and months ahead from now Margie s diary entry is. I. Answer these questions in a few words or a couple of sentences each. How old are Margie and Tommy? What did Margie write in her diary? Had Margie ever seen a book before? What things about the book did she find strange? What do you think a telebook is? Where was Margie s school? Did she have any classmates? What subjects did Margie and Tommy learn? NQ aR WN . Answer the following with reference to the story. 1. I wouldn t throw it away. (i) Who says these words? (ii) What does it refer to? (iii) What is it being compared with by the speaker? 2. Sure they had a teacher, but it wasn t a regular teacher. It was a man. (i) Who does they refer to? (ii) What does regular mean here? (iii) What is it contrasted with? Ill. Answer each of these questions in a short paragraph (about 30 words). What kind of teachers did Margie and Tommy have? Why did Margie s mother send for the County Inspector? What did he do? Why was Margie doing badly in geography? What did the County Inspector do to help her? What had once happened to Tommy s teacher? Did Margie have regular days and hours for school? If so, why? How does Tommy describe the old kind of school? How does he describe the old kind of teachers? BONE ONO IV. Answer each of these questions in two or three paragraphs (100-150 words). 1. What are the main features of the mechanical teachers and the schoolrooms that Margie and Tommy have in the story? 2. Why did Margie hate school? Why did she think the old kind of school must have been fun? s 10 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 i x 3. Do you agree with Margie that schools today are more fun than the school in the story? Give reasons for your answer. * ke Thinking about Language I. Adverbs Read this sentence taken from the story: They had once taken Tommy s teacher away for nearly a month because the history sector had blanked out completely. The word complete is an adjective. When you add -ly to it, it becomes an adverb. 1. Find the sentences in the lesson which have the adverbs given in the box below. awfully sorrowfully completely _loftily carefully differently quickly nonchalantly 2. Now use these adverbs to fill in the blanks in the sentences below. (i) The report must be read ____________