things and gave them homework and asked them questions. A man isn t smart enough. Sure he is. My father knows as much as my teacher. He knows almost as much, I betcha. Margie wasn t prepared to dispute that. She said, I wouldn t want a strange man in my house to teach me. Tommy screamed with laughter. You don t know much, Margie. The teachers didn t live in the house. They had a special building and all the kids went there. And all the kids learned the same thing? Sure, if they were the same age. But my mother says a teacher has to be adjusted to fit the mind of each boy and girl it teaches and that each kid has to be taught differently. Just the same they didn t do it that way then. If you don t like it, you don t have to read the book. I didn t say I didn t like it, Margie said quickly. She wanted to read about those funny schools. They weren't even half finished when Margie s mother called, Margie! School! Margie looked up. Not yet, Mamma. Now! said Mrs Jones. And it s probably time for Tommy, too. Margie said to Tommy, Can I read the book some more with you after school? May be, he said nonchalantly. He walked away whistling, the dusty old book tucked beneath his arm. Margie went into the schoolroom. It was right next to her bedroom, and the mechanical teacher was on and waiting for her. It was always on at the same time every day except Saturday and Sunday, s 8 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 regular: here, normal; of the usual kind betcha (informal): (J bet you (in fast speech): I m sure dispute: disagree with nonchalantly: not showing much interest or enthusiasm; carelessly 10. The mechanical teacher was flashing on the screen... because her mother said little girls learned better if they learned at regular hours. The screen was lit up, and it said: Today s arithmetic lesson is on the addition of proper fractions. Please insert yesterday s homework in the proper slot. Margie did so with a sigh. She was thinking about the old schools they had when her grandfather s grandfather was a little boy. All the kids from the whole neighborhood came, laughing and shouting in the schoolyard, sitting together in the schoolroom, going home together at the end of the day. They learned the same things, so they could help one another with the homework and talk about it. And the teachers were people... The mechanical teacher was flashing on the screen: When we add fractions % and 4... Margie was thinking about how the kids must have loved it in the old days. She was thinking about the fun they had. Isaac ASIMOV Reprint 2025-26 The Fun They Had / 9 # c; I ag * SK Thinking about the Text _ Activity Calculate how many years and months ahead