Notes for the Teacher Beehive, a textbook in English for Class IX, is based on the new syllabus in English which was prepared as a follow-up to the National Curriculum Framework, 2005. The curriculum calls for an approach that is rich in comprehensible input and adopts a language-across-the-curriculum, multilingual perspective. This reader aims at helping the child to read for meaning, and to learn to communicate in English with confidence and accuracy. % Care has been taken to give a central place to the learner in the process of teaching and learning. Learner-friendly language has been used in the instructions, and the exercises and activities are addressed to the child. In this process the teacher is a facilitator or a co-learner. A rich variety of reading material has been provided to include the literary, cultural and sociological dimensions of texts. The themes range from childhood and adolescence, to disability, talent and achievement, to music, science, and contemporary social and environmental concerns. The range is as inclusive as possible, keeping in view the interest and cognitive development of the learners. The book draws on different genres such as story, biography and autobiography; science fiction; humour; travelogue; and the one-act play. The number of poems has been increased to help learners explore this great source of language, derive the joy of learning through poetry, and understand the music of words. An attempt has been made to include different types of poems such as the lyric, the ballad and the humorous poem. The poems have been chosen for their simplicity and suitability in terms of language and thought. We need not talk about the poet or the background to the poem, unless the poem seems to demand it. Nor should we attempt to exhaust all the possibilities of a poem; we should encourage the students to begin to see some of the possibilities. They should be guided to apprehend the poem through the visual, the auditory, the tactile, the intellectual, or the emotional channels, and to understand the suggestiveness of the images. An attempt has been made to help the learner develop the skill of predicting and anticipating what follows. Every good reader should guess what is coming next. The task Before You Read given at the beginning Reprint 2025-26 of each unit is designed for this purpose. Learners should be encouraged to participate in this activity. 4 The section Thinking about the Text attempts to move from surface level understanding of the text to critical thinking. The comprehension exercises given here try to help the learners infer meaning. There are a few questions which ask for the readers judgment; they aim to bring out the learners deeper understanding of the text. 4 In the section Thinking about Language : Vocabulary enrichment has been attempted through a variety of tasks on the usage of words closely related in meaning, matching words to meanings, word building (including phrasal verbs), and reference to the dictionary. An activity on the use of the index has been