and sent for the County Inspector. 4. He was a round little man with a red face and a whole box of tools with dials and wires. He smiled at Margie and gave her an apple, then took the teacher apart. Margie had hoped he wouldn t know how to put it together again, but he knew how all right, and, after an hour or so, there it was again, large and black and ugly, with a big screen on which all the lessons were shown and the questions were asked. That wasn t so bad. The part Margie hated s 6 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 ds 5. 6. most was the slot where she had to put homework and test papers. She always had to write them out in a punch code they made her learn when she was six years old, and the mechanical teacher calculated the marks in no time. The Inspector had smiled after he was finished and patted Margie s head. He said to her mother, It s not the little girl s fault, Mrs Jones. I think the geography sector was geared a little too quick. Those things happen sometimes. I ve slowed it up to an average ten-year level. Actually, the overall pattern of her progress is quite satisfactory. And he patted Margie s head again. Margie was disappointed. She had been hoping they would take the teacher away altogether. They had once taken Tommy s teacher away for nearly a month because the history sector had blanked out completely. So she said to Tommy, Why would anyone write about school? Tommy looked at her with very superior eyes. Because it s not our kind of school, stupid. This is the old kind of school that they had hundreds and hundreds of years ago. He added loftily, pronouncing the word carefully, Centuries ago. Margie was hurt. Well, I don t know what kind of school they had all that time ago. She read the book over his shoulder for a while, then said, Anyway, they had a teacher. s * a slot: a given space, time or position geared (to): adjusted to a particular standard or level loftily: in a superior way They had a teacher... It was a man. Reprint 2025-26 The Fun They Had / 7 # & Sure they had a teacher, but it wasn t a regular teacher. It was a man. A man? How could a man be a teacher? Well, he just told the boys and girls things and gave them homework and asked them questions. A man isn t smart enough. Sure he is. My father knows as much as my teacher. He knows almost as much, I betcha. Margie wasn t prepared to dispute that. She said, I wouldn t want a strange man in my house to teach me. Tommy screamed with laughter. You don t know much, Margie. The teachers didn t live in the house. They had a special building and all