is not a real classroom but one where learning is through computer software or the Internet. The children may know what a robot is, and be able to guess what a robotic teacher would be. 4 In this unit students are required to present their arguments in a debate. The following points could be explained before the task. A debate is a contest between two speakers or two groups of speakers to show skill and ability in arguing. A proposition, a question or a problem is required for this purpose, which can be spoken for or against. To participate in a debate, one must prepare for it. So, one must prepare an outline of the main points in the order in which one is going to argue. The time limit is about four to five minutes. The speaker addresses the audience. Every topic/subject has its own vocabulary. These must be learnt. The speaker addresses the chair (Mr President/Madam), submits an argument, appeals for sympathetic understanding and support, questions the opponent s views, and concludes an argument. 2. The Sound of Music 4 These biographical pieces tell us of people who have achieved success and recognition through determination, hard work and courage. The children may be asked to think of potential barriers to success, and of people who have overcome them. The second part of the unit encourages students to think about the rich heritage of Indian music, and our musical instruments. The portraits of musicians given in the beginning may be supplemented by others that the children can be asked to bring to class. 4 A comprehension exercise in Part II encourages children to find words in the text that express attitudes (positive, negative or neutral) to events, places, etc. Encourage the children to compare and discuss their answers. 4 Dictionary entries give us different kinds of information about words. Children need help in using the dictionary to find specific kinds of information. Notes for the Teacher / 3 # Reprint 2025-26 4 This unit has an exercise that asks students to consult a dictionary and find out which adjective can be used before a noun, which can be used after a verb, and which can be used in both ways. You may add some adjectives to those suggested. Encourage the children also to find more adjectives of the kinds mentioned. Students may wish to consult (in addition to the Oxford Advanced Learner s Dictionary), the Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English, the Collins Cobuild Advanced Learner s English Dictionary, and the Word Master (Orient Longman), or any good dictionary of their choice. The Speaking exercise asks the students to imagine introducing a celebrity guest to an audience. It can be made an authentic activity if students are given a couple of minutes during the morning assembly to speak to their fellow-pupils about such a person. This would give them practice in facing an audience, and encourage them to prepare seriously, by: (i) noting down the important points about the person