Fun They Had Oh BeroreE You READ mnt e The story we shall read is set in the future, when books and schools as we now know them will perhaps not exist. How will children study then? The diagram below may give you some ideas. mr Learning through computers Virtual classroom *. Schools of the Future ed Moving 1) teacher J ie e-text e In pairs, discuss three things that you like best about your school and three things about your school that you would like to change. Write them down. Have you ever read words on a television (or computer) screen? Can you imagine a time when all books will be on computers, and there will be no books printed on paper? Would you like such books better? Marcie even wrote about it that night in her diary. On the page headed 17 May 2157, she wrote, Today Tommy found a real book! It was a very old book. Margie s grandfather once said that when he was a little boy his grandfather Reprint 2025-26 told him that there was a time when all stories were printed on paper. They turned the pages, which were yellow and crinkly, and it was awfully funny to read words crinkly: with many that stood still instead of moving the way they were lds or lines supposed to on a screen, you know. And then when they turned back to the page before, it had the same words on it that it had had when they read it the first time. 2. Gee, said Tommy, what a waste. When you're through with the book, you just throw it away, I guess. Our television screen must have had a million books on it and it s good for plenty more. I wouldn t throw it away. Same with mine, said Margie. She was eleven and hadn t seen as many telebooks as Tommy had. He was thirteen. She said, Where did you find it? In my house. He pointed without looking, because he was busy reading. In the attic. attic: a space just What s it about? below the roof, used School. as a storeroom 3. Margie was scornful. School? What s there to write scornful: about school? I hate school. contemptuous; Margie always hated school, but now she hated somethings it more than ever. The mechanical teacher had been worthless giving her test after test in geography and she had been doing worse and worse until her mother had shaken her head sorrowfully and sent for the County Inspector. 4. He was a round little man with a red face and a whole box of tools with dials and wires. He smiled at Margie and gave her an apple, then took the teacher apart. Margie had hoped he wouldn t know how to put it together again, but he knew how all right, and, after an hour or so, there it was again, large and black and ugly, with a big screen on