to help the learners infer meaning. There are a few questions which ask for the readers judgment; they aim to bring out the learners deeper understanding of the text. 4 In the section Thinking about Language : Vocabulary enrichment has been attempted through a variety of tasks on the usage of words closely related in meaning, matching words to meanings, word building (including phrasal verbs), and reference to the dictionary. An activity on the use of the index has been included. Attention has been drawn to grammar-in-context that emerges out of the reading text, e.g. the use of the tenses and voice, reported speech, conditional and subordinate clauses or phrases, and adverbs. 4 The communicative skills have been exercised by tasks on Speaking and Writing. The Speaking tasks call for learners to work in pairs or groups, (for example) to present an argument, express a viewpoint, express contrasts, seek or give an opinion, introduce a speaker, tell a story, enact or read out a play in parts, etc. 4 There are a variety of writing tasks: help writing newspaper report, an article for a school magazine, argumentative writing, narration, description, and picture interpretation. 4 A small attempt has been made to relate speech and writing by pointing out similarities and differences. Opportunities for writing in groups and pairs are provided to get into the task. 4 We have introduced the old exercise of dictation again but from a completely different perspective. Dictation has been introduced in its current, updated form as a variety of activities designed to integrate the language skills of listening, prior reading, language processing and recall, and writing, including the appropriate use of punctuation in meaningful contexts. 4 Some exercises also allow scope for the learners languages to support one another s by asking for reflection on relevant words, or poems or stories in other languages; and attempt (preliminary as they may be) to attend to the process of translation. Activities have been suggested to bring out the relatedness of the learners school subjects. s 2 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 Units 1-3 1. THE Fun THEY Hap & 4 This story takes us to the world of the future where computers will play a major role. Let the children talk freely about how they imagine the schools of the future that their own children might go to. You might want to explain the ideas of virtual reality and virtual classroom . The term virtual reality refers to a reality created by computer software, and a virtual classroom is not a real classroom but one where learning is through computer software or the Internet. The children may know what a robot is, and be able to guess what a robotic teacher would be. 4 In this unit students are required to present their arguments in a debate. The following points could be explained before the task. A debate is a contest between two speakers or two groups of speakers to show skill and ability in arguing. A proposition,