ZZ NN . ABCD is a trapezium in which AB || DC and its diagonals intersect each other at the point O. Show Fe EL NN R a Bo. Do Fig. 6.21 10. The diagonals of a quadrilateral ABCD intersect each other at the point O such that AO CO BO. DO. Show that ABCD is a trapezium. 6.4 Criteria for Similarity of Triangles In the previous section, we stated that two triangles are similar, if (i) their corresponding angles are equal and (ii) their corresponding sides are in the same ratio (or proportion). That is, in A ABC and A DEF, if G7) ZA=2D,ZB=ZE, ZC=Z F and iy 2B BE SA then the two triangl imil Fig. 6.22 (ii) DE. EF Fp len the two triangles are similar (see Fig. 6.22). A D B C E F Fig. 6.22 Reprint 2025-26 86 MATHEMATICS Here, you can see that A corresponds to D, B corresponds to E and C corresponds to F. Symbolically, we write the similarity of these two triangles as A ABC ~ A DEF and read it as triangle ABC is similar to triangle DEF . The symbol ~ stands for is similar to . Recall that you have used the symbol = for is congruent to in Class IX. Now a natural question arises : For checking the similarity of two triangles, say ABC and DEF, should we always look for all the equality relations of their corresponding angles (ZA= 2D, ZB=ZE, Z C= ZF) and all the equality relations of the ratios (AB BC _ CA of their corresponding sides & ~ oF 4 ? Let us examine. You may recall that in Class IX, you have obtained some criteria for congruency of two triangles involving only three pairs of corresponding parts (or elements) of the two triangles. Here also, let us make an attempt to arrive at certain criteria for similarity of two triangles involving relationship between less number of pairs of corresponding parts of the two triangles, instead ofall the six pairs of corresponding parts. For this, let us perform the following activity: Activity 4 : Draw two line segments BC and EF of two different lengths, say 3 cm and 5 cm respectively. Then, at the points B and C respectively, construct angles PBC and QCB of some measures, say, 60 and 40 . Also, at the points E and F, construct angles REF and SFE of 60 and 40 respectively (see Fig. 6.23). Q P A prot 407 3cm Reprint 2025-26 TRIANGLES 87 Let rays BP and CQ intersect each other at A and rays ER and FS intersect each other at D. In the two triangles ABC and DEF, you can see that ZB=ZE,2ZC=ZF and Z A= Z D. That is, corresponding angles of these two triangles are equal. What can you say about their corresponding sides ? Note that BC 3 AB CA =~=06. <' 9 EF 5 What about DE and ED - On measuring AB, DE, CA