that world maps (i.e., global maps) and blue prints for the construction of a building are prepared using a suitable scale factor and observing certain conventions. In order to understand similarity of figures more clearly, let us perform the following activity: Activity 1: Place a lighted bulb at a Oo point O on the ceiling and directly below it a table in your classroom. Let us cut a polygon, say a quadrilateral ABCD, from a plane cardboard and place this cardboard parallel to the ground between the lighted bulb and the table. Then a shadow of ABCD is cast on the table. Mark the outline of this shadow as A B C'D (see Fig.6.4). Note that the quadrilateral A B C D is an enlargement (or magnification) of the quadrilateral ABCD. This is because of the property of light that light propogates in a straight line. You may also note that A lies on ray OA, B lies on ray OB, C lies on OC and D lies on OD. Thus, quadrilaterals A B C D and ABCD are of the same shape but of different sizes. So, quadrilateral A B C D is similiar to quadrilateral ABCD. We can also say that quadrilateral ABCD is similar to the quadrilateral A B C D . Here, you can also note that vertex A corresponds to vertex A, vertex B corresponds to vertex B, vertex C corresponds to vertex C and vertex D corresponds to vertex D. Symbolically, these correspondences are represented as A A, B OB, C C and D D. By actually measuring the angles and the sides of the two quadrilaterals, you may verify that (i) ZA=ZA ,ZB=ZB ,,ZC=2ZC,ZD=ZD' and .. AB _ BC _ CD __ DA () Vp BC CD DAY This again emphasises that two polygons of the same number of sides are similar, if (i) all the corresponding angles are equal and (ii) all the corresponding sides are in the same ratio (or proportion). Reprint 2025-26 TRIANGLES 77 From the above, you can easily say that quadrilaterals ABCD and PQRS of Fig. 6.5 are similar. Fig. 6.5 Remark : You can verify that if one polygon is similar to another polygon and this second polygon is similar to a third polygon, then the first polygon is similar to the third polygon. You may note that in the two quadrilaterals (a square and a rectangle) of Fig. 6.6, corresponding angles are equal, but their corresponding sides are not in the same ratio. D 3cem Cc s 3.5 cm R 3cm 3cm 3cm 3cm P A 3cm B 3.5 cm Q Fig. 6.6 So, the two quadrilaterals are not similar. Similarly, you may note that in the two quadrilaterals (a square and a rhombus) of Fig. 6.7, corresponding sides are in the same ratio, but their corresponding angles are not equal. Again, the two polygons (quadrilaterals) are not similar. Reprint 2025-26 78 MATHEMATICS D 2.1 cm C 2.1 cm 2.1 cm 2.1 cm Fig. 6.7 Thus,