human beings are called human-made resources. You have learnt about various natural resources, such as air, water, energy from the Sun, forests, soil, rocks, minerals and fossil fuels. Some of these natural resources Nature s Treasures Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 11.indd 223 10/4/2024 3:05:43 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 11.indd 224 get replenished through natural processes over a period of time. If you remember, Ajji told Bhoomi and Surya that they could collect only those nellikai that had fallen on the ground. This makes sure that there would be enough fruits for other animals and birds. The seeds from the droppings of animals and birds would enable new trees to grow, though it would take some years before we get fruits from these new trees. Thus, resources which get renewed, replenished or restored within a reasonable period of time are called renewable resources. Air, water and forest are some of the examples of renewable natural resources. Nature renews them. We should use our natural resources judiciously. On the other hand, fossil fuels take millions of years to form. They are found in limited quantities and once used, they get exhausted. They are not produced or replenished within a reasonable period oftime. These resources are called non-renewable resources. Examples of non-renewable natural resources are minerals, soil, rocks, coal, petroleum and natural gas. 11.8 Resources We Use It is time for Bhoomi and Surya to go back home after a wonderful holiday at their Ajji s home. Their Amma (mother) comes to pick them up. Bhoomi and Surya show her the vegetable plants that have started to grow in the garden and the dried chillies given by Ajji to take home. They notice changes in the colour of the skyline and the smell of the air once they reach the city. There are very few trees. The air does not smell as good as the air at Ajji s place. They can smell smoke from the vehicles. The air is polluted. Amma says, Yes. When we use fossil fuels in our vehicles, smoke is generated. Now, there are vehicles which cause less pollution. For example, there are electric vehicles that do not release any smoke. So, people are making an effort to create alternatives. Can you list some alternatives for reducing air pollution? Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:05:43 PM We use many natural resources in our everyday life. Let us identify some resources that we use by performing Activity 11.6. Activity 11.6: Let us make a list of natural resources used OO ee C ES Make a list of activities you do in your daily life and write down the natural resources used directly or indirectly for each activity. In Table 11.4, some items are already filled in. Using them as a guide, fill the remaining blank rows. Table 11.4: Natural resources used Activity Natural resource Washing clothes Water Making clay toys Collecting firewood Making kites Having breakfast How many natural resources did you list? Compare your list with