is a renewable resource. [ ] Nature s Treasures Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 11.indd 227 10/4/2024 3:05:55 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 11.indd 228 3. 10. 11. 12. Fill in the blanks using the most appropriate option (i) A fuel that is commonly used in two wheelers like scooters or bikes is......... (a) Kerosene (b) Petrol (c) Diesel (d) LPG (ii) An example of a renewable resource is ................. (a) Coal (b) Water (c) Natural gas (d) Petrol Classify the following as renewable or non-renewable resources coal, natural gas, forests and minerals. Why do we say that petroleum is a non-renewable resource? It is difficult to regrow forests. Justify this statement. Make a list of five daily activities in which you use natural resources. Suggest ways by which you can reduce their use. List four activities that are possible due to the presence of air. How can you contribute towards enhancing the green cover of your locality? Make a list of actions to be taken. In the given illustration, we see that food is being cooked. Answer the following questions (i) What type of energy is being used for cooking? (ii) Name one benefit and one drawback of using this type of energy for cooking. Cutting down trees on a large scale impacts the quality of the soil. Why do you think it is so? Explain two ways in which human activities pollute the air. Propose one action which can help in reducing air pollution. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:05:55 PM 13. 14. 15. 16. Chapter 11.indd 229 A family uses solar panels to generate electricity, a gas stove to cook food and a windmill for pumping water from a well. What would happen if there were no sunlight for a week? Fill up the blanks using the following terms (fossil fuels, forest, air, petroleum, coal, water and nonrenewable resource) Natural Resources Renewable Resources Natural gas There is an increasing demand of trees to meet the requirements of industries and for housing. Therefore, trees are being felled. Is it justified? Discuss and prepare a brief report. Propose a plan to use less water in your school. What steps would you take to make this plan happen and how would it help the environment? Learning further Rainwater harvesting is an age-old practice in India. Find out some of the traditional rainwater harvesting techniques being used in your state or in other parts of the country. Reprint 2025-26 Nature s Treasures 10/4/2024 3:06:00 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 11.indd 230 Investigate the effect of air pollution on human health by interacting with your elders or community members and identify the main sources of air pollution in your local area. Based on your findings, suggest two practical steps that your school or community could take to help reduce air pollution. Prepare a list of the names and uses of important minerals and rocks that are used in your village/town/city for various purposes. You are an