Chapter 11.indd 207 1 Nature s Treasures School vacations are always fun for Bhoomi and Surya. This vacation, they visit their Ajji (grandmother). Ajji lives ina village on the edge of a forest in the Western Ghats. The air in the village is fresh and cooler than in the city. They can see beautiful hills, streams, and many interesting plants, animals and birds around them. One afternoon, Bhoomi and Surya ask Ajji to tell them more about the place. Ajji says, Children, do you know that this place has several treasures of nature that enrich our lives? The pure air is refreshing and the soil is so fertile that it supports a variety of living beings. Moreover, this place gets plenty of sunlight which is useful in many ways. Different varieties of trees provide food and shelter to animals including various birds and insects. Can you think of more such treasures of nature? A village Reprint 2025-26 O677CHI1 10/4/2024 3:03:50 PM Bhoomi replies, Ajji,; we use water for drinking and growing vegetables. Ajji says, Yes. We need these treasures for our survival and for making our lives more comfortable. Without these treasures of nature, any form of life on Earth is not possible. We all are a part of nature. Ajji explains the importance of air around us and how it is essential for our survival. Let us find out more about air. es || | iT One morning, Bhoomi and Surya see Ajji performing some _ breathing exercises. Ajji asks them to join her. She says, I am taking deep breaths in, and letting them out. This helps in getting more fresh air in the lungs to stay healthy. Bhoomi and Surya sit with Ajji and start taking deep breaths. Let us also perform a breathing exercise. oe . Breathing exercise Activity 11.1: Let us experience $s @ Take a deep breath in, and then breathe out slowly. @ Take a deeper breath in again. Hold your breath for as long as you can and then breathe out slowly. @ How long can you hold your breath? @ How do you feel when you hold your breath? From this activity, we find that it is difficult to A hold our breath for a long time. The air which we breathe in has oxygen. Our body needs oxygen to perform its functions. When we hold our breath for a long time, the body does not get enough oxygen to perform its functions. Thus, we need oxygen for our survival. Similarly, most of the living beings also need oxygen for their survival. Caution Do not hold your breath for so long that you start feeling uncomfortable. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 11.indd 208 10/4/2024 3:03:52 PM Chapter 11.indd 209 oe Do you know? The air which surrounds the Earth is a mixture of gases. Can you name some gases which are present in the air? Air contains nitrogen, oxygen, argon, carbon dioxide and other gases