resources used OO ee C ES Make a list of activities you do in your daily life and write down the natural resources used directly or indirectly for each activity. In Table 11.4, some items are already filled in. Using them as a guide, fill the remaining blank rows. Table 11.4: Natural resources used Activity Natural resource Washing clothes Water Making clay toys Collecting firewood Making kites Having breakfast How many natural resources did you list? Compare your list with that of your friend. You and your friends have listed many natural resources that we use everyday. These resources are air, water, soil, and food from plants and animals. We get these resources from nature andalso make things using them for our consumption. Therefore, we must conserve our natural resources and use them responsibly without wasting them. This way, we can continue to fulfill our present needs while also saving for the future, without harming the environment. Earth provides enough to satisfy every man s need but not for every man s greed. Nature s Treasures M. K. Gandhi Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 11.indd 225 10/4/2024 3:05:44 PM Classify - | Explore Investigate [ Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 11.indd 226 Sd Resources required for our survival are provided by nature. Resources provided by nature are called natural resources. Some important natural resources are air, water, energy from the Sun, forests, soil, rocks, minerals and fossil fuels. Resources created by human beings to meet their needs are called human-made resources. Natural resources can be classified as renewable resources and non-renewable resources. Resources that get renewed, replenished or restored by natural processes within a reasonable period are called renewable resources. Resources that are in limited quantities and do not get replenished within a reasonable period are called non-renewable resources. All living beings, including humans, depend on natural resources for their survival so we should use them judiciously. Reprint 2025-26 Experience 10/4/2024 3:05:49 PM Let us enhance our learning 1. Fig. 11.9 shows items related to natural resources. Match them with their jumbled up names. Make another table and write the names of these resources. Classify these resources as renewable or non-renewable. Item Jumbled up name Fig. 11.9: Natural resources 2. State whether the following statements are True [T] or False [F]. If False, correct them. (i) Nature has all the resources to meet human needs. [ ] (ii) Machines are a resource found in nature. [ ] (iii) Natural gas is a non-renewable resource. [ ] (iv) Air is a renewable resource. [ ] Nature s Treasures Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 11.indd 227 10/4/2024 3:05:55 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 11.indd 228 3. 10. 11. 12. Fill in the blanks using the most appropriate option (i) A fuel that is commonly used in two wheelers like scooters or bikes is......... (a) Kerosene (b) Petrol (c) Diesel (d) LPG (ii) An example of a renewable resource is ................. (a) Coal (b) Water (c) Natural gas