of water? There are many ways to reduce wastage of water. For example, turning off taps when not in use and fixing water leakages. Recycling water and water harvesting also help in saving water. Our country is blessed with numerous rivers, streams and lakes. Have you ever noticed plastic bags and wrappers floating on the surface of water? We pollute freshwater Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 11.indd 212 10/4/2024 3:04:35 PM Chapter 11.indd 213 sources by throwing trash (waste materials) in them. Waste from homes and industries pollute our water sources when it is dumped into them. Identify other human activities that lead to water pollution. Discuss with your friends in the class what you can do to reduce water pollution. Polluted water is not fit for consumption by living beings. As freshwater sources are limited, there is a shortage of water in many parts of India. At some places, people have to walk long distances to fetch drinking water. Everyone does not have the same kind of access to water. It is important for us to conserve water and use it judiciously. We must also prevent it from being polluted so that water remains fit for consumption by all living beings. In what ways can you conserve water? Water harvesting is one of the methods for conserving water. In many buildings, rainwater is_ collected and stored in large quantities for later use. This is called rainwater harvesting (Fig. 11.4a). Do you know that rainwater is also harvested in many homes, residential societies or schools? It is an age-old practice in India. For example, stepwells (Fig. 11.4b), commonly known as Bawadi in Rajasthan and Vav in Gujarat are built for water harvesting as a response to the scarcity of water in these regions. These stepwells have a unique system of water harvesting. They store not only rainwater but also water seeping from nearby lakes, ponds and rivers. The walls of the trenches (long deep holes dug in the ground) are lined with blocks of stones that allow seepage of water. Find traditional water harvesting practices in your locality. Discuss with your teachers and parents to learn more about it. Reprint 2025-26 Fig. 11.4 (b): Bawadi (Toorji ka Jhatra, Jodhpur in Rajasthan) Nature s Treasures 10/4/2024 3:04:36 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 11.indd 214 J Do you know? In the chapter A Journey through States of Water , we have learnt about the water cycle, where the Sun plays an important role in the evaporation of water. Have you ever observed your mother or grandmother cut raw mangoes and expose them to the hot sun for several days to dry? Let us explore more about energy from the Sun. 11.3 Energy from the Sun On a sunny day, Bhoomi and Surya are helping Ajji dry chillies in the Sun. Ajji says, We use the heat from the Sun to dry it. We can use dried chillies when fresh ones are