explore more about it by performing Activity 11.5. Activity 11.5: Let us conduct a survey = es Conduct a survey of vehicles in your neighbourhood. @ Which types of vehicles are there? What types of fuels do they use? Record the information that you collect in Table 11.3. Table 11.3: Types of vehicles and fuels used Type of vehicle Type of fuel used What are the most common types of fuels used? Petrol and diesel are the two most widely used fuels for vehicles. Petrol, diesel and kerosene are obtained from petroleum. Petroleum along with natural gas and coal are commonly called fossil fuels. They are formed essentially from the remains of microorganisms and plants that got buried deep inside the earth, and were converted to petroleum, natural gas and coal. It takes millions of years for these fuels to form. Natural gas is used for cooking and generating electricity. Nowadays, it is also used in the form of Compressed Natural Gas (CNG) as a fuel for vehicles. It is a cleaner fuel than petrol or diesel. Coal is mainly used for the production of electricity. It is found in several parts of India. Find out the major coal-producing states and mark them in a map of India. J Do you know? Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 11.indd 222 10/4/2024 3:05:43 PM Coal Petrol Natural gas Fossil fuels are found in limited quantities. Hence, we will soon run out of fossil fuels if we continue to use them in the manner that we currently do. To avoid such a situation, we need to explore alternate sources of energy. When fossil fuels are burnt, smoke and carbon dioxide gas are produced which pollutes the air. Over-dependence on fossil fuels for transportation and as domestic fuels has resulted in large scale air pollution. Let us do our bit to conserve the fossil fuels by @ Walking or cycling to nearby places. @ Using public transport. Suggest some more ways. mum | 1.7 Natural Resources: Renewable and Non-renewable Nature s treasures fulfill our needs. They are essential resources to sustain all life forms on the Earth. For example, we get heat and light from the Sun, water from rivers, and food from plants and animals. These resources which we get from nature are called natural resources. We also use natural resources to make many useful things for our convenience. For example, electric bulbs, furniture, solar panels, bicycles, etc., make our lives comfortable. All such resources created by human beings are called human-made resources. You have learnt about various natural resources, such as air, water, energy from the Sun, forests, soil, rocks, minerals and fossil fuels. Some of these natural resources Nature s Treasures Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 11.indd 223 10/4/2024 3:05:43 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 11.indd 224 get replenished through natural processes over a period of time. If you remember, Ajji told Bhoomi and Surya that they could collect only those nellikai