The roots of plants hold on to the soil and prevent it from being washed away. The leaves that fall from the trees decay and enrich the soil with nutrients. This soil is used by new plants and trees to grow. This is an example of recycling in nature. Let us investigate the soil in more detail. es |] 5 Soil, Rocks and Minerals Bhoomi, Surya and Ajji come back home from the forest. Bhoomi and Surya help Ajji in preparing the soil in the garden for planting some vegetables (Fig. 11.5). Ajji asks them to dig the soil gently and loosen the lumps. You have already learnt in the chapter Living Creatures: Exploring their Characteristics that for plants Fig. 11.5: Soil preparation for to grow, the space between the planting vegetables soil particles not only provides sufficient air but also space for the roots to grow easily. Bhoomi and Surya could see small pebbles, the roots of plants and a few earthworms too in the soil. Do you realise that earthworms are natural agents that help in turning and loosening the soil? While Bhoomi and Surya help Ajji, let us do our own experiment by performing Activity 11.4. Activity.11.4: Let usinvestigate $e @ Collect samples of soils from A different areas around your home Caution and school. aint ro wash you nas @ Guess what could be there in oroughly after touching the . . soil collected from different different soils. places. vomenmes soil that has @ Observe carefully each soil sample garbage carries germs . that may be harmful to us. and note its colour. Touch each soil sample and feel its texture. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 11.indd 218 10/4/2024 3:05:26 PM @ Observe the soil samples with your naked eye. If you have a magnifying lens, look at the soil through it. Record your observations in Table 11.2. Table 11.2: Soil samples Location from What I Observation of soil with Observation which soil guessed naked eye including its of soil with sample was about the colour and texture magnifying collected soil? lens Soil from a farm after ploughing @ Is there any difference between your guess and what you can actually observe when you look closely? Do you see any differences in the soil samples taken from different places? Do you see differences in what you are able to observe with your naked eye and what you can observe with a magnifying lens? There are many things in the soil, such as sand, insects and worms. There may be many small organisms that we cannot see with our naked eyes. Plants and animals also become part of the soil as they decompose and decay. The soil samples collected from different places may be of different colours because they may contain different materials. Have you ever wondered how soil is formed? Soil is formed by the disintegration (breaking apart) of rocks by actions of the Sun, water and living organisms over