10/4/2024 3:04:34 PM Chapter 11.indd 211 We have learnt that air is very important for us. Water too is essential and precious for us. How do you feel when you cannot get water to drink, especially when you are thirsty? Let us find out more about water. 11.2 Water Bhoomi and Surya help Ajji in filling the troughs of water for the cows. They also help her in watering plants such as vegetables and medicinal herbs in the garden. Ajji teaches them how to water the plants so that every drop is used and none of it goes waste. Can you think of some more uses of water in your daily life? Write down your responses in the blank bubble. Watering the plants We need water for drinking. Pe cccccccccccccccccccccccccccccces a Pe ccccccccccccccccccccccccccccccce We need water for many daily activities, such as drinking, cooking, bathing, washing and cleaning. It is also used for growing crops and for industrial purposes. Where do we get water from? Make a list of the different sources of water. Water covers about two-thirds of the Earth s surface. Most of the water is found in oceans and seas. However, this water is saline or salty. This saline water is not fit for domestic, agricultural and industrial use. For all these activities, we need freshwater, which is present in the form of ice sheets or snow, rivers or lakes on the surface of the Earth, and underground. Freshwater present in ice sheets Reprint 2025-26 Nature s Treasures 10/4/2024 3:04:35 PM and snow, or underground water is difficult to access. A very small fraction of the freshwater present in ponds, rivers, lakes and wells is easily accessible. Water is precious, that is why Ajji guides them to use it with care. Do you feel that water is being used efficiently in our daily activities? Have you observed water being wasted in your daily activities? Let us find out activities where water is wasted and how this wastage can be reduced. Activity 11.3: Let us find OUt sum Fill the Column II and Column III in Table 11.1. Table 11.1: Wastage of water in your daily activities Column I Column II Column III Howis water Suggest ways to reduce Activit y wasted? wastage of water. 1. Hand washing 2. Washing clothes 3. Washing utensils 4. Taking shower 5. Cooking 6. Gardening 7. Brushing teeth What conclusion can you draw from the information you gathered in the table? What can you and your family do to reduce this wastage of water? There are many ways to reduce wastage of water. For example, turning off taps when not in use and fixing water leakages. Recycling water and water harvesting also help in saving water. Our country is blessed with numerous rivers, streams and lakes. Have you ever noticed plastic bags and wrappers floating on the surface of water? We pollute freshwater Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 11.indd 212 10/4/2024 3:04:35 PM Chapter 11.indd 213