important role in the evaporation of water. Have you ever observed your mother or grandmother cut raw mangoes and expose them to the hot sun for several days to dry? Let us explore more about energy from the Sun. 11.3 Energy from the Sun On a sunny day, Bhoomi and Surya are helping Ajji dry chillies in the Sun. Ajji says, We use the heat from the Sun to dry it. We can use dried chillies when fresh ones are not available. I will give you some to take home. Do you know that the Sun is the main source of energy on Earth? All plants and animals are dependent on it. We use heat and light from the Sun for various purposes. What are some of the activities for which we need heat and light? Bhoomi draws some pictures to show the uses of heat and light from the Sun. Help her by adding more examples. Draw the pictures and write their descriptions in the space provided. Plants make food Drying of clothes -------------- 9 -------------- 0 ------------One afternoon, Bhoomi and Surya pass by the field near Ajj s house, where they see a cow grazing the grass. They talk about the Sun being the main source of energy. Read the conversation carefully and answer. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:04:50 PM Look at this cow. It is No, I think grass and i energy from gene one ey the Sun. from it. cow is eating grass. Grass leaves need sunlight to grow. So, the main source of energy is the Sun. This way the cow gets energy from the Sun. The cow is standing in the Sun. But it does not mean that it is getting energy from the Sun. According to you, whose statement is correct and Sunlight helps plants prepare food. The Sun also provides all the living beings on Earth with heat and light. It is their main source of energy. Have you seen solar panels on rooftops, on top of street lights or on traffic signals? The solar panels capture the Sun s energy and produce electricity. Energy from the Sun can also be directly used for cooking in a solar cooker or for heating water in a solar water heater. Uses of solar energy Nature s Treasures Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 11.indd 215 10/4/2024 3:05:04 PM What will happen if the Sun is not visible for a few days? 1. We may have to depend on artificial lighting during day time also. ee = | | 4 Forests Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 11.indd 216 One cannot imagine life on Earth without the Sun. The Sun is the main source of energy on the Earth. Plants get energy from the Sun and produce food. Animals eat plants and grow. We get food from both plants and animals. This cycle on Earth is possible due to the Sun. So, we all are dependent on the Sun as the main source of energy. Where