4 Forests Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Chapter 11.indd 216 One cannot imagine life on Earth without the Sun. The Sun is the main source of energy on the Earth. Plants get energy from the Sun and produce food. Animals eat plants and grow. We get food from both plants and animals. This cycle on Earth is possible due to the Sun. So, we all are dependent on the Sun as the main source of energy. Where do we find a large variety of plants or animals? Let us explore. One morning, Ajji takes Bhoomi and Surya for a walk in the forest. They find a variety of herbs, shrubs and trees in the forest. Ajji explains, Forests are large areas with dense growth of various types of plants. On the way, they collect some nellikai (Kannada term for Indian gooseberries) that have fallen on the ground. Ajji tells them, We have a tradition in the village not to pluck fruits from the trees; they are left for animals and birds to eat. A forest Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:05:04 PM Chapter 11.indd 217 Discuss with your friends and make a list of at least five products that we get from forests. Forests are a natural home for many wild animals, including birds and insects. Forests provide food and shelter to them. In nature, every animal depends on other life forms for survival. The diversity of life forms ensures food for every living being. However, over the years, the forest cover has been decreasing, mainly due to human activities like large scale cutting of trees. It takes many years to grow a new forest or restore lost forests. Therefore, we must preserve and use forests responsibly so that they get enough time to regenerate. Van Mahotsav is a week long event celebrated across What are the conseq the country during the month cutting a large forest area? Make of July. It is a forest festival story Ny le play, m that during which new plants rite sory oc and trees are planted, and See ppen awareness about respecting Li e conti ut down forests is raised. The aim of the ees ino we ests. event is to increase the green cover. You too can plan a Van Mahotsav in your community. Reprint 2025-26 of oD Nature s Treasures 10/4/2024 3:05:25 PM During their walk in the forests, Bhoomi and Surya notice that there are a lot of leaves on the ground and the soil feels damp. Ajji explains, The roots of plants hold on to the soil and prevent it from being washed away. The leaves that fall from the trees decay and enrich the soil with nutrients. This soil is used by new plants and trees to grow. This is an example of recycling in nature. Let us investigate the soil in more detail. es |] 5 Soil, Rocks and Minerals Bhoomi, Surya and Ajji come back home from the forest. Bhoomi and Surya help Ajji in