1062CH12 AREAS RELATED TO CIRCLES 11.1 Areas of Sector and Segment of a Circle You have already come across the terms sector and segment of a circle in your earlier classes. Recall that the portion (or part) of the circular region enclosed by two radii and the corresponding arc is called a sector of the circle and the portion (or part) of the circular region enclosed between a chord and the corresponding arc is called a segment of the circle. Thus, in Fig. 11.1, shaded region OAPB is a sector of the circle with centre O. Z AOB is called the Major Sector Fig. 11.1 angle of the sector. Note that in this figure, unshaded region OAQB is also a sector of the circle. For obvious reasons, OAPB is called the minor sector and OAQB is called the major sector. You can also see that angle of the major sector is 360 Z AOB. Now, look at Fig. 11.2 in which AB is a chord of the circle with centre O. So, shaded region APB is a segment of the circle. You can also note that unshaded region AQB is another segment of the circle formed by the chord AB. For obvious reasons, APB is called the minor segment and AQB is called the major segment. Remark : When we write segment and sector we will mean the minor segment and the minor sector respectively, unless stated otherwise. Reprint 2025-26 AREAS RELATED TO CIRCLES 155 Now with this knowledge, let us try to find some relations (or formulae) to calculate their areas. Let OAPB be a sector of a circle with centre O and radius r (see Fig. 11.3). Let the degree measure of Z AOB be 0. You know that area of a circle (in fact of a circular region or disc) is m7 . In a way, we can consider this circular region to A B be a sector forming an angle of 360 (1.e., of degree measure 360) at the centre O. Now by applying the Fig. 11.3 Unitary Method, we can arrive at the area of the sector OAPB as follows: When degree measure of the angle at the centre is 360, area of the sector = mr? So, when the degree measure of the angle at the centre is 1, area of the mr? Therefore, when the degree measure of the angle at the centre is 0, area of the sector = tor= xg = ex Wr? seer 360 360 Thus, we obtain the following relation (or formula) for area of a sector of a circle: Area of the sector of angle 0 = xm, 360 where r is the radius of the circle and 0 the angle of the sector in degrees. Now, a natural question arises : Can we find the length of the are APB corresponding to this sector? Yes. Again, by applying the Unitary Method and taking the whole length of the circle (of angle 360 ) as 2mr, we can