Perimeter and Area eg Chapter 9 9.1 AREA OF A PARALLELOGRAM We come across many shapes other than squares and rectangles. How will you find the area of a land which is a parallelogram in shape? Let us find a method to get the area of a parallelogram. Can a parallelogram be converted into a rectangle of equal area? Draw a parallelogram on a graph paper as shown in Fig 9.1(4). Cut out the parallelogram. Draw a line from one vertex of the parallelogram perpendicular to the opposite side [Fig 9.1(11)]. Cut out the triangle. Move the triangle to the other side of the parallelogram. @) (ii) (iit) Fig 9.1 What shape do you get? You get a rectangle. Is the area of the parallelogram equal to the area of the rectangle formed? : Loh ~> breadth Yes, area of the parallelogram = area of the ral q ~ height rectangle formed me L dats What are the length and the breadth of the rectangle? Fig 9.2 2024-25 PERIMETER AND AREA ii We find that the length of the rectangle formed is equal to the base of the parallelogram and the breadth of the rectangle is equal to the height of the parallelogram (Fig 9.2). Now, Area of parallelogram = Area of rectangle = length x breadth =/xb But the length / and breadth b of the rectangle are exactly the base b and the height h, respectively of the parallelogram. Thus, the area of parallelogram = base x height = b xh. Any side of a parallelogram can be chosen as base of the parallelogram. The perpendicular dropped on that side from the opposite vertex is known as height (altitude). In the parallelogram ABCD, DEis height ~~ Cc perpendicular to AB. Here AB is the A base and DE is the height of the parallelogram. In this parallelogram ABCD, BF is the perpendicular to opposite side AD. Here AD is the base and BF is the height. Consider the following parallelograms (Fig 9.2). EET Fig 9.3 Find the areas of the parallelograms by counting the squares enclosed within the figures and also find the perimeters by measuring the sides. 2024-25 EE CE emarics Complete the following table: Parallelogram Perimeter [sis | sonis | Segunie | You will find that all these parallelograms have equal areas but different perimeters. Now, consider the following parallelograms with sides 7 cm and 5 cm (Fig 9.4). Fig 9.4 Find the perimeter and area of each of these parallelograms. Analyse your results. You will find that these parallelograms have different areas but equal perimeters. To find the area of a parallelogram, you need to know only the base and the corresponding height of the parallelogram. 2024-25 PERIMETER AND AREA ii, yo Try THESE Find the area of following parallelograms: 8 cm 8 cm (ii) Inaparallelogram ABCD, AB =7.2 cm and the perpendicular from C on AB is 4.5 cm. 9.2 AREA OF A TRIANGLE A gardener wants to know the cost of covering the