find that these parallelograms have different areas but equal perimeters. To find the area of a parallelogram, you need to know only the base and the corresponding height of the parallelogram. 2024-25 PERIMETER AND AREA ii, yo Try THESE Find the area of following parallelograms: 8 cm 8 cm (ii) Inaparallelogram ABCD, AB =7.2 cm and the perpendicular from C on AB is 4.5 cm. 9.2 AREA OF A TRIANGLE A gardener wants to know the cost of covering the whole of a triangular garden with grass. In this case we need to know the area of the triangular region. Let us find a method to get the area of a triangle. Draw a scalene triangle on a piece of paper. Cut out the triangle. Place this triangle on another piece of paper and cut out another triangle of the same size. So now you have two scalene triangles of the same size. Are both the triangles congruent? Superpose one triangle on the other so that they match. You may have to rotate one of the two triangles. Now place both the triangles such that a pair of corresponding sides is joined as shown in Fig 9.5. Is the figure thus formed a parallelogram? Compare the area of each triangle to the area of the parallelogram. Compare the base and height of the triangles with the base and height of the parallelogram. You will find that the sum of the areas of both the triangles is equal to the area of the parallelogram. The base and the height of the triangle are the same as the base and the height of the parallelogram, respectively. Area of each triangle = Oy (Area of parallelogram) Oy (base X height) (Since area of a parallelogram = base X height) 1 1 5 (bxh) (or 5 bh , in short) 2024-25 CE emarics 1. Try the above activity with different types of triangles. 2. Take different parallelograms. Divide each of the parallelograms into two triangles by cutting along any of its diagonals. Are the triangles congruent? In the figure (Fig 9.6) all the triangles are on the base AB =6cm. What can you say about the height of each of the triangles corresponding to the base AB? Can we say all the triangles are equal in area? Yes. Are the triangles congruent also? No. We conclude that all the congruent triangles are equal in area but the triangles equal in area Fig 9.6 need not be congruent. oo Consider the obtuse-angled triangle ABC of base 6 cm (Fig 9.7). Its height AD which is perpendicular from the vertex A is outside the triangle. a Can you find the area of the triangle? Bt is a GS parallelogram are 4 cm and 3 cm respectively. Find the HG EG GG TE Ec area of the parallelogram (Fig 9.8). Fig 9.7 SOLUTION Given that length of base (b) = 4 cm, height (h) = 3 cm Area of the parallelogram = b x h =4cmX3cm=12 cm