because Saturday was a holiday. (c) because it is on Saturday that people were allowed to board the ship. (d) because it is in the afternoon on Saturday that ship would start the voyage. 2. Who are excursionists? (a) They are the research students. (b) They are pilgrims. (c) They are musicians. (d) They are tourists on a leisure trip. 3. What was the mood of the people on the ship? 4. What was the author looking forward to? Unit 8 ME You can t judge a book by its cover Don t base your opinion of something (or someone) on the way it looks. Za Hit the nail on the head Get something exactly right WZ Do something at the drop of a hat Do something without having planned beforehand G\ D S e A S Ck) GG) @ S 5) @ Nea Me MaMa Matata ata Mata Matlatatatatatiatatabakh| 5. Match the words/phrases in Column A with pictures in Column B. carriage valise OM 2) IOs (0 a, Saxe rs) Q WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] (UTES) DEMS MEMS ME HSM SHSM SMS MSHS HSS 4S 4S HE HEM SMHS 4S (4 CK] 3 VocaBULARY 1. Match the phrasal verbs in Column A with the meanings in Column B. Look for to try to find a piece of information Look upto await eagerly Look forward to having a great deal of respect for a person Look up search 2. Rewrite the following words by removing the suffix age . (a) carriage (b) coverage (c) hermitage (d) marriage 3. Rewrite the following words by adding the suffix ful . (a) beauty (b) colour (c) duty (d) revenge (e) help wy (g) mercy If the word in question has Q two consonants before the Y, change the Y to I before GRAMMAR adding the suffix -ly. Tense Sloppy Sloppily 1. Read the following passage carefully. What is the event Happy happily described in the passage? Guess when it took place. Underline and name the tenses in the following passage. This is a good place to enrich ourselves about plant species which are environment friendly. The residents could gather horticulture: the art or a lot of information about horticulture at the event. practice of garden cultivation @\ Several states from north India are represented at this and management event and the florists showcase the best of their horticulture at the show. The organisers said that several events are lined up for D S e Sunday and these include dance, drawing, painting and a o G) IQ oils &S S Unit 8 a117)8 Nea Me MaMa Matata ata Mata Matlatatatatatiatatabakh| detox: rid the body of unhealthy substance By [Fun fact | The shortest, oldest and most commonly used word is IT . s Yay ae S @ S la, e fe) DEMS MEMS ME HSM SHSM SMS MSHS HSS 4S 4S HE HEM SMHS 4S (4 fashion show competition, among others. As many as 85 stalls have been put up by florists, gardening equipment