ata Mata Matlatatatatatiatatabakh| >) @ WrItiInG 1. Read/watch the advertisements on tourism. You can also watch the Kerala Tourism advertisement film A Reading Room With a View which is on the cultural diversity of Kerala. The film is awarded the best film in 60 second category at the prestigious Kyoorius Awards. Now create an advertisement for your city or state for promoting tourism. 2. Write a paragraph describing a journey, imaginery, or you have undertaken. You can follow the steps given below: 1. Prepare an itinerary. 2. You can make use of the following expressions, phrases and proverbs frequently used by the Ifa) travellers. @ Gye Jetlag, itchy feet, hit the road, time table, on the home stretch, call it a day, book in advance, travel over, travel through, travel light, any port in a storm, stopover, etc. YOO e (0 a, Saxe ea a WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] DEMS MEMS ME HSM SHSM SMS MSHS HSS 4S 4S HE HEM SMHS 4S (4 Ck) @ PRoJECT 1. You have read about the mesmerising effect of the music of flute on Vikram Seth in Kathmandu . Do you know the instruments for Sufi music differ from one culture to another? In Turkey, Iran and North Africa, the most prominent instrument is the Ney which is the reed flute. In Sufi music the Ney is accompanied by string instruments like saz, santoor, rubab, etc. Create a class magazine on music and artists. Some suggestions are given below. Collect information on the commonly used musical instruments in the following categories: Indian classical music Ghazal singing Bharatnatayam, Chau and Kathak dance Folk music Jazz Collect photographs of musical instruments. e Prepare brief biographical sketches of musicians, dancers, costume designers, artists, etc. You can meet some of them or collect information from sources like books, Internet, magazines, newspapers, etc. Give a suitable name to the magazine. 2. Plan a trip to the North-east region of the country by road. Explore the various possibilities of the travel. Also, create a map of your travel. NoTEs reed: a piece of thin cane or metal, which vibrates in a current of air to produce various musical sounds Unit 8 @ Ck) GG) qi 23) S 5) Gl GS Gj S =. Nea Me MaMa Matata ata Mata Matlatatatatatiatatabakh|