o G) IQ oils &S S Unit 8 a117)8 Nea Me MaMa Matata ata Mata Matlatatatatatiatatabakh| detox: rid the body of unhealthy substance By [Fun fact | The shortest, oldest and most commonly used word is IT . s Yay ae S @ S la, e fe) DEMS MEMS ME HSM SHSM SMS MSHS HSS 4S 4S HE HEM SMHS 4S (4 fashion show competition, among others. As many as 85 stalls have been put up by florists, gardening equipment wholesalers and seed retailers. Entry to the show has been made free for all. However, this year, it s the pollution control plants that have been grabbing all eyeballs. All plants emit oxygen, but it was established in a study conducted by National Aeronautics and Space Administration back in 1989 that some indoor plants could be extremely useful in controlling the air pollution by acting as a vacuum cleaner against the pollutants and absorbing them. Detox plants, which act as vacuum cleaners inside the house, are a hit in the ongoing event. Nature enthusiasts are preferring them for pollution control as well as interior decoration. (Source: Hindustan Times, Saturday, 24 Feb. 2018) Q @ Epirinec 1. Punctuate the following passage with appropriate punctuation marks. Kathmandu is vivid mercenary religious with small shrines to flower-adorned deities along the narrowest and busiest streets with fruit sellers flute sellers hawkers of postcards shops selling western cosmetics film rolls and chocolate or copper utensils and nepalese antiques film songs blare out from the radios car horns sound bicycle bells ring stray cows low questioningly at motorcycles vendors shout out their wares This passage is taken from the text Kathmandu by Vikram Seth. You can compare and check your rewritten passage with the passage in the textbook and see how far you are correct. WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] Cr) 3 LISTENING Listen to the passage and answer the questions that follow. A Visit to Bhitarkanika The sun was warm but the sea breeze kept up its cooling effect all along. Soon the steamer turned away and anchored near a creek by the river. The muddy fringe and the mangrove vegetation declared the gateway to the Bhitarkanika Wildlife Sanctuary in Odisha. The steamer could not negotiate these creeks at low tide, so a similar motorboat was hired to ferry us to the Dangmal forest rest-house in the heart of the mangrove forest. From the motorboat we had a good look at a large crocodile basking in the sun. The boat moved on, taking us deeper into the forest. Here we felt as though we had stepped into a time warp. In this awesome and mysterious place, birds of extraordinary plumage appeared before us. For the moment we revelled in the magnificence of nature which had us completely in its thrall. Among the birds, the kingfishers were the stars of the show. Crocodiles, large and small, slid into the water at our approach. Through the foliage we could see chital deer delicately browsing on fresh outcrops of