tour (a) to a place under an expert guide (b) for hiking in remote places (c) for visiting a place for sightseeing (d) All of the above ii [Fun fact | 2. By hiking in wilderness the author means Costs an arm and a leg (a) taking a long distance walk in abandoned areas Very expensive (b) walk in the forest areas It s a piece of cake (c) marathon in uninhabited areas WS ESI) @\G) S e S S Zz (d) sprinting in abandoned, uninhabited areas 3. Acruise ship is (a) a large ship that carries people on voyages of e pleasure. OG) ly A Unit 8 S 5 Nea Me MaMa Matata Wala Mata Matlatatiatatatatawtabah| (b) a big ship that carries people and goods on special mission. (c) a large watercraft for carrying passengers from one point to another. (d) a large ship that carries mail, goods and first aid facilities. 4. What all activities do tourists engage in? Pa Fun fact ff 5. What are the forms of transportation tourists use for visiting places? Spelling errors It s commitment , not committment . It's independence , not Independance . Read the excerpt-and answer the following questions. Following is an excerpt from the travelogue, The Innocents Abroad by Mark Twain. A little after noon on that distinguished Saturday I reached the ship and went on board. All was bustle pier: a long structure built in the sea and joined to the land at one end and confusion. The pier was crowded with carriages and men; passengers were arriving and hurrying on board; the vessel s decks were encumbered with trunks and woebegone: very sad or valises; groups of excursionists, arrayed in unattractive Ifa) miserable traveling costumes, were moping about in a drizzling @ Gye rain and looking as droopy and woebegone as so many molting chickens. The gallant flag was up, but it was under the spell, too, and hung limp and disheartened by the mast. Altogether, it was the bluest, bluest spectacle! S @ S (0 a, Same rs) Q JS WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] (UTES) DEMS MEMS ME HSM SHSM SMS MSHS HSS 4S 4S HE HEM SMHS 4S (4 It was a pleasure excursion there was no gainsaying that, because the program said so it was so nominated in the bond but it surely hadn t the general aspect of one. 1. Why is Saturday described as that distinguished Saturday? (a) because the much awaited Saturday has come when the voyage has to start. (b) because Saturday was a holiday. (c) because it is on Saturday that people were allowed to board the ship. (d) because it is in the afternoon on Saturday that ship would start the voyage. 2. Who are excursionists? (a) They are the research students. (b) They are pilgrims. (c) They are musicians. (d) They are tourists on a leisure trip. 3. What was the mood of the people on the ship? 4. What was the author looking forward to? Unit