the forest. Here we felt as though we had stepped into a time warp. In this awesome and mysterious place, birds of extraordinary plumage appeared before us. For the moment we revelled in the magnificence of nature which had us completely in its thrall. Among the birds, the kingfishers were the stars of the show. Crocodiles, large and small, slid into the water at our approach. Through the foliage we could see chital deer delicately browsing on fresh outcrops of leaves. A herd of wild boar was spotted searching for succulent roots. High above us, open-billed storks stood sentry-like following our progress through their remarkable kingdom. The evening sun was beginning to paint the tree-lined horizon crimson and gold and a brooding silence enveloped us all. (Source: Steps to English, Workbook for Class IX, NCERT, 2003) 1. Where was the author going? Unit 8 creek: a narrow area of water where the sea flows into the land plumage: the feathers covering a bird s body brooding silence: mysterious silence G\ D S a A Ck) GG) ly A 6 5 Or THO +) S @ Nea Me MaMa Matata ata Mata Matlatatatatatiatatabakh| 2. Where was the forest rest-house? How did the group manage to get there? 3. Which creature did they see first? 4. What does the author mean by the magnificence of nature ? 5. How are the kingfishers and the open-billed storks described? 6. Whatwere the chital deer and the wild boar doing when the motorboat went past them? Q fa} SPEAKING o Yay ae Prepare a short speech on the following and share it in the school assembly. 1. Travelling it offers you a hundred roads to adventure, By ) Q and gives your heart wings. Cee | fa) WorDs AND EXPRESSIONS 1 Corre DEMS MEMS ME HSM SHSM SMS MSHS HSS 4S 4S HE HEM SMHS 4S (4 Travelling it leaves you speechless, then turns you into a storyteller. (Ibn Batuta, a 14th century traveller) Travel is fatal to prejudice, bigotry, and narrow-mindedness, and many of our people need it sorely on these accounts. Broad, wholesome, charitable views of men and things cannot be acquired by vegetating in one little corner of the earth all one s lifetime. (Mark Twain, The Innocents Abroad) Ze A Fun fact Put/turn the clock back To make things the same as they were 2. The tourism sector can be aligned with the policies of sustainable development. Qa e OIoX OG) ky x Unit 8 iS) 5S Nea Me MaMa Matata ata Mata Matlatatatatatiatatabakh| >) @ WrItiInG 1. Read/watch the advertisements on tourism. You can also watch the Kerala Tourism advertisement film A Reading Room With a View which is on the cultural diversity of Kerala. The film is awarded the best film in 60 second category at the prestigious Kyoorius Awards. Now create an advertisement for your city or state for promoting tourism. 2. Write a paragraph describing a journey, imaginery, or you have undertaken. You can follow the steps