Unit 8.indd 112 976CHI0 Kathmandu is an excerpt from the travelogue Heaven Lake written by Vikram Seth. The travelogue is an account of his travel from China, Tibet and Kathmandu to India. Vikram Seth beautifully describes the natural landscape, cultural richness and diversity among people from region to region. Wee ee ee ew ew ee eee ee ee ee % Do you know? A river in New Zealand has become the first in the world to be recognised as a living entity with the legal status of a person after a 170-year battle by the local Maori people. The nation s parliament passed a bill to allow Whanganui River known by the Maoris as Te Awa Tupua to represent its own interests and advocate on its own behalf. This is a unique judgement for sustaining the health and well-being of the river. (Source: Adapted from The Guardian International Edition, 16 March 2017) 1. Collect information on similar judgements being taken in the context of river Ganga, and discuss in class. 2. Talk about the condition of Bagmati river in Kathmandu written by Vikram Seth. Reprint 2025-26 20-02-2023 09:28:31 @ 3 REapiInGc COMPREHENSION Read the following passage and answer the questions that follow. When we think of tourism, we think primarily of people who are visiting a particular place for sightseeing, visiting friends and relatives, taking a vacation, and having a good time. They may spend their leisure time engaging in various sports, sunbathing, talking, singing, taking rides, touring, reading or simply enjoying further. We may include in our definition of tourism people who are participating in a convention, a business conference, or some other kind of business or professional activity. Those who are taking a study tour under an expert guide or doing some kind of scientific research or study are also doing tourism. These visitors use all forms of transportation from hiking in a wilderness park to flying in = chairlifl: a series of chairs hanging from a moving cable, for carrying people up and down a mountain a jet to an exciting city. Transportation can include taking a chairlift up a Colorado mountainside or standing at the rail of a cruise ship looking across the blue Caribbean. Whether people travel by one of these means or by car, motor coach camper, train, motorbike or bicycle, they are taking a trip and thus are engaging in tourism. (Adapted from Tourism: Principles, Practices, Philosophies by Charles R. Goeldner and J.R. Brent Ritchie, p. 4) 1. Tourism is about taking a tour (a) to a place under an expert guide (b) for hiking in remote places (c) for visiting a place for sightseeing (d) All of the above ii [Fun fact | 2. By hiking in wilderness the author means Costs an arm and a leg (a) taking a long distance walk in abandoned areas Very expensive (b) walk in the forest areas It s a piece of cake (c) marathon in uninhabited areas WS ESI) @\G) S e S S