Y ; ~4 | e= notes of the piano. To be able to hear his own compositions, he sawed off the legs of his piano. The piano touched the floor, and Beethoven would press \ ' y veines ; == his ear to the floor, banging the piano keys to listen to the high notes in his compositions. The most significant aspect of 5 e A @ Beethoven s character was that he did not give up. With a brave heart, r , \" } : he confronted the greatest challenge eS We @ ) >) s@: WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1 (TES) SME MEMS MS MSM SMS MS DEM SMS MSHS MS He HS MS SMS 41S Me | Unit 2.indd 24 30-05-2018 11:46 | a musician can face, and continued living his dream of composing music. Deafness could not deter him from achieving the pinnacle of musical success. He fought against the greatest obstacle and won. His quality of never giving up strengthened him. It made him come to terms with his deafness in a dynamic and constructive way. These qualities led him to become a famous composer. 1. Read the following statements and write true (T) or false (F). (a) Although he composed a lot of music, Beethoven never learned to play music himself. (T/F) (b) His deafness was not a sudden loss of hearing. (T/F) (c) He composed most of his music early in his life, before he became deaf. (T/F) (d) His musical skills were compared to Haydn. (T/F) (e) Beethoven cut down the legs of his piano to hear the notes of the keys from the floor. (T/F) 2. How could Beethoven compose music despite his loss of hearing? 3. What realisation made Beethoven continue his passion for music with more determination? Unit 2 pinnacle: the most successful point Common Spelling Errors It s tomorrow , not tommorrow . It s noticeable , not noticable . Gl o> GS om CY) S oes CB (OTTHN) NEEM MaMeaMata tala MaataWatatiatiaMatiahtataabt: | Unit 2.indd 25 30-05-2018 11:41:15 | 4. Which word in the following is similar in meaning to skillful (para 1)? (a) brilliant (b) masterly (c) talented (d) genius Read the poem carefully and answer the question that follows. THE Souitary REAPER Behold her, single in the field, Yon solitary Highland lass! profound: very great or Reaping and singing by herself; intense Stop here, or gently pass! chaunt: old British spelling Alone she cuts and binds the grain, of chant; a repeated rhythmic phrase And sings a melancholy strain; O listen! for the Vale profound Is overflowing with the sound. No Nightingale did ever chaunt More welcome notes to weary bands Of travellers in some shady haunt, Among Arabian sands: A voice so thrilling ne er was heard In spring-time from the Cuckoo-bird, Breaking the silence of the seas Among the farthest Hebrides. Will no one tell me what she sings? Perhaps the plaintive numbers flow For old, unhappy, far-off things, And battles long ago: Or