tunes help stroke victims recover faster. (f) Music helps adolescents to discover their identity. Ck] 3 SPEAKING fy @) ] (9g, eI O mee Gaye SME MEMS MS MSM SMS MS DEM SMS MSHS MS He HS MS SMS 41S Me | Unit 2.indd 34 Two students need to come to the front of the class for a role play. One plays the role of Thyagaraja, a famous singer, and the other the role of the interviewer, Rohit, a Radio Jockey (RJ). The interview is about the singer s initiatives in helping people through music. RJ Rohit : Do you think music has any effect on people s lives? Thyagaraja : Yes, I believe music surely has a positive effect on people s lives. It helps when you are stressed, or depressed about something. Apart from these, music is a good way of relaxing and feeling good about life. RJ Rohit : What, according to you, could be the influence of music on young children? WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] 30-05-2018 11:41:18 | Thyagaraja : Now-a-days, young children get distracted easily. Music helps them in concentrating on what they are doing. RJ Rohit How does music help patients? Thyagaraja : Listening to music relaxes patients. The process of healing becomes faster when they are in a relaxed state of mind. RJ Rohit Thank you very much. You are doing a great job for the humankind. Cr) @ WritTinc 1. Listening to music has become a part of our lives for many reasons. We listen to different types of music today. Discuss in pairs the following question: Is the traditional music of a country more important than its contemporary music? Write your views in about 50-60 words. 2. The traits of a musician are given in the box overleaf. Use these and write a short biography in about 100-150 words. You may collect more information from the Internet, books in the library and other sources. Unit 2 Ze i Fun fact Adjectives ending in ING Used to describe something that causes an emotion. -ing Tiring Confusing Relaxing Satisfying Shocking Gl o> GS om ool eS &S i) & (OTTHN) NEEM MaMeaMata tala MaataWatatiatiaMatiahtataabt: | Unit 2.indd 35 30-05-2018 11:41:18 | A. R. Rahman: Indian composer, singer, songwriter, music producer, musician and philanthropist; born in Chennai on 6 January 1967; graduated from Trinity College, Oxford University; famous in integrating Indian classical music with electronic music, world music and traditional orchestral arrangements; recipient of the Padmashri and the Padma Vibhushan awards; two Oscars and a Golden Globe; a notable humanitarian and philanthropist; donates and raises money for a number of causes and charities. Biographical Sketch vr = [Fun fact By and large Mistaken as by in large . This phrase is used when discussing a subject ina general sense. fy @) ] eS We @ ) >) 3@: WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] % (TES) SME MEMS MS MSM SMS MS DEM SMS MSHS MS He HS MS SMS 41S Me | Unit 2.indd 36