the soul , rightly said by Plato. Music is often referred to as food for the soul due to the several benefits we can derive from experiencing it. Music can be pleasure for some, and a way to relax for others. It also motivates and energises listeners. Music is, indeed, a universal language, which can bring nations together and unite people with different faiths as it touches one s soul. In the mainstream, music is mainly known for its entertainment quotient, but the Indian culture also talks about the healing effects of music through Raga Chikitsa . Raga Chikitsa has helped in reviving an ancient healing practice known as Nada Yoga. Nada is a musical sound, which is believed to have curative effects on the body and soul of all creatures. Consequently, its power is therapeutic and is used in curing diseases. Medical research has found music therapy to aid patients in pain management. It is not surprising, as music affects the body and mind significantly. One experiences positive energy by listening to music. Music lifts one from clouds of desolation. Rhythms, Unit 2 desolate: giving an impression of bleak and Crp l dismal emptiness Gl o> GS Ck) CY) S ower 8B (OTTHN) EN Fen M ene Fen en Fe Meme eae Felner CN Pen Fe CA =n Fe Pen NFCA Fe CN [ATUTATOMT TIAA TTT TTT TO TOTO OOOO OUTDO 30-05-2018 11:41:18 | Noms sedative: promoting calm or inducing sleep particularly upbeat music, helps one distract oneself from situations that cause stress and brightens one s mood. Music lowers anxiety levels, relaxes mind and brings optimism. It is said that listening to soft, sedative music once a day can help overcome depression. Music therapy finds its traces in mythology. The story of Hippocrates, the Greek father of medicine dates back to 400 B.C. He is known to have used music to cure his patients. This therapy also aids stroke victims to heal at a faster rate, since it increases the patient s emotional comforts and motivates them to move towards the path of recovery. On the other hand, adolescents, too, are benefitted by music in terms of emotional, social and psychological well being. Music is a force that purifies beings from within. According to you, which FOUR of the following statements are true? (a) Nada Yoga treats diseases through Raga Chikitsa. (b) Music is a universal language that reaches souls. (c) Music therapy dates back to 400 B.C. (d) Hippocrates played music to treat the patients. (e) Upbeat tunes help stroke victims recover faster. (f) Music helps adolescents to discover their identity. Ck] 3 SPEAKING fy @) ] (9g, eI O mee Gaye SME MEMS MS MSM SMS MS DEM SMS MSHS MS He HS MS SMS 41S Me | Unit 2.indd 34 Two students need to come to the front of the class for a role play. One plays the role of Thyagaraja, a famous singer, and the other the role of the interviewer, Rohit, a Radio