Unit 2.indd 21 What kind of music is Ravi Shankar famous for? (a) Jazz (b) Classical (c) Pop Which country was Justin Beiber born in? (a) USA (b) India (c) Canada How many strings does a guitar have? (a) 6 (b) 7 (c) 8 What is a group of three musicians called? (a) a trio (b) a duet (c) a quartet What is the next note after sa-re-ga-ma? (a) dha (b) ni (c) pa What is the next note after do-re-mi? (a) ti (b) fa (c) so Reprint 2025-26 1/7/2019 10:01:22 AM @ (Notes) ____ 9 ReapiInc CoMPREHENSION inescapable: unable to be avoided or denied ~ y) aM, SB ) ej [) o we Gaye SME MEMS MS MSM SMS MS DEM SMS MSHS MS He HS MS SMS 41S Me | Unit 2.indd 22 oT In this section, you will read three texts on music in different perspectives. The first one will enlighten you about the effective role of music in our lives, the second reflects on the life of the famous music composer, Ludwig van Beethoven, and the third is a poem by William Wordsworth where he appreciates the melody of a song. Read the texts carefully and answer the questions that follow. Roe or Music 1n Lire Today, we are rushing through life and everyone seems to be pressurised and stressed about one or the other thing. Stress has become an inescapable part of our lives. Many of our illnesses are a result of stress, and to deal with it, we need certain ways to relax our body and mind. Listening to music, particularly gentle, calming and melodious music, relaxes people both physically and mentally. Music releases endorphins, the natural painkillers in our brain, which relieve us from the sense of pain. Music can normalise heart rate and blood pressure. The common occurrences of fatigue and boredom decrease when we listen to music. It diverts our attention from everyday anxieties, thereby reducing the stress caused by such concerns. While meditating, listening to music helps us to connect with our soul. Students can improve their concentration and boost their memory by listening to soft music. Soothing music, when played at night, helps us to rest and relax for a good night s sleep. Listening to good music helps in overcoming negative traits such as anger or worry, thereby improving our personality. It creates positive energy and happiness. Every cell in the body becomes energetic with increased peace of mind. Music is a therapy for everyone plants, birds, animals and human beings to flourish and rejuvenate. It certainly plays an important part in making the world better for all living beings. WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] 30-05-2018 11:41:15 | Complete the following statements by selecting the most appropriate options given below. 1. helps in relaxation of our body and mind. (a) Pop music (b) Soothing music (c) Jazz music (d) Rock music The natural painkillers released in our brain are (a) Insulin (b) Endorphins (c) Endocrine (d) Glycerin Music is