a melancholy strain; O listen! for the Vale profound Is overflowing with the sound. No Nightingale did ever chaunt More welcome notes to weary bands Of travellers in some shady haunt, Among Arabian sands: A voice so thrilling ne er was heard In spring-time from the Cuckoo-bird, Breaking the silence of the seas Among the farthest Hebrides. Will no one tell me what she sings? Perhaps the plaintive numbers flow For old, unhappy, far-off things, And battles long ago: Or is it some more humble lay, Familiar matter of to-day? Some natural sorrow, loss, or pain, That has been, and may be again? eS We @ ) re) s@: WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] % (TES) SME MEMS MS MSM SMS MS DEM SMS MSHS MS He HS MS SMS 41S Me | Unit 2.indd 26 30-05-2018 11:41:16 | Whate er the theme, the Maiden sang As if her song could have no ending; I saw her singing at her work, And o er the sickle bending; I listened, motionless and still; And, as I mounted up the hill, The music in my heart I bore, Long after it was heard no more. William Wordsworth 1. Complete the summary of the poem given below with a suitable word/ phrase in each blank. The poet finds a young Highland girl who (a) alone and sings to herself. The poet asks us to listen carefully, because the whole (b) is filled with the overflowing sound of her singing. He asks us to either (c) and listen to her sad song, or gently pass by so as not to disturb her. He goes on to say that no nightingale ever sang a more (d) song to bands of tired (e) in the Arabian Desert. The poet asserts that the beauty of the girl s singing exceeds that of the cuckoo s in the (f) . Her singing is also the only thing which (g) the silence of the valley. The poet tries to (h) what the girl is singing about. He is unable to get the words of the song clearly. He thinks that perhaps she is singing about old sorrows or (i) fought long ago, or more routine concerns of life or even some (j) which she has endured and may endure again. At the end, he quietly walks away with a feeling that he may never be able to find out the (k) of her never-ending song. Nevertheless, he asserts that her singing has captured his imagination so much that he will (1) the music in his heart long after it is heard no more. Unit 2 ME That chair is not BROKE. That chair is BROKEN. You, however, might be BROKE if you can't afford to fix the chair that s BROKEN. Gl o> GS om CY) S oes CB (OTTHN) NEEM MaMeaMata tala MaataWatatiatiaMatiahtataabt: | Unit 2.indd 27 30-05-2018 11:41:16 | Vk) 3 VOCABULARY 1. The following words and phrases occur in the given passages and poem. Given below are