and human beings to flourish and rejuvenate. It certainly plays an important part in making the world better for all living beings. WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] 30-05-2018 11:41:15 | Complete the following statements by selecting the most appropriate options given below. 1. helps in relaxation of our body and mind. (a) Pop music (b) Soothing music (c) Jazz music (d) Rock music The natural painkillers released in our brain are (a) Insulin (b) Endorphins (c) Endocrine (d) Glycerin Music is helpful in improving the of students. (a) concentration (b) emotion (c) relaxation (d) anxiety Which word from the passage means the same as to renew ? (a) rejuvenate (b) enhance (c) release (d) relieve List the benefits of music mentioned in the passage. Unit 2 wa B bun tact | Common suffixes that make nouns -~ ment agree agreement move movement -y monarch monarchy discover _ discovery Gl o> GS om CY) S oes CO (OTTHN) NEEM MaMeaMata tala MaataWatatiatiaMatiahtataabt: | Unit 2.indd 23 30-05-2018 11:41:15 | = om BEATING THE Opps The musical accomplishments of composer Ludwig van Beethoven have been all the more remarkable for the fact that he lost his hearing ability from an early age. He beating the odds: to succeed despite not having a good Se ; chance of succeeding ringing in his ears that made it difficult for him to hear. He is compared to Mozart for his genius, and is considered the developed the symptoms of tinnitus, a constant sound of most eminent musician after Mozart. Although his formal education never went beyond the elementary level, he trained in music under Joseph Haydn. He has always been acclaimed as a brilliant piano maestro. His father and grandfather were the court musicians of a German prince. Young Ludwig was often made to perform for his father s drinking companions in the middle of the night, and was even beaten if he protested. For the first thirty years of his life, Beethoven could listen to and play music effortlessly. As a result, he understood sounds of musical instruments and the pitch of the singing voices. He knew the harmony between music and singing before he became completely deaf. His deafness was not sudden, but a gradual decline. This slow process of losing his hearing activated his mind to imagine how his compositions would sound like. When he became completely deaf, he started to observe the vibrations of the piano. The observations helped him realise that he could not hear the high y a ! = Y ; ~4 | e= notes of the piano. To be able to hear his own compositions, he sawed off the legs of his piano. The piano touched the floor, and Beethoven would press \ ' y veines ; == his ear to the floor, banging the piano keys to listen to the high notes in his compositions. The most significant aspect of 5 e A @ Beethoven s character was that he did not give up. With a brave