interesting book. The table is round. The round table. 3 But adjectives can have many forms. i) Commonly 1. He chose a pipe with a natural hollow stem that was misunderstood phrases longer and broader. 2. Ustad Bismillah Khan was awarded India s highest For all intents and civilian awards urposes f 7 : P np 3. My mother is the most beautiful woman in the world. This phrase means for all practical purposes. Here the adjectives longer and broader refer to the Sneds peak pomparaeye. hy and highest and most beautiful refer to Often mistaken as sneak SUPSE ative Cesree. ; peak . Er is used for the comparative degree for shorter words This phrase means to take and more is used for longer words. an early look at something. Example: Let s go to the local market. The vegetables are cheaper there. But in Supermarket these are more expensive. A. Now fill in the blanks with appropriate comparative adjectives. (a) He was not audible. His voice was not loud. Can you request him to be a bit (loud)? (b) There are many peaks in the Himalayas. Everest is (high) peak in India. (a 4) (c) With 9 degree Celsius it was colder yesterday, and @ with 4 degree Celsius it is (cold) today. 2 (d) Our police is the____ Cs C C_ (reliable) in (>) the country. ] id (e) My sister is (serious) than me. (9g, 0: WoRrDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1 O ome SME MEMS MS MSM SMS MS DEM SMS MSHS MS He HS MS SMS 41S Me | Unit 2.indd 30 30-05-2018 rats | (f) Your dance performance is not good. It can be (good) with practice. (g) Living in the countryside is (peaceful) than living in a town. (h) My father is (important) person in my life. B. Fill in the blanks with appropriate superlative degree most / est . (a) With so many vehicles, the roads of Delhi have become (crowded) ones in India. (b) Yesterday was (cold) day of the month. (c) The book is interesting. It is (interesting) book I have ever read. (d) This hotel is cheaper. But that one is (cheap) in the town. (e) (old) member of my family is my grandfather. (f) Lata Mangeshkar has (melodious) voice in the country. 2. In the same lesson, use of to-verb has been explained. Let s do some more activities on this. Join the two sets of sentences given below, and make one sentence. The first one is done for you. 1. May I help you? Okay He offered to help her. 2. Let s go to the Old Age Home in the evening. That s fine. She arranged to the Old Age Home in the evening. 3. What would you like to eat? , asked Shivani s mother. T don t have an appetite , replied Shivani. Shivani refused 4. Post the letter. Don t forget. Don t forget Unit 2 ME Literally Literally is often misused to express