help of both the physical and political maps for this exercise. DON T MISS OUT The traditional house construction method in the western Himalayan region is known as kath-kunv or dhajjidewari style of houses. A combination of locally available stone and wood is used, which not only keeps the house warm but also resists damage in the Himachal Pradesh 08-04-2025 11:30:26 < - DON'T MISS OUT The Great Himalayan National Park in Himachal Pradesh has a wide diversity of flora and fauna. The park has been declared Fig. 1.7. 1.Great Himalayan National Park Conservation Area. 2. Himalayan monal (male). 3. A monastery in Ladakh. 4. The Beas river in Himachal Pradesh. 5. Snow Leopard 6. A display of produce in a local market in the Himalayas. 7. Rnododendron a type of sherbet is made out of this flower. India and the World: Land and the People 1 -Geographical Diversity of India Chapter 1.indd 7 08-04-2025 11:30:31 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 1.indd 8 a World Heritage Site by UNESCO. The biodiversity of the park is being preserved by the government as well as the village communities that live inside the park. The cold desert of India The word desert immediately evokes an image of a hot place. However, there are also cold deserts, and we have one in India. Ladakh is a cold desert where winter temperatures drop below 30 C. There is very little rainfall, and the landscape is rugged, with rocky terrain, deep valleys, and lakes such as Pangong Tso (tso means lake). ee oe oth Be ae | - The terrain here resembles : "OEE La **"\ 3" that of the moon; hence, it is i a Vg a. | called moonland . Geologists explain the formation of this terrain, as we saw earlier, by the fact that the mountains were folded when _ the Indian landmass _ collided with Eurasia. This folded portion was part of an ocean, and so the rocks in this area Fig. 1.9. Yaks are very important for the lives of people in the Himalayas. They are reared for their milk, meat, wool and dung, and are also used for transport. 08-04-2025 11:30:31 Fig. 1.10. Pangong Tso, Ladakh. This lake has salty water, unlike most other lakes. The saltiness is a result of the minerals that dissolve from the surrounding mountain areas. are made largely of sand and clay. Wind and rain have eroded the mountains into the shapes you see in the photograph. Despite the harsh conditions, Ladakh is home to unique wildlife like snow leopards, ibex, and Tibetan antelopes. The Ladakhi people lead a simple life. The region is known for its ancient monasteries and colourful festivals such as Losar and the Hemis Festival. The Gangetic Plains As we move southwards from the Himalayas, we reach the vast and fertile Gangetic Plains. These plains have been an important part of the history and civilisation of India. These plains are nourished by mighty rivers originating