tourists but also help in hydroelectric power generation and provide water for irrigation. India and the World: Land and the People 1 -Geographical Diversity of India 08-04-2025 11:30:46 Fig. 1.29. Lion-tailed macaque in the Western Ghats Fig. 1.31. This is an insectivorous plant, meaning it feeds on ; = : insects, found in the Fig. 1.32. Coal mines in the plateau; an important Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Western Ghats. It catches resource, especially in the production of electricity. small insects in sticky Coal is a fossil fuel, the use of which contributes traps and digests them! to global warming. Chapter 1.indd 18 08-04-2025 11:30:49 Chapter 1.indd 19 Fig. 1.33. Mumbai, on the west coast, is India s financial centre India s Amazing Coastlines India s coastline is dotted with beautiful beaches, rocky cliffs, and lush green forests. Some beaches have golden sand while others have black rocks. Some islands have coral reefs while others are covered in thick jungles. India s coasts are full of surprises! The Indian coastline is over 7500 km long. > Look at the physical map of India in your school atlas or wall map and find the names of five rivers that flow into the Bay of Bengal. Find out India s coastal states and discuss the difference between the western and eastern coastal plains. > Do you know what it is called when these rivers split into multiple streams near the coast? Discuss with your teacher in class to find out! The West Coast of India The West Coast of India stretches from Gujarat to Kerala, passing through Maharashtra, Goa, and Karnataka. Most rivers here originate in the Western Ghats, flow swiftly, and form estuaries. The coastline is shaped by alluvial deposits from short rivers and features coves, creeks, and estuaries, with the Narmada and Tapti estuaries being the largest. a India and the World: Land and the People 1 -Geographical Diversity of India 08-04-2025 11:30:50 rt +2 Fig. 1.34. An aerial view of a part of the west coast. Note how close the hills of the Western Ghats are to the Arabian Sea. The west coast has many important ports and cities. These have been the centres of economic activity for millennia. The East Coast The East Coast lies between the Eastern Ghats and the Bay of Bengal, stretching from the Ganga delta to Kanyakumari. It has wide plains and major river deltas, including Mahanadi, Godavari, Krishna, and Kaveri. Important water bodies like Chilika Lake and Pulicat Lake (a lagoon, which is a body of water separated from larger bodies of water by a natural barrier) are found here. Deltas are landforms formed at the mouth of a river when it deposits Fig. 1.35. Satellite view of the East sediments into a larger body of water, Coast of India. such as an ocean, a lake, or another river. Over time, these sediments build up, forming a triangular or fan-shaped area. The Godavari, Krishna, Kaveriand Mahanadi | rivers