surface; some of its sides are often steep slopes. India has several plateaus; the most important one is the triangular peninsular area in the middle and south of the country. It is also a very old land formation! Since this region is a peninsula, surrounded by water on all three sides by the Arabian Sea, the Bay of Bengal, and the Indian Ocean, it is called a peninsular plateau. The plateau is bordered by two mountain ranges, the Western Ghats and Eastern Ghats. The Western Ghats are taller and run along the western coast like a wall, with many beautiful waterfalls flowing down their steep sides during the monsoon season. - DON T MISS OUT The Western Ghats have been declared a UNESCO World Heritage Site. They are home to many rivers and have a rich biodiversity. The northern portion of the Western Ghats are also known as the Sahyadri Hills. The Eastern Ghats are lower and broken into smaller hills along the eastern coast. Between these mountain ranges lies the Deccan Plateau, a vast area of flat highlands. Rivers like the Godavari, Krishna, and Kaveri flow across the plateau from west to east. These rivers are important for farming and provide water to millions of people. LET'S EXPLORE Look at the physical map of India given at the end of the book. Notice the direction of the flow of the rivers. 08-04-2025 11:30:45 Chapter 1.indd 17 Fig. 1.27. Dense forests of Chhattisgarh, home to many tribal communities This plateau is rich in minerals, forests, and fertile land, making it vital for India s economy. It tilts a little to the east, so a few of the rivers in this region flow towards the Bay of Bengal. East-flowing rivers like the Godavari, Krishna, and Mahanadi originate here, providing water for farming, industries, and hydroelectric power. There are west-flowing rivers (Narmada, Tapti) too, which drain into the Arabian Sea. Dense forests on the plateau are home to tribal communities, including the Santhal, Gond, Baiga, Bhil, and Korku. These tribes have distinct languages, traditions, and ways of life closely connected to Nature. Tribal communities are largely spread over the states of Jharkhand, West Bengal, Odisha, Assam, Madhya Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Maharashtra, Telangana, and Gujarat. Examine the physical and political maps at the end of this book to locate the states and connect them to their location on the physical map. Plateaus are home to many beautiful waterfalls in India, as rivers flow over their uneven and rocky surfaces. These waterfalls not only attract tourists but also help in hydroelectric power generation and provide water for irrigation. India and the World: Land and the People 1 -Geographical Diversity of India 08-04-2025 11:30:46 Fig. 1.29. Lion-tailed macaque in the Western Ghats Fig. 1.31. This is an insectivorous plant, meaning it feeds on ; = : insects, found in the Fig. 1.32. Coal mines in the plateau; an important Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Western Ghats. It catches resource, especially in