beam in Bandhavgarh __ the verge of extinction. Project Tiger has National Park, Madhya Pradesh supported the return of the tiger to its habitats. India and the World: Land and the People 1 -Geographical Diversity of India Chapter 1.indd 11 08-04-2025 11:30:35 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 1.indd 12 Fig. 1.20. A peacock and peahen the is between 2.5 and 4.5 m long. This Indian peacock is our national bird reptile is on the verge of extinction. There are laws that prohibit harming it or hunting it. The Great Indian Desert or Thar Desert If we move westward on the map, you will notice a yellowish area. This area is the Thar Desert. What do you see? A vast stretch of golden dunes, rugged terrain, and a wide-open sky? Fig. 1.21. A traveller among the sand dunes of the Thar Desert. What is the shape of a sand dune? While mountains are made of rock and their shape is fixed, why do you think sand dunes also have a similar shape, even though they are made of sand? 08-04-2025 11:30:37 Chapter 1.indd 13 India. The Jaisalmer fort is a UNESCO World Heritage site. Sand dunes are formed when the wind shifts and shapes the sand into hill-like formations. Sometimes these rise as high as 150 metres. The Thar is a vast arid region. Most of it lies within India, spanning the states of Rajasthan, Gujarat, Punjab, and Haryana. The desert acts as a natural barrier due to the harsh conditions that deter human and animal movement including very high daytime temperatures and cold nights, as well as a lack of access to water. People living in the Thar have adapted their way of life to the place and what it offers; food habits, clothing and lifestyle are suited to these harsh conditions. Fig. 1.23. Camel vendor at the Pushkar Mela (at the edge of the Thar Desert) India and the World: Land and the People 1 -Geographical Diversity of India 08-04-2025 11:30:41 ~ DON'T MISS OUT Fig. 1.24. (Left) Women fetching water from a source far away from home. (Right) Rainwater harvesting structure in a hamlet. Water is scarce in the desert. Women often need to travel long distances every day to fetch water for their families. So, the traditional method for cleaning utensils is to scour them with sand until they are clean. A little water can be used for a light rinse. The water used for rinsing is reused for purposes like watering a plant. So, the next time you leave the tap running, remember the people of the Thar Desert. Rajasthan is also famous for its ingenious water conservation methods, including taanka or kunds. These are special water collection systems that store rainwater, often for drinking purposes. The Aravalli Hills LET'S EXPLORE Let s go back to the map. Trace your path slowly from the Thar Desert towards the east. Do you see the Aravalli Hills? | | The Aravallis are