11:30:25 - DON T MISS OUT Chapter 1.indd 5 How the Himalayas were formed ... an interesting story A long, long time ago, India was part of a much bigger landmass called Gondwana , where its neighbour was Africa! At some point, it broke away and slowly started moving north. About 50 million years ago, it reached the landmass of Eurasia and collided with it. As India pushed against Eurasia, the land between them crumpled and rose up just like how a carpet wrinkles when you push it. That s how the mighty Himalayan mountains were formed! Amazingly, India is still pushing into Asia today, very slowly about five centimetres each year, which is much slower than the rate at which your hair grows. This means the Himalayas are still growing taller, just a tiny bit each year about five millimetres, but over a millennium, that adds up to five metres! EURASItAN PLATE f e et "0 INDIAN ees OCEAN ie i ey \ 1 71 million = \ ye a NDA ae =~ ah ~~ SRI LANKA ' ae Fig. 1.5. Folded layers of Himalayan rock - etal . dl oo J Fig. 1.4. India s journey to Eurasia The word Himalaya is a combination of two Sanskrit words hima, meaning snow , and a@laya, meaning abode or dwelling thus, abode of snow . India and the World: Land and the People 1 -Geographical Diversity of India 08-04-2025 11:30:26 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 1.indd 6 The Himalayas are broadly categorised into three main ranges: The Himadri (the Greater Himalayas) are the highest and most rugged part of the range, home to towering peaks like Mount Everest and Kanchenjunga. This region remains snow-covered throughout the year. Life here is tough, and there are not many human settlements. The Himachal (the Lower Himalayas) lie south of the Greater Himalayas and have a more moderate climate, allowing rich biodiversity and human habitation. Popular hill stations, such as Nainital (Uttarakhand), Darjeeling (West Bengal), Shimla (Himachal Pradesh), and Mussoorie (Uttarakhand), are located in this region. The Shivalik Hills (the Outer Himalayas) form the outermost and lowest range, consisting of rolling hills and dense forests. These foothills are rich in wildlife, serving as a transition zone between the Himalayas and the Gangetic Plains (also called the Northern Plains). LET'S EXPLORE ts en ad Fig. 1.6. Kath-kuni House, event of mild earthquakes. Can you locate the names of the states in the different parts of the Himalayas? Take the help of both the physical and political maps for this exercise. DON T MISS OUT The traditional house construction method in the western Himalayan region is known as kath-kunv or dhajjidewari style of houses. A combination of locally available stone and wood is used, which not only keeps the house warm but also resists damage in the Himachal Pradesh 08-04-2025 11:30:26 < - DON'T MISS OUT The Great Himalayan National Park in Himachal Pradesh has a wide diversity of flora