Lake (a lagoon, which is a body of water separated from larger bodies of water by a natural barrier) are found here. Deltas are landforms formed at the mouth of a river when it deposits Fig. 1.35. Satellite view of the East sediments into a larger body of water, Coast of India. such as an ocean, a lake, or another river. Over time, these sediments build up, forming a triangular or fan-shaped area. The Godavari, Krishna, Kaveriand Mahanadi | rivers create fertile deltas, making the land ideal for farming. Indian Islands The Indian Islands refer to the group of islands scattered across the Indian Ocean, the Arabian Sea, and the Bay of Bengal, which form part of India s territory. India has two major island Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 1.indd 20 08-04-2025 11:30:51 groups Lakshadweep in the Arabian Sea and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands in the Bay of Bengal. These islands have unique wildlife, beautiful beaches, coral reefs, and volcanoes. Several ancient tribes made these islands their home tens of thousands of years ago. Lakshadweep islands Lakshadweep is an archipelago (a group of islands) located in the Arabian Sea, close to the Malabar coast of Kerala. It is made up of 36 islands made of coral. Not all islands are inhabited by people. India controls a vast marine area, allowing for fishing, resource exploration, and environmental protection. Andaman and Nicobar islands This archipelago comprises more than 500 large and small volcanic islands, divided into two distinct groups the Andaman and the Nicobar Islands. Their location is very important. Fig. 1.36. Coral reef in the Fig. 1.37. Coral reef in the Lakshadweep Islands Andaman Islands India and the World: Land and the People 1 -Geographical Diversity of India Fig. 1.38. A floating dock (a small port) of the Indian Navy near the Andaman Islands. Chapter 1.indd 21 08-04-2025 11:30:52 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 1.indd 22 Fig. 1.39. An aerial view of the active volcano on Barren Island, the only one in India - DON'T MISS OUT A) They are like the outposts of India, keeping an eye on the ocean. It is home to a variety of flora and fauna. The Andaman Islands are also significant from a historical point of view many of our freedom fighters were jailed there under the most severe conditions in a prison complex called Cellular Jail . It has been preserved to remind us of the tremendous sacrifices that our forefathers made so we could be free. We will discuss this some more in higher classes. Barren Island (Fig. 1.39 above) in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands is the only active volcano in India. It sometimes erupts, sending smoke and lava into the sky! The Delta in West Bengal and the Sundarbans Fig. 1.40. Mangroves of the delta in the Sundarbans of West Bengal As we travel back from the islands towards the eastern side of the Himalayas via the