west and the Bay of Bengal in the east. > These diverse geographic features have created a variety of conditions with respect to soil, flora, fauna, life and economic opportunities, and honed a rich culture. > These geographical features have played an important role in shaping our civilisation. Questions and activities 1. What, in your opinion, are two important geographical features of India? Why do you think they are important? Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 1.indd 24 08-04-2025 11:30:55 Chapter 1.indd 25 . What do you think India might have looked like if the Himalayas did not exist? Write a short note or sketcha drawing to express your imagination. . India has been called a mini-continent . Based on what you ve read, why do you think this is so? . Follow one of India s big rivers from where it starts to where it meets the ocean. What are the different ways in which people might utilise this river along its journey? Discuss in groups in your class. . Why is the southern part of India referred to as a peninsular plateau? . Which UNESCO Heritage Site mentioned in this chapter did you find more interesting? Write a short paragraph to describe what about it is interesting. . Look at the two maps of India, physical as well as political, given at the end of this book. Identify the place you are at now. Which physical feature of India would you use to describe its location? . Food preservation techniques differ from place to place across India. They are adapted to local conditions. Do a class project. Gather different methods of preserving food. Hint: Drying vegetables when they are in season for use during the off-season. . Despite having such different regions (mountains, deserts, plains, coasts), India remains one country. How do you think our geography has helped unite people? India and the World: Land and the People 1 -Geographical Diversity of India 08-04-2025 11:30:55 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 * Noodles is our abbreviation for Notes and Doodles ! Chapter 1.indd 26 08-04-2025 11:30:55