forefathers made so we could be free. We will discuss this some more in higher classes. Barren Island (Fig. 1.39 above) in the Andaman and Nicobar Islands is the only active volcano in India. It sometimes erupts, sending smoke and lava into the sky! The Delta in West Bengal and the Sundarbans Fig. 1.40. Mangroves of the delta in the Sundarbans of West Bengal As we travel back from the islands towards the eastern side of the Himalayas via the Bay of Bengal, we come to the Sundarbans. This is located in the delta of the Ganga, Brahmaputra (you saw them earlier in the chapter) and their tributaries. This delta has a unique combination of the river, sea and land. About half of it is located in India, and the rest is in Bangladesh. This is also a UNESCO Heritage site. The Sundarbans are home to many species, including the Royal Bengal Tiger. Note: Do remember to look at the map and identify where the delta is. 08-04-2025 11:30:52 Chapter 1.indd 23 Meghalaya, India; The Shad Suk Mynsiem festival is celebrated by the Khasi people as a form of gratitude towards nature; Living roots bridge near Nongriat village, Cherrapunjee, Meghalaya The hills of the Northeast Stay on the map as we move towards the hills of the Northeast, our final destination for now. Can you see Garo, Khasi, and Jantia marked on the map? These hills, part of the Meghalaya Plateau, are known for their lush greenery, heavy rainfall, and breathtaking waterfalls. This region experiences one of the highest rainfalls in the world, making it rich in forests, unique wildlife, and fertile land. India and the World: Land and the People 1 -Geographical Diversity of India 08-04-2025 11:30:54 aio FY = Mawlynnong Village, situated in the East Khasi Hills of Meghalaya, is renowned as the cleanest village in Asia . This picturesque village is famous for its well-maintained cleanliness, bamboo dustbins, and eco-friendly living practices. The village is also known for its living root bridges, which are created by weaving tree roots over the course of many years. Fig. 1.42. Living root bridges showcase the craftsmanship of the tribes of the Northeast. Before we move on... > India gives its name to the subcontinent it is a part of. > It has many diverse geographical features, ranging from the snowy Himalayas to the heat of the Thar Desert. The plains are watered by a large number of rivers. There is also a peninsular plateau with the Arabian Sea on the west and the Bay of Bengal in the east. > These diverse geographic features have created a variety of conditions with respect to soil, flora, fauna, life and economic opportunities, and honed a rich culture. > These geographical features have played an important role in shaping our civilisation. Questions and activities 1. What, in your opinion, are two important geographical features of India? Why do you think they are important? Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1