and the rest of the continent and have played a crucial role in shaping India s climate, culture, and history. 08-04-2025 11:30:23 LET S EXPLORE > Do you recall your lesson on latitudes and longitudes? Look at the map. Can you read, approximately, the latitude and longitude where India lies? > Identify the above features on India s physical map. Let us now journey together from the Himalayas to the islands in the Indian Ocean, and onward to the east of India. The diverse colours on the map already give us a sense of the geographical diversity. Familiarise yourself with the legend on the map. The different colours indicate the altitudes. The Himalayas Look at the length of the Himalayan Range on the map. It is like a massive wall. From the legend, can you guess the altitude at different points of the Himalayas? India and the World: Land and the People 1 -Geographical Diversity of India Fig. 1.2. These are satellite images of the Himalayan range. Note that the length of the range is about 2500 km. Chapter 1.indd 3 08-04-2025 11:30:24 as > LET'S REMEMBER The Himalayas seem to touch the sky. In fact, many of its peaks are over 8000 metres in height and are together called the Eight Thousanders . This mountain range stretches across six countries in Asia: India, Nepal, Bhutan, China, Pakistan, and Afghanistan. Can youname the highest mountain in the world? In the summer, the snow on the mountains melts and feeds major rivers, such as the Ganga, Indus, and Brahmaputra. These rivers and their tributaries provide water for drinking, farming, and industrial use, connecting with the lives of hundreds of millions of people. Hence, the Himalayas are sometimes called the Water Tower of Asia . The Himalayas are also important to many cultures and belief systems. The mountains themselves are considered sacred, and temples and monasteries have been built within them, attracting monks and spiritual seekers from around the world who come to pray and meditate. 2. DON'T MISS OUT The Bhagirathi River, a major tributary of the Ganga, originates from Gaumukh ( Cow s Mouth ), in Uttarakhand. It is the edge Fig. 1.3. Gaumukh | of the Gangotri Glacier. This glacier is one of the largest in the Indian Himalayas. It is considered sacred and attracts many pilgrims. Gaumukh is also a popular trekking destination. Next time you see the Ganga, remember its journey began there! Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 1.indd 4 08-04-2025 11:30:25 - DON T MISS OUT Chapter 1.indd 5 How the Himalayas were formed ... an interesting story A long, long time ago, India was part of a much bigger landmass called Gondwana , where its neighbour was Africa! At some point, it broke away and slowly started moving north. About 50 million years ago, it reached the landmass of Eurasia and collided with it. As India pushed against Eurasia, the land between them crumpled and rose up just like