Geographical Diversity of India CHAPTER To us, by its very geography, the country [India] appears to be quite distinct from other countries, and that itself gives it a certain national character. Sri Aurobindo Fig. 1.1. Jog Falls in Karnataka. Notice the plateau and the waterfalls. The power of the waterfall is converted into electricity (hydroelectricity; hydro means water) through special turbines. 1. What are some key geographical features of India? 2. How does India s geographical diversity affect our lives? 0781CHO1 The Big Questions @ Chapter 1.indd 1 08-04-2025 11:30:22 aa Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 1.indd 2 In 1984, Rakesh Sharma, the first Indian astronaut to go into space, spoke with the then Prime Minister of India, Indira Gandhi. When she asked him, How does India look from space? , he replied, Sdadre jahan se achchha better than the whole world. (This is the title of a well-known poem of the early 20th century.) LET'S EXPLORE Look at the map of India at the end of this book. What are you able to observe? Recall your lesson on different types of landforms mountains, plains and plateaus. Which landforms can you identify on the map? What do the different colours on the map mean? (Hint: The legend on the map shows the heights of each area.) As you go through this chapter, remember to refer periodically to the physical map. India is the seventh-largest country in the world, and a part of Asia. Along with its neighbours Pakistan, Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhutan, Sri Lanka, and Myanmar it forms the region known as the Indian Subcontinent (subcontinent, since it is part of the continent of Asia). Often, for the purpose of discussion, we refer to five regions the great mountain zone, the plains of the Ganga and the Indus, the desert region, the southern peninsula, and the islands. In this chapter, we will fly over these zones, providing you with a bird s-eye view of these features and offering glimpses of what things look like in close-up at some of these places. It would be difficult to go into all the details at this stage since, as you will soon see, India is large and diverse. The Himalayan Mountain range stands as a natural barrier in the north, while the Thar Desert and the Arabian Sea mark its western limits. To the south, the Indian Ocean and to the east, the Bay of Bengal form a natural boundary. These geographical features create a separation between India and the rest of the continent and have played a crucial role in shaping India s climate, culture, and history. 08-04-2025 11:30:23 LET S EXPLORE > Do you recall your lesson on latitudes and longitudes? Look at the map. Can you read, approximately, the latitude and longitude where India lies? > Identify the above features on India s physical map. Let us now journey together from the Himalayas to the islands in the Indian Ocean, and onward to the east