watering a plant. So, the next time you leave the tap running, remember the people of the Thar Desert. Rajasthan is also famous for its ingenious water conservation methods, including taanka or kunds. These are special water collection systems that store rainwater, often for drinking purposes. The Aravalli Hills LET'S EXPLORE Let s go back to the map. Trace your path slowly from the Thar Desert towards the east. Do you see the Aravalli Hills? | | The Aravallis are among the oldest mountains in the world, some 2.5 billion years old! The range has many peaks and ridges. Although its highest peak, Mount Abu, towers at over 1700 m, most of its hills are between 300 and 900 metres high. Isn t it fascinating that a drive of about 4 and a half hours can take us Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 1.indd 14 08-04-2025 11:30:42 Chapter 1.indd 15 Fig. 1.25. (Left) A part of the Aravallis; just beyond this range, the Thar Desert begins. (Right) A part of the Aravallis seen from space. from Mount Abu in the Aravallis to Jodhpur in the Thar Desert, a drive into a completely different geography? Look at the political map in the textbook and identify the states that the range spans. Did you see Delhi, Rajasthan, Haryana and Gujarat? The Aravallis play a vital role in shaping the geography and climate of northwestern India. One of its most important functions is acting as a natural barrier, preventing the Thar Desert from expanding further eastward. You will read more about this later. The Aravallis, rich in minerals like marble, granite, zinc, and copper, have supported mining and construction activities for centuries. In fact, evidence from its ancient mines at Zawar has shown that over eight centuries ago, Indians were the first in the world to master the delicate process of extraction of zinc. Historic forts, such as Chittorgarh, Kumbhalgarh, and Ranthambore, are located here. Fig. 1.26. Kumbhalgarh Fort surrounded by the Aravallis; this location in the hills proved to be an excellent deterrent to the enemy. India and the World: Land and the People 1 -Geographical Diversity of India 08-04-2025 11:30:45 Peninsula: A peninsula is a piece of land that is surrounded by water on three sides. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 1.indd 16 a The Peninsular Plateau LET'S REMEMBER =) A plateau is a landform that rises up from the surrounding land and has a more or less flat surface; some of its sides are often steep slopes. India has several plateaus; the most important one is the triangular peninsular area in the middle and south of the country. It is also a very old land formation! Since this region is a peninsula, surrounded by water on all three sides by the Arabian Sea, the Bay of Bengal, and the Indian Ocean, it is called a peninsular plateau. The plateau is bordered by two mountain ranges, the Western Ghats