were awakened by noises in the study. Creeping downstairs, they heard the chink of money being taken from the clergyman s desk. Without making any noise and with a poker grasped firmly in his hand, the clergyman flung open the door. Surrender! 98 Footprints without Feat Reprint 2025-26 Then to his amazement he realised that the room appeared to be empty. He and his wife looked under the desk, and behind the curtains, and even up the chimney. There wasn t a sign of anybody. Yet the desk had been opened and the housekeeping money was missing. Extraordinary affair! the clergyman kept saying for the rest of the day. But it was not as extraordinary as the behaviour of Mrs Hall s furniture a little later that morning. The landlord and his wife were up very early, and were surprised to see the scientist s door wide open. Usually it was shut and locked, and he was furious if anyone entered his room. The opportunity seemed too good to be missed. They peeped round the door, saw nobody, and decided to investigate. The bedclothes were cold, showing that the scientist must have been up for some time; and stranger still, the clothes and bandages that he always wore were lying about the room. All of a sudden Mrs Hall heard a sniff close to her ear. A moment later the hat on the bedpost leapt up and dashed itself into her face. Then the bedroom chair became alive. Springing into the air it charged straight at her, legs foremost. As she and her husband turned away in terror, the extraordinary chair pushed them both out of the room and then appeared to slam and lock the door after them. Mrs Hall almost fell down the stairs in hysterics. She was convinced that the room was haunted by spirits, and that the stranger had somehow caused these to enter into her furniture. My poor mother used to sit in that chair, she moaned. To think it should rise up against me now! The feeling among the neighbours was that the trouble was caused by witchcraft. But witchcraft or not, when news of the burglary at the clergyman s home became known, the strange scientist was strongly suspected of having had a hand in it. Suspicion grew even stronger when he suddenly produced some ready cash, though he had admitted not long before that he had no money. The village constable was secretly sent for. Instead of waiting for the constable, Mrs Hall went to the scientist, who had somehow mysteriously appeared from his empty bedroom. I want to know what you have been doing to my chair upstairs, she demanded. And I want to know how it is you came out of an empty room and how you entered a locked room. Footprints without Fed 99 Reprint 2025-26 | The scientist was always quick-tempered; now he became furious. You don t understand who or what I am! he shouted. Very well