Hall went to the scientist, who had somehow mysteriously appeared from his empty bedroom. I want to know what you have been doing to my chair upstairs, she demanded. And I want to know how it is you came out of an empty room and how you entered a locked room. Footprints without Fed 99 Reprint 2025-26 | The scientist was always quick-tempered; now he became furious. You don t understand who or what I am! he shouted. Very well I'll show you. Suddenly he threw off bandages, whiskers, spectacles, and even nose. It took him only a minute to do this. The horrified people in the bar found themselves staring at a headless man! Mr Jaffers, the constable, now arrived, and was quite surprised to find that he had to arrest a man without a head. But Jaffers was not easily prevented from doing his duty. If a magistrate s warrant ordered a person s arrest, then that person had to be arrested, with or without his head. There followed a remarkable scene as the policeman tried to get hold of a man who was becoming more and more invisible as he threw off one garment after another. Finally a shirt flew into the air, and the constable found himself struggling with someone he could not see at 50 Footprints without Feat Reprint 2025-26 all. Some people tried to help him, but found themselves hit by blows that seemed to come from nowhere. In the end Jaffers was knocked unconscious as he made a last attempt to hold on to the unseen scientist. There were nervous, excited cries of Hold him! But this was easier said than done. Griffin had shaken himself free, and no one knew where to lay hands on him. H.G. WELLS Think thou, i 1. Griffin was rather a lawless person. Comment. 2. How would you assess Griffin as a scientist? Talk about il 1. Would you like to become invisible? What advantages and disadvantages do you foresee, if you did? 2. Are there forces around us that are invisible, for example, magnetism? Are there aspects of matter that are invisible or not visible to the naked eye? What would the world be like if you could see such forces or such aspects of matter? 3. What makes glass or water transparent (what is the scientific explanation for this)? Do you think it would be scientifically possible for a man to become invisible, or transparent? (Keep in mind that writers of science fiction have often turned out to be prophetic in their imagination!) | Cogaedlad ideas The Invisible Man by H.G. Wells e As Far As the Human Eye Can See by Isaac Asimov e It Happened Tomorrow (ed.) Bal Phondke Footprints without Fed 31 Reprint 2025-26