meals, run to the bazaar or learn to write whole sentences any more. I had forgotten about them in the excitement of the theft. Whole sentences, I knew, could one day bring me more than a few hundred rupees. It was a simple matter to steal and sometimes just as simple to be caught. But to be a really big man, a clever and respected man, was something else. I should go back to Anil, I told myself, if only to learn to read and write. I hurried back to the room feeling very nervous, for it is much easier to steal something than to return it undetected. I opened the door quietly, then stood in the doorway, in clouded moonlight. Anil was still asleep. I crept to the head of the bed, and my hand came up with the notes. I felt his breath on my hand. I remained still for a minute. Then my hand found the edge of the mattress, and slipped under it with the notes. I awoke late next morning to find that Anil had already made the tea. He stretched out his hand towards me. There was a fifty-rupee note between his fingers. My heart sank. I thought I had been discovered. I made some money yesterday, he explained. Now you'll be paid regularly. My spirits rose. But when I took the note, I saw it was still wet from the night s rain. Today we'll start writing sentences, he said. He knew. But neither his lips nor his eyes showed anything. I smiled at Anil in my most appealing way. And the smile came by itself, without any effort. RuskIN Bonp GLOSSARY flattery: insincere praise modestly: without boasting; in a humble way grunting: making low guttural sounds appealing: attractive unlined: (here) showing no sign of worry or anxiety 12 Footprints without Feat Reprint 2025-26 Think dbo i 1. What are Hari Singh s reactions to the prospect of receiving an education? Do they change over time? (Hint: Compare, for example, the thought: I knew that once I could write like an educated man there would be no limit to what I could achieve with these later thoughts: Whole sentences, I knew, could one day bring me more than a few hundred rupees. It was a simple matter to steal and sometimes just as simple to be caught. But to be a really big man, a clever and respected man, was something else. ) What makes him return to Anil? 2. Why does not Anil hand the thief over to the police? Do you think most people would have done so? In what ways is Anil different from such employers? Talk about iL 1. Do you think people like Anil and Hari Singh are found only in fiction, or are there such people in real life? 2. Do you think it a significant detail in the story that Anil is a struggling writer? Does this explain his behaviour in any way? 3. Have you