was quite pleasant working for Anil. I made the tea in the morning and then would take my time buying the day s supplies, usually making a profit of about a rupee a day. I think he knew I made a little money this way but he did not seem to mind. Reprint 2025-26 Anil made money by fits and starts. He would borrow one week, lend the next. He kept worrying about his next cheque, but as soon as it arrived he would go out and celebrate. It seems he wrote for magazines a queer way to make a living! One evening he came home with a small bundle of notes, saying he had just sold a book to a publisher. At night, I saw him tuck the money under the mattress. I had been working for Anil for almost a month and, apart from cheating on the shopping, had not done anything in my line of work. I had every opportunity for doing so. Anil had given me a key to the door, and I could come and go as I pleased. He was the most trusting person I had ever met. And that is why it was so difficult to rob him. It s easy to rob a greedy man, because he can afford to be robbed; but it s difficult to rob a careless man sometimes he doesn t even notice he s been robbed and that takes all the pleasure out of the work. Well, it s time I did some real work, I told myself; I m out of practice. And if I don t take the money, he'll only waste it on his friends. After all, he doesn t even pay me. READ AND FIND OUT How does the thief think Anil will react.to the theft? What does he say about the different reactions of people when they are_ robbed? Does Anil realise that he has been robbed? Anil was asleep. A beam of moonlight stepped over the balcony and fell on the bed. I sat up on the floor, considering the situation. If I took the money, I could catch the 10.30 Express to Lucknow. Slipping out of the blanket, I crept up to the bed. Anil was sleeping peacefully. His face was clear and unlined; even I had more marks on my face, though mine were mostly scars. My hand slid under the mattress, searching for the notes. When I found them, I drew them out without a sound. Anil sighed in his sleep and turned on his side, towards me. I was startled and quickly crawled out of the room. When I was on the road, I began to run. I had the notes at my waist, held there by the string of my pyjamas. I slowed down to a walk and counted the notes: 600 rupees in fifties! I could live like an oil-rich Arab for a week or two. lo Footprints without Feat Reprint 2025-26 ~ When I