A\_young boy makes friends with Anil. Anil trusts him completely and employs him. Does the boy betray his trust? 1060CHO2 READ AND FIND OUT * Who does I refer to in this story? What is he a fairly successful hand at? What does he get from Anil in return for his work? I was still a thief when I met Anil. And though only 15, I was an experienced and fairly successful hand. Anil was watching a wrestling match when I approached him. He was about 25 a tall, lean fellow and he looked easy-going, kind and simple enough for my purpose. I hadn t had much luck of late and thought I might be able to get into the young man s confidence. You look a bit of a wrestler yourself, I said. A little flattery helps in making friends. So do you, he replied, which put me off for a moment because at that time I was rather thin. Well, I said modestly, I do wrestle a bit. What s your name? Hari Singh, I lied. I took a new name every month. That kept me ahead of the police and my former employers. After this introduction, Anil talked about the well-oiled wrestlers who were grunting, lifting and throwing each other about. I didn t have much to say. Anil walked away. I followed casually. Hello again, he said. I gave him my most appealing smile. I want to work for you, I said. But I can t pay you. Reprint 2025-26 I thought that over for a minute. Perhaps I had misjudged my man. I asked, Can you feed me? Can you cook? I can cook, I lied again. If you can cook, then may be I can feed you. He took me to his room over the Jumna Sweet Shop and told me I could sleep on the balcony. But the meal I cooked that night must have been terrible because Anil gave it to a stray dog and told me to be off. But I just hung around, smiling in my most appealing way, and he couldn t help laughing. Later, he patted me on the head and said never mind, he d teach me to cook. He also taught me to write my name and said he would soon teach me to write whole sentences and to add numbers. I was grateful. I knew that once I could write like an educated man there would be no limit to what I could achieve. It was quite pleasant working for Anil. I made the tea in the morning and then would take my time buying the day s supplies, usually making a profit of about a rupee a day. I think he knew I made a little money this way but he did not seem to mind. Reprint 2025-26 Anil made money by fits and starts. He would borrow one week, lend the next. He kept worrying about his next cheque, but as soon as