Landforms and Life CHAPTER Free from the burden of human beings, may the Earth with many heights, slopes and great plains, bearing plants endowed with varied powers, spread out for us and show us her riches! ... The Earth is my mother and I am her child. Atharva Veda, Bhumi Stkta ( Hymn to the Earth ) 1. What are the major eso The Big ] Jor types of Questions @ chapter3_161224 indd 44 landforms and their significance to life and culture? What are the challenges and * opportunities of life associated 0681003 with each landform? Introduction Humans, like most mammals, live on land. Land, as you may have noticed, has many forms and features; its appearance changes a lot from one region to another. Suppose that you are travelling by road from the region known as Chhota Nagpur in Jharkhand, reach Prayagraj in Uttar Pradesh, and go on to Almora in Uttarakhand. On the way, you will see very different landscapes. In fact, you will encounter three major landforms, which we will now explore. LET'S EXPLORE > Asa class activity, form groups of four or five students and observe the school s surroundings. What kind of landscape do you see? Will the landscape change a few kilometres away? Or within some 50 kilometres? Compare with other groups. nitude: > In the same groups, discuss a journey that any of you ofan object has made through a region of India. List the different above landscapes seen on the way. Compare with other groups. sea level. Examples: the altitude | A landform is a physical feature on the surface of our nountan planet Earth. Landforms take shape over millions of years the altitude | and have a significant connection with the environment or plane in and life. They can broadly be divided into three categories flight, the | mountains, plateaus and plains (Fig. 3.1). antuce ee These landforms have different climates and are home to a variety of flora and fauna. Humans have adapted to all landforms, but the number of people living on different kinds of landforms varies throughout the world. Mountains Mountains are landforms that are much higher than the surrounding landscape. They can be recognised by a broad base, steep slopes and a narrow summit. Depending on their height, some mountains are covered with snow. At lower altitudes, the snow melts every summer and turns India and the World: Land and the People Exploring Society: India and Beyond Reprint 2025-26 chapter3_161224.indd 42 & 03-02-2025 04:57:22 | into water that feeds rivers. At high altitudes, the snow may never melt, leaving the mountain permanently snow Fig. 3.1. This drawing illustrates three landforms mountains in the background (two of them snow-capped), a plateau on the left and a plain in the foreground, with a river emerging from the mountains. capped. Other highlands with a lower height, less steep slopes and rounded tops are called hills. Wy THINK ABOUT IT chapter3_161224.indd 43 What is snow? Unless you live in a Himalayan