first civilisations developed around rivers in fertile plains. In our times too, a large part of the world s population lives in plains. About 40 crore people, more than one-fourth of the total Indian population, live in India s Ganga plain (often called the Gangetic plain ). As with many other plains of the Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 04:57:50 | world, the major occupations of people in this region include river fishing and agriculture. Food crops such as rice, wheat, maize, barley and millets are grown. Fibre crops such as cotton, jute and hemp are also grown in the Gangetic plain. Traditional agriculture has been mostly rainfed (that is, watered through rainfall). In recent decades, however, agriculture has turned to irrigation, with water brought to the fields through networks of canals or pumped from groundwater. While irrigation has increased agricultural production, it has also contributed to the depletion (or decrease) of groundwater. This presents a challenge for the future of agriculture in the region. Some of the other problems affecting the Ganga plains include high population and pollution. Whether in mountain ranges or plains, rivers around the world have carried immense cultural value. In particular, many communities have considered a river s source and its confluence with one or two other rivers to be sacred. @ In India, numerous festivals, ceremonies and rituals are conducted at such locations. Because plains have a gentle slope, river navigation is easy and supports a lot of economic activities. In earlier days, people also used rivers extensively to travel from one place confluence: to another. Even today (Fig. 3.10 on page 56), there are The meeting stretches along the Ganga where people prefer to use boats point of two or more to move around! rivers. LET'S EXPLORE > Can you give examples of river sources or confluences from your region that are regarded sacred by any community? > Visit a nearby river and observe all activities there, whether economic or cultural. Note them down and discuss with your classmates. 3 - Landforms and Life Reprint 2025-26 chapter3_161224.indd 55 & 03-02-2025 04:57:50 | > Name some popular tourist destinations in India and identify the category of landform they are associated with. Resilience: The capacity to meet challenges and difficulties, adapt to them or overcome them. India and the World: Land and the People Exploring Society: India and Beyond | chapter3_161224.indd 56 Fig. 3.10. River transportation on the Ganga In this chapter, we explored the three main landforms. But its surface is very complex and experts often define a few more landforms. One such landform is the desert. Deserts are considered to be large and dry expanses with very little precipitation. Their flora and fauna are also unique. Some deserts are hot, like the Sahara Desert in Africa or the Thar Desert in the northwest of the Indian Subcontinent. Others are cold, like the Gobi Desert in Asia. (Some experts also describe the Antarctica continent as a desert.) Despite harsh living conditions, humans have adapted to most