used. Nearly 2,500 km long, this river has numerous tributaries (that is, other rivers joining it). Some of them, like the Yamuna and the Ghagara, also originate in the Himalayas. Others, like the Son or Sone, originate from the Vindhya Range to the south of the Ganga plain. age ? a Fig. 3.5. Terrace farming in north India Life in the mountains The mountain terrain is usually rugged or rough, and has steep slopes. This means that regular farming can only be practised in some valleys. Cultivation is practised on the Reprint 2025-26 & 03-02-2025 04:57:41 | slopes by cutting steps into the slope (Fig. 3.5). This is called Valley: A lower area terrace farming. In many mountainous regions of the world, between hills herding is the preferred occupation over agriculture. or mounreins, wi Tourism is often an important source of income for the a river or . . . . . . . s ream people living in the mountains. The crisp mountain air flowing and scenic beauty attract many tourists. Some tourists through it. also go to the mountains for sports such as skiing, hiking, mountaineering and paragliding. For many centuries, people have also travelled to these uplands for pilgrimages to holy sites. But an excessive inflow of visitors can also put the fragile mountain environment under pressure; it is often difficult to find the right balance. <) DON'T MISS OUT Bachendri Pal started climbing mountains from a young age and led many women s climbing expeditions. She was the first Indian woman to climb Mount Everest in cy 1984 and was awarded Padma Shri the same year (and Padma Bhushan in 2019). Arunima Sinha lost a leg in an accident when she was 22. With Bachendri Pal s encouragement and training, she managed to climb Mount Everest in 2013, and went on to climb the highest peak of every continent, including Mount Vinson in Antarctica! She was awarded Padma Shri in 2015. LET'S EXPLORE These images (Fig. 3.6 on page 50) depict a few challenges that people living in the mountains may face. Discuss them in groups in the class and write one paragraph on each. Also discuss why, despite many such challenges, people still choose 3 - Landforms and Life to live in the mountains. Reprint 2025-26 chapter3_161224.indd 49 & 03-02-2025 04:57:41 | Flash flood: A sudden local flood, often caused bya cloudburst. Landslide: The sudden collapse of a mass of earth or rock froma mountainside. The sudden fall . of snow, ice or rocks froma mountainside; often occurs when the snow starts melting. Cloudburst: A sudden violent rainstorm. India and the World: Land and the People Exploring Society: India and Beyond Fig. 3.6. Life in the mountains has definite positives, from pure air to the beautiful scenery. It also involves potential challenges, both natural and human-made, seme of which are depicted in these pictures. chapter3_161224.indd 50 LN 4 DON'T MISS OUT Many traditional communities around the world consider mountains to be sacred places and worship