define a few more landforms. One such landform is the desert. Deserts are considered to be large and dry expanses with very little precipitation. Their flora and fauna are also unique. Some deserts are hot, like the Sahara Desert in Africa or the Thar Desert in the northwest of the Indian Subcontinent. Others are cold, like the Gobi Desert in Asia. (Some experts also describe the Antarctica continent as a desert.) Despite harsh living conditions, humans have adapted to most of the deserts. In India, communities living in the Thar Desert, or migrating through it, hold rich cultural traditions, such as folk songs and legends, related to the desert. The diverse ways in which humans have made alllandforms their home is a testimony to our adaptability and resilience. Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 04:57:51 | The five tinais of ancient Tamil Sangam poetry are five landscapes associated with certain specific deities, lifestyles, moods or emotions (such as love, longing, separation, quarrel, etc.). This table only lists the characteristics of the five landscapes and the main human occupations in each: Tinat Landscape Main occupation kurifji mountainous regions hunting and gathering Mullai grassland and forests cattle rearing Marudam | fertile agricultural plains farming Neydal coastal regions fishing and seafaring Palai arid, desert-like regions | journeying and fighting These five tinais constitute a different classification of landforms than the one we have seen, but they reflect a keen awareness of the diverse regions and their characteristics. They also illustrate the deep connection between humanity and the natural environment. (You do not need to remember the details of the tinais, but the concepts they reflect need to be understood.) Before we move on... > chapter3_161224.indd 57 Landforms are classified into three main types mountains, plateaus and plains. They have very different physical characteristics and environments. Throughout history, people s lives and activities have been much impacted by the type of landform they have lived in. These landforms are an integral part of culture across the world. Indian culture, in particular, has celebrated them in diverse ways. Each landform offers different challenges as well as opportunities. Reprint 2025-26 3 - Landforms and Life 03-02-2025 04:57:51 | Questions, activities and projects 1. In what type of landform is your town / village / city located? Which features mentioned in this chapter do you see around you? 2. Let us go back to our initial trip from Chhota Nagpur to Prayagraj and Almora. Describe the three landforms you came across on the way. 3. List afew famous pilgrimage spots in India along with the landforms in which they are found. 4. State whether true or false > The Himalayas are young mountains with rounded tops. > Plateaus usually rise sharply at least on one side. +> Mountains and hills belong to the same type of landform. Vv Mountains, plateaus and rivers in India have the same types of flora and fauna. Ganga is a tributary to the Yamuna. Deserts have unique flora and fauna. Melting snow feeds rivers. Vvvv