that feeds rivers. At high altitudes, the snow may never melt, leaving the mountain permanently snow Fig. 3.1. This drawing illustrates three landforms mountains in the background (two of them snow-capped), a plateau on the left and a plain in the foreground, with a river emerging from the mountains. capped. Other highlands with a lower height, less steep slopes and rounded tops are called hills. Wy THINK ABOUT IT chapter3_161224.indd 43 What is snow? Unless you live in a Himalayan region (such as Kashmir, Ladakh, Himachal Pradesh, Uttarakhand, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh), you may never have seen snow! In the rest of India, most precipitation is in the form of rain and hail. But at higher altitudes, if it is cold enough, snow will fall, covering the landscape in a soft and beautiful white blanket. Snow and hailstones are nothing but precipitation of water in a solid state. Reprint 2025-26 Precipitation: Water from the atmosphere reaching the ground in any form rain, snow and hail are the most common forms of precipitation. 3 - Landforms and Life 03-02-2025 04:57:23 | Mount Aconcagua Reprint 2025-26 | chaptersmt612240indd a4 ey 103702 2025 il Most of the world s mountains are grouped in mountain ranges, such as the Himalayas in Asia, the Alps in Europe and the Andes in South America. Some of these ranges stretch for thousands of kilometres. Fig. 3.3. A sketch showing the relative heights of six mountains of the world Fig. 3.2 shows pictures of six mountains of the world. Fig. 3.3 brings them together to give a visual impression of their relative heights from top to bottom. Mount Everest (between Tibet (China) and Nepal) and Kanchenjunga (between Nepal and the Indian state of Sikkim) are the two highest peaks of the Himalayan range. Mount Aconcagua (in South America) is the highest peak of the Andes. Mount Kilimanjaro in eastern Africa is an isolated mountain that is not part of any range. Mont Blanc in Western Europe is the highest mountain of the Alps. Anamudi (in Kerala, also known as Anai Peak ) is the highest mountain in south India. 3 - Landforms and Life Reprint 2025-26 chapter3_161224.indd 45 & 03-02-2025 04:57:29 | Montane forest: A type of forests that grows in mountainous regions. Moss: A small green plant without flowers or true roots, often spreading in a cushion-like cover. Lichen: A plant-like organism that generally clings to rocks, walls or tree. Mountains with tall and sharp peaks, like the Himalayas, are relatively young , which means that they were formed recently in the Earth s history but that is still millions of years ago! Shorter and more rounded mountains and hills, like the Aravalli Range, are much older and have been rounded by erosion. Sometimes, as with the Himalayas, upliftment as well as erosion continue to this day. (You will learn more in Science about such processes and their causes; let us just say here that some mountains of the world, like the Himalayas, are still growing in height.)