mountainside; often occurs when the snow starts melting. Cloudburst: A sudden violent rainstorm. India and the World: Land and the People Exploring Society: India and Beyond Fig. 3.6. Life in the mountains has definite positives, from pure air to the beautiful scenery. It also involves potential challenges, both natural and human-made, seme of which are depicted in these pictures. chapter3_161224.indd 50 LN 4 DON'T MISS OUT Many traditional communities around the world consider mountains to be sacred places and worship them. Mount Everest, the highest mountain in the world at 8,849 m, has many names. Tibetans call it Chomolungma , which means Mother Goddess of the World and worship the mountain as such. Nepalis call it Sagarmatha , meaning Goddess of the Sky . Similarly, Mount Kailash in Tibet is held sacred by followers of Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Bon (an ancient Tibetan religion). Such reverence for mountain summits is also found elsewhere in India, as well as in other parts of the world. Plateaus A plateau is a landform that rises up from the surrounding land and has a more or less flat surface; some of its sides are often steep slopes. Like mountains, plateaus can be young or old in terms of the Earth s history. Two examples of plateaus are the Tibetan Plateau, the largest and highest plateau in the world, and the Deccan Plateau. The height of plateaus can vary from a few hundred metres to several thousand metres. _ DON'T MISS OUT The Tibetan Plateau has an average altitude of 4,500 m, which explains why it has been nicknamed the Roof of the World ! From east to west, it is nearly 2,500 km long the distance from Chandigarh to Kanyakumari. The Deccan Plateau of central and south India is one of the oldest plateaus in the world, formed through volcanic activity millions of years ago. Like mountains, plateaus are rich in mineral deposits; they have been called storehouses of minerals . As a result, mining is a major activity on plateaus, where many of the world s largest mines are found. For example, the East Reprint 2025-26 chapter3_161224.indd 51 & 3 - Landforms and Life 03-02-2025 04:57:49 | India and the World: Land and the People Exploring Society: India and Beyond Fig. chapter3_161224.indd 52 African Plateau is famous for gold and diamond mining. In India, huge reserves of iron, coal and manganese are found in the Chhota Nagpur Plateau. The plateau environment is very diverse across the world. Many plateaus have a rocky soil, which makes them less fertile than plains (see next section) and therefore less favourable to farming. An exception is that of lava plateaus (that is, formed through volcanic activity), as they often have a rich black soil. Plateaus are also home to many spectacular waterfalls. The Victoria Falls on the Zambezi River in southern Africa, the Hundru Falls on the Subarnarekha River in the Chhota Nagpur Plateau and the Jog Falls on the Sharavati River in the Western Ghats are