formed recently in the Earth s history but that is still millions of years ago! Shorter and more rounded mountains and hills, like the Aravalli Range, are much older and have been rounded by erosion. Sometimes, as with the Himalayas, upliftment as well as erosion continue to this day. (You will learn more in Science about such processes and their causes; let us just say here that some mountains of the world, like the Himalayas, are still growing in height.) Mountain environment Mountain slopes are often covered with a type of forest called montane forest, where conifer trees such as pines, firs, spruce and deodar are common. These conifer trees grow tall and cone-shaped, with thin, pointed leaves. At higher altitudes, the trees give way to grasses, mosses and lichen. Here are two verses from a long poem by Kalidasa, who lived at least 1,500 years ago and is often considered to be the greatest poet of ancient India. The poem, Kumarasambhava, begins with an invocation to the Himalayas. (This is a simplified translation from the Sanskrit.) In the north rises Himalaya, the Lord of mountains, like a living god, who measures the Earth and stretches from the western to the eastern oceans. ... From it the wind comes down, carrying spray from descending Ganga, shaking the deodar trees, opening the peacocks tail feathers and cooling the mountain people after they hunt deer. Discuss the verses and the following questions in class. = What are the western to the eastern oceans ? Can you locate them as well as the Lord of mountains on Fig. 5.2? = Why is Ganga mentioned? (Hint: There could be several reasons.) India and the World: Land and the People Exploring Society: India and Beyond Reprint 2025-26 chapter3_161224.indd 46 03-02-2025 04:57:32 | _ = 5 % << n Leopard | Black bear we Fig. 3.4. A few mountain animals } 7 rn chapter3_161224.indd 47 India and the World: Land and the People Exploring Society: India and Beyond chapter3_161224.indd 48 Terrain: A piece or stretch of land, from the point of view of its physical features. Deep forests, flowing rivers, lakes, grasslands and caves in the mountains are home to diverse fauna, for instance, the golden eagle, the peregrine falcon, the Canadian lynx, the snow leopard, the ibex, the Himalayan tahr, the mountain hare, the yak, the grey fox and the black bear (Fig. 3.4). DON'T MISS OUT Ganga is the Indian name of the largest river originating in the Himalayas. In English, Ganges is also used. Nearly 2,500 km long, this river has numerous tributaries (that is, other rivers joining it). Some of them, like the Yamuna and the Ghagara, also originate in the Himalayas. Others, like the Son or Sone, originate from the Vindhya Range to the south of the Ganga plain. age ? a Fig. 3.5. Terrace farming in north India Life in the mountains The mountain terrain is usually rugged or rough, and has steep slopes. This means that regular farming can