intervals. = What are the materials that remain unchanged over long periods of time? = What are the materials which change their form and structure over time? = Of these materials that are changed, which ones change the fastest? Our Environment Reprint 2025-26 We have seen in the chapter on Life Processes that the food we eat is digested by various enzymes in our body. Have you ever wondered why the same enzyme does not break-down everything we eat? Enzymes are specific in their action, specific enzymes are needed for the break-down of a particular substance. That is why we will not get any energy if we try to eat coal! Because of this, many human-made materials like plastics will not be broken down by the action of bacteria or other saprophytes. These materials will be acted upon by physical processes like heat and pressure, but under the ambient conditions found in our environment, these persist for a long time. Substances that are broken down by biological processes are said to be biodegradable. How many of the substances you buried were biodegradable? Substances that are not broken down in this manner are said to be non-biodegradable. These substances may be inert and simply persist in the environment for a long time or may harm the various members of the eco-system. = Use the library or internet to find out more about biodegradable and non-biodegradable substances. = How long are various non-biodegradable substances expected to last in our environment? = These days, new types of plastics which are said to be biodegradable are available. Find out more about such materials and whether they do or do not harm the environment. Q U ES TION $ Why are some substances biodegradable and some non-biodegradable? Give any two ways in which biodegradable substances would affect the environment. Give any two ways in which non-biodegradable substances would affect the environment. Visit any town or city, and we are sure to find heaps of garbage all over the place. Visit any place of tourist interest and we are sure to find the place littered with empty food wrappers. In the earlier classes we have talked about this problem of dealing with the garbage that we generate. Let us now look at the problem a bit more deeply. 214 Science Reprint 2025-26 = Find out what happens to the waste generated at home. Is there a system in place to collect this waste? = Find out how the local body (panchayat, municipal corporation, resident welfare association) deals with the waste. Are there mechanisms in place to treat the biodegradable and nonbiodegradable wastes separately? Calculate how much waste is generated at home in a day. How much of this waste is biodegradable? Calculate how much waste is generated in the classroom in a day. How much of this waste is biodegradable? Suggest ways of dealing with this waste. = Find out how the sewage in your locality is treated. Are there mechanisms in place to ensure that