deals with the waste. Are there mechanisms in place to treat the biodegradable and nonbiodegradable wastes separately? Calculate how much waste is generated at home in a day. How much of this waste is biodegradable? Calculate how much waste is generated in the classroom in a day. How much of this waste is biodegradable? Suggest ways of dealing with this waste. = Find out how the sewage in your locality is treated. Are there mechanisms in place to ensure that local water bodies are not polluted by untreated sewage. = Find out how the local industries in your locality treat their wastes. Are there mechanisms in place to ensure that the soil and water are not polluted by this waste? Improvements in our life-style have resulted in greater amounts of waste material generation. Changes in attitude also have a role to play, with more and more things we use becoming disposable. Changes in packaging have resulted in much of our waste becoming nonbiodegradable. What do you think will be the impact of these on our environment? Think it over Our Environment 215 Reprint 2025-26 = Search the internet or library to find out what hazardous materials have to be dealt with while disposing of electronic items. How would these materials affect the environment? = Find out how plastics are recycled. Does the recycling process have any impact on the environment? Q U ES TION S$ What is ozone and how does it affect any ecosystem? How can you help in reducing the problem of waste disposal? Give any two methods. What you have learnt The various components of an ecosystem are interdependent. The producers make the energy from sunlight available to the rest of the ecosystem. There is a loss of energy as we go from one trophic level to the next, this limits the number of trophic levels in a food-chain. Human activities have an impact on the environment. The use of chemicals like CFCs has endangered the ozone layer. Since the ozone layer protects against the ultraviolet radiation from the Sun, this could damage the environment. The waste we generate may be biodegradable or non-biodegradable. The disposal of the waste we generate is causing serious environmental problems. Which of the following groups contain only biodegradable items? (a) Grass, flowers and leather (b) Grass, wood and plastic (c) Fruit-peels, cake and lime-juice (d) Cake, wood and grass Which of the following constitute a food-chain? (a) Grass, wheat and mango (b) Grass, goat and human 216 Science Reprint 2025-26 (c) Goat, cow and elephant (d) Grass, fish and goat . Which of the following are environment-friendly practices? (a) Carrying cloth-bags to put purchases in while shopping (b) Switching off unnecessary lights and fans (c) Walking to school instead of getting your mother to drop you on her scooter (d) All ofthe above . What will happen if we kill all the organisms in one trophic level? . Will the impact of removing all the organisms in a trophic level be