1064CHI1S CHAPTER 1 ) O Our Environment e have heard the word environment often being used on the television, in newspapers and by people around us. Our elders tell us that the environment is not what it used to be earlier; others say that we should work in a healthy environment ; and global summits involving the developed and developing countries are regularly held to discuss environmental issues. In this chapter, we shall be studying how various components in the environment interact with each other and how we impact the environment. 13.1 ECO-SYSTEM WHAT ARE ITS COMPONENTS? All organisms such as plants, animals, microorganisms and human beings as well as the physical surroundings interact with each other and maintain a balance in nature. All the interacting organisms in an area together with the non-living constituents of the environment form an ecosystem. Thus, an ecosystem consists of biotic components comprising living organisms and abiotic components comprising physical factors like temperature, rainfall, wind, soil and minerals. For example, if you visit a garden you will find different plants, such as grasses, trees; flower bearing plants like rose, jasmine, sunflower; and animals like frogs, insects and birds. All these living organisms interact with each other and their growth, reproduction and other activities are affected by the abiotic components of ecosystem. So a garden is an ecosystem. Other types of ecosystems are forests, ponds and lakes. These are natural ecosystems while gardens and crop-fields are humanmade (artificial) ecosystems. = You might have seen an aquarium. Let us try to design one. = What are the things that we need to keep in mind when we create an aquarium? The fish would need a free space for swimming (it could be a large jar), water, oxygen and food. = We can provide oxygen through an oxygen pump (aerator) and fish food which is available in the market. Reprint 2025-26 = If we add a few aquatic plants and animals it can become a selfsustaining system. Can you think how this happens? An aquarium is an example of a human-made ecosystem. = Can we leave the aquarium as such after we set it up? Why does it have to be cleaned once in a while? Do we have to clean ponds or lakes in the same manner? Why or why not? We have seen in earlier classes that organisms can be grouped as producers, consumers and decomposers according to the manner in which they obtain their sustenance from the environment. Let us recall what we have learnt through the self sustaining ecosystem created by us above. Which organisms can make organic compounds like sugar and starch from inorganic substances using the radiant energy of the Sun in the presence of chlorophyll? All green plants and certain bacteria which can produce food by photosynthesis come under this category and are called the producers. Organisms depend on the producers either directly or indirectly for their sustenance? These organisms which consume the food produced, either directly from producers or