a similar phenomenon on a much larger scale. Let us see how we can explain it. Twinkling of stars The twinkling of a star is due to atmospheric refraction of starlight. The starlight, on entering the earth s atmosphere, undergoes refraction continuously before it reaches the earth. The atmospheric refraction occurs in a medium of gradually changing refractive index. Since the atmosphere bends starlight towards the normal, the apparent position of the star is slightly different from its actual position. The star appears slightly higher (above) than its actual position when viewed near the horizon (Fig. 10.9). Further, this apparent position of the star is not stationary, but keeps on changing slightly, since the physical conditions of the earth s atmosphere are not stationary, as was the case in the previous paragraph. Since the stars are very distant, they approximate point-sized sources of light. As the path of rays of light coming from the star goes on varying slightly, the apparent position of the star fluctuates and the amount of starlight entering the eye flickers the star sometimes appears brighter, and at some other time, fainter, which is the twinkling effect. Why don t the planets twinkle? The planets are much Apparent position y closer to the earth, and are thus seen as extended sources. oftheSun = _e- c 3 If we consider a planet as a collection of a large number Observer 2-7": Atmosphere Figure 10.10 Atmospheric refraction effects at sunrise and sunset uc - of point-sized sources of light, the total variation in the amount of light entering our eye from all the individual ; Horizon point-sized sources will average out to zero, thereby - yi nullifying the twinkling effect. Advance sunrise and delayed sunset The Sun is visible to us about 2 minutes before the actual sunrise, and about 2 minutes after the actual sunset because of atmospheric refraction. By actual sunrise, we mean the actual crossing of the horizon by the Sun. Fig. 10.10 shows the actual and apparent positions of the Sun with respect to the horizon. The time difference between actual sunset and the apparent sunset is about 2 minutes. The apparent flattening of the Sun s disc at sunrise and sunset is also due to the same phenomenon. Science Reprint 2025-26 10.6 SCATTERING OF LIGHT The interplay of light with objects around us gives rise to several spectacular phenomena in nature. The blue colour of the sky, colour of water in deep sea, the reddening of the sun at sunrise and the sunset are some of the wonderful phenomena we are familiar with. In the previous class, you have learnt about the scattering of light by colloidal particles. The path of a beam of light passing through a true solution is not visible. However, its path becomes visible through a colloidal solution where the size of the particles is relatively larger. 10.6.1 Tyndall Effect The earth s atmosphere is a heterogeneous mixture of minute particles. These particles include smoke, tiny water droplets, suspended