colours that we see in a spectrum. Isaac Newton was the first to use a glass prism to obtain the spectrum of sunlight. He tried to split the colours of the spectrum of white light further by using another similar prism. However, he could not get any more colours. He then placed a second identical prism in an inverted position with respect to the first prism, as shown in Fig. 10.6. This allowed all the colours of the spectrum to pass through the second prism. He found a beam of white light emerging from the other side of the second prism. This observation gave Newton the idea that the sunlight is made up of seven colours. Any light that gives a spectrum similar to that of sunlight is often referred to as white light. Arainbow is a natural spectrum appearing in the sky after a rain shower (Fig. 10.7). It is caused by dispersion of sunlight by tiny water droplets, present in the atmosphere. A rainbow is always formed in a direction opposite to that of the Sun. The water droplets act like small prisms. They refract and disperse the incident sunlight, then reflect it internally, and finally refract it again when it comes out of the raindrop (Fig. 10.8). Due to the dispersion of light and internal reflection, different colours reach the observer s eye. You can also see a rainbow on a sunny day when you look at the sky through a waterfall or through a water fountain, with the Sun behind you. The Human Eye and the Colourful World Reprint 2025-26 white light Figure 10.7 Rainbow in the sky Raindrop Sunlight Figure 10.8 Rainbow formation Apparent 10.5 ATMOSPHERIC REFRACTION Star * star position Refractive index increasing Figure 10.9 Apparent star position due to atmospheric refraction You might have observed the apparent random wavering or flickering of objects seen through a turbulent stream of hot air rising above a fire or a radiator. The air just above the fire becomes hotter than the air further up. The hotter air is lighter (less dense) than the cooler air above it, and has a refractive index slightly less than that of the cooler air. Since the physical conditions of the refracting medium (air) are not stationary, the apparent position of the object, as seen through the hot air, fluctuates. a This wavering is thus an effect of atmospheric refraction (refraction of light by the earth s atmosphere) on a small scale in our local environment. The twinkling of stars is a similar phenomenon on a much larger scale. Let us see how we can explain it. Twinkling of stars The twinkling of a star is due to atmospheric refraction of starlight. The starlight, on entering the earth s atmosphere, undergoes refraction continuously before it reaches the earth. The atmospheric refraction occurs in a medium of gradually changing refractive index. Since the atmosphere bends starlight towards the normal, the apparent position of the star is slightly different from its actual position.