now discuss. Symmetries of a circle The circle is a fascinating figure. What happens when you rotate a circle clockwise about its centre? It coincides with itself. It does not matter what angle you rotate it by! So, for a circle, every angle is an angle of symmetry. MB eS Now take a point on the rim of the circle and join it to the centre. Extend the segment to a diameter of the circle. Is that diameter a line of reflection symmetry? It is. Every diameter is a line of symmetry! Like wheels, we can find other objects around us having rotational symmetry. Find them. Some of them are shown below: HE Fan Flower Wheel Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 % Figure it Out 1. Colour the sectors of the circle below so that the figure has i) 3 angles of symmetry, ii) 4 angles of symmetry, iii) what are the possible numbers of angles of symmetry you can obtain by colouring the sectors in different ways? Draw two figures other than a circle and a square that have both reflection symmetry and rotational symmetry. Draw, wherever possible, a rough sketch of: a. A triangle with at least two lines of symmetry and at least two angles of symmetry. b. A triangle with only one line of symmetry but not having rotational symmetry. c. A quadrilateral with rotational symmetry butnoreflection | symmetry. d. A quadrilateral with reflection symmetry but not having iy rotational symmetry. In a figure, 60 is the smallest angle of symmetry. What are the other angles of symmetry of this figure? In a figure, 60 is an angle of symmetry. The figure has two angles of symmetry less than 60 . What is its smallest angle of symmetry? Can we have a figure with rotational symmetry whose smallest angle of symmetry is: a. 45 ? b. 17 ? Symmetry 7. This is a picture of the new Parliament Building in Delhi. a. Does the outer boundary of the picture have reflection symmetry? If so, draw the lines of symmetries. How many are they? b. Does it have rotational symmetry around its centre? If so, find the angles of rotational symmetry. 8. How many lines of symmetry do the shapes in the first shape sequence in Chapter 1, Table 3, the Regular Polygons, have? What number sequence do you get? 9. How many angles of symmetry do the shapes in the first shape sequence in Chapter 1, Table 3, the Regular Polygons, have? What number sequence do you get? 10. How many lines of symmetry do the shapes in the last shape sequence in Chapter 1, Table 3, the Koch Snowflake sequence, have? How many angles of symmetry? 11. How many lines of symmetry and angles of symmetry does Ashoka Chakra have? Playing with Tiles a. Use the colour tiles WV given at the end of the book to complete the following figure so that it has exactly 2 lines of symmetry. b. Use 16 such tiles