halves will not exactly overlap. On the other hand, if you rotate it by 90 about the red point at the centre, the windmill looks exactly the same. We say that the windmill has rotational symmetry. When talking of rotational symmetry, there is always a fixed point about which the object is rotated. This fixed point is called the centre of rotation. Will the windmill above look exactly the same when rotated through an angle of less than 90 ? No! An angle through which a figure can be rotated to look exactly the same is called an angle of rotational symmetry, or just an angle of symmetry, for short. Symmetry SL LOO em, mn ees 00 OO OOOO eae ere S OOOO E00 000 E00 0 I 0 OO OOO O S>EOer 0-00 OOOO eae =< 0 0 0 OOO OOO OOO OOOO OOOO SOS ~S For the windmill, the angles of symmetry are 90 (quarter turn), 180 (half turn), 270 (three-quarter turn) and 360 (full turn). Observe that when any figure is rotated by 360 , it comes back to its original position, so 360 is always an angle of symmetry. Thus, we see that the windmill has 4 angles of symmetry. Do you know of any other shape that has exactly four angles of symmetry? How many angles of symmetry does a square have? How much rotation does it require to get the initial square? We get back a square overlapping with itself after 90 of rotation. This takes point A to the position of point B, point B to the position of point C, point C to the position of point D, and point D back to the position of point A. Do you know where to mark the centre of rotation? Line after rotation A B B Imaginary reference line Initial position D C A D Square after rotation What are the other angles of symmetry? Line after rotation Line after rotation Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Example: Find the angles of symmetry of the following strip. gf: Solution: Let us rotate the strip in a clockwise direction about its centre. \ A rotation of 180 results in the figure above. Does this overlap with the original figure. No. Why? Another rotation through 180 from this position gives the original shape. This figure comes back to its original shape only after one complete rotation through 360 . So, we say that this figure does not have rotational symmetry. Rotational Symmetry of Figures with Radial Arms Consider this figure, a picture with ne 4 radial arms. How many angles of symmetry does it have? What are they? Note that the angle between adjacent central dotted lines is 90 . Can you change the angles between the radial arms so that the figure still has 4 angles of symmetry? Try drawing it. To check if the figure drawn indeed has 4 angles of symmetry, you could draw the figure on two different pieces of paper. Cut out