occupies the position occupied by B and D that of C! %& What if we reflect along the diagonal from A to C? Where do points A, B, C and D go? What if we reflect along the horizontal line of symmetry? A figure that has a line or lines of symmetry is thus, also said to have reflection symmetry. Generating shapes having lines of symmetry So far we have seen symmetrical figures and asymmetrical figures. How does one generate such symmetrical figures? Let us explore this. Ink Blot Devils You enjoyed doing this earlier in Class 5. Take a piece of paper. Fold it in half. Open the paper and spill a few drops of ink (or paint) on one half. Now press the halves together and then open the paper again. What do you see? Is the resulting figure symmetric? If yes, where is the line of symmetry? Is there any other line along which it can be folded to produce two identical parts? Try making more such patterns. Symmetry Paper Folding and Cutting Here is another way of making symmetric shapes! In these two figures, a sheet of paper is folded and a cut is made along the dotted line shown. Draw a sketch of how the paper will look when unfolded. Do you see a line of symmetry in this figure? What is it? Make different symmetric shapes by folding and cutting. There are more ways of folding and cutting pieces of paper to get symmetric shapes! Use thin rectangular coloured eS? 2 D> paper. Fold it several times and create some intricate patterns by cutting the paper, like the one shown here. Identify the lines of symmetry in the repeating design. Use such ee 2 PS D> decorative paper cut-outs for festive occasions. %f Figure it Out Punching Game The fold is a line of symmetry. Punch holes at different locations of a folded square sheet of paper using a punching machine and create different symmetric patterns. Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 1. In each of the following figures, a hole was punched in a folded square sheet of paper and then the paper was unfolded. Identify the line along which the paper was folded. Figure (d) was created by punching a single hole. How was the paper folded? a. b. Cc. 2. Given the line(s) of symmetry, find the other hole(s): Cc. d. 3. Here are some questions on paper cutting. Consider a vertical fold. We represent it this way: a. b. Vertical Fold Symmetry Similarly, a horizontal fold is represented as follows: Horizontal Fold C 4. After each of the following cuts, predict the shape of the hole when the paper is opened. After you have made your prediction, make the cutouts and verify your answer. Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 5 Suppose you have to get each of these shapes with some folds and a single straight cut. How will you do it? a. The hole in the centre is a square.