chapter? What about in the picture of the cloud? 2. For each of the following figures, identify the line(s) of symmetry if it exists. 42 ONES Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Figures with more than one line of symmetry Does a square have only one line of symmetry? Take a square piece of paper. By folding, find all its lines of symmetry. Fold 1 |S : var Fold 3 ~ Fold 4 Here are the different folds giving different lines of symmetry. Fold the paper into half vertically. Fold it again into half horizontally (i.e., you have folded it twice). Now open out the folds. Vertical Fold +| Horizontal Fold Again fold the square into half (for a third time now), but this time along a diagonal, as shown in the figure. Again, open it. Symmetry Fold it into half (for the fourth time), but this time along the other diagonal, as shown in the figure. Open out the fold. %& Is there any other way to fold the square so that the two halves overlap? How many lines of symmetry does the square shape have? Thus, figures can have multiple lines of symmetry. The figures below also have multiple lines of symmetry. Can you find them all? %e& We saw that the diagonal of a square is also a line of symmetry. Let us take a rectangle that is not a square. Is its diagonal a line of symmetry? First, see the rectangle and answer this question. Then, take a rectangular piece of paper and check if the two parts overlap by folding it along its diagonal. What do you observe? Reflection So far we have been saying that when we fold a figure along a line of symmetry, the two parts overlap completely. We could also say that the part of the figure on one side of the line of symmetry is reflected by the line to the other side; similarly, the part of the figure on the other side of the line of symmetry is reflected to the first side! Let us understand this by labeling some points on the figure. The figure shows a square with its corners labeled A, B, C and D. Let us first consider the vertical line of symmetry. When we reflect Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 the square along this line, the points B, C on the right get reflected to the left side and occupy the positions occupied earlier by A, D. What happens to the points A, D? A occupies the position occupied by B and D that of C! %& What if we reflect along the diagonal from A to C? Where do points A, B, C and D go? What if we reflect along the horizontal line of symmetry? A figure that has a line or lines of symmetry is thus, also said to have reflection symmetry. Generating shapes having lines of symmetry So far we have seen symmetrical figures and asymmetrical figures. How does one generate