Consider this figure, a picture with ne 4 radial arms. How many angles of symmetry does it have? What are they? Note that the angle between adjacent central dotted lines is 90 . Can you change the angles between the radial arms so that the figure still has 4 angles of symmetry? Try drawing it. To check if the figure drawn indeed has 4 angles of symmetry, you could draw the figure on two different pieces of paper. Cut out the radial arms from one of the papers. Keep the figure on the paper fixed and rotate the cutout to check for rotational symmetry. How will you modify the figure above so that it has only two angles of symmetry? Symmetry Here is one way: We have seen figures having 4 and 2 angles of symmetry. Can we get a figure having exactly 3 angles of symmetry? Can you use radial arms for this? Let us try with 3 radial arms as in the figure below. How many angles of symmetry does it have and what are they? Here is a figure with three radial arms. Trace and cut out a copy of this figure. By rotating the cutout over this figure determine its angles of rotation. We see that only a fullturn or a rotation of 360 will bring the figure back into itself. So this figure does not have rotational symmetry as 360 degrees is its only angle of symmetry. However, can anything in the figure be changed to make it have 3 angles of symmetry? Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Can it be done by changing the angles between the dotted lines? Ifa figure with three radial arms should have rotational symmetry, then a rotated version of it should overlap with the original. Here are rough diagrams of both of them. If these two figures must overlap, what can you tell about the angles? Observe that 7A must overlap 7B, 7B must overlap 7C and 2C must overlap 7A. So, ZA = ZB = ZC. What must this angle be? We know that a full turn has 360 degrees. This is equally distributed amongst these three angles. So each angle must be we = 120 . So, the radial arms figure with 3 arms shows rotational symmetry when the angle between the adjacent dotted lines is 120 . Use paper cutouts to verify this observation. Now how many angles of rotation does the figure have and what are they? 4 BAN BIN LO SQ Initial ~ " After120 ~~ = ~=s After 240 ~ "After 360 . position rotation (120 + 120 ) (120 + 120 + 120 ) rotation rotation Note: The colours have been added to show the rotations. Symmetry Let us explore more figures. % Can you draw a figure with radial arms that has a) exactly 5 angles of symmetry, b) 6 angles of symmetry? Also find the angles of symmetry in each case. Hint: Use 5 radial arms for the first case.