Symmetry Similarly, a horizontal fold is represented as follows: Horizontal Fold C 4. After each of the following cuts, predict the shape of the hole when the paper is opened. After you have made your prediction, make the cutouts and verify your answer. Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 5 Suppose you have to get each of these shapes with some folds and a single straight cut. How will you do it? a. The hole in the centre is a square. b. The hole in the centre is a square. Note: For the above two questions, check if the 4-sided figures in the centre satisfy both the properties of a square. 6. How many lines of symmetry do these shapes have? a. b. A triangle with equal sides and equal angles. Symmetry c. A hexagon with equal sides and equal angles. 7. Trace each figure and draw the lines of symmetry, if any: OW Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 8. Find the lines of symmetry for the kolam below. 7 \NL7 WAN 9. Draw the following. a. A triangle with exactly one line of symmetry. b. A triangle with exactly three lines of symmetry. c. A triangle with no line of symmetry. Is it possible to draw a triangle with exactly two lines of symmetry? 10. Draw the following. In each case, the figure should contain at least one curved boundary. a. A figure with exactly one line of symmetry. b. A figure with exactly two lines of symmetry. c. A figure with exactly four lines of symmetry. 11. Copy the following on squared paper. Complete them so that the blue line is a line of symmetry. Problem (a) has been done for you. (a) (b) (c) Symmetry (d) (f) (e) Hint: For (c) and (f), see if rotating the book helps! 12. Copy the following drawing on squared paper. Complete each one of them so that the resulting figure has the two blue lines as lines of symmetry. (a) (b) (d) (e) (c) (f) Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 _ _aeoOroeOowoorwe OOOO 000 00 0 00 0 OO O OST OTE 00 OOO 0000 0S OOO Oe ~>S'- CET 209SE 0 0 0 OOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO OOOO SN 13. Copy the following on a dot grid. For each figure draw two more lines to make a shape that has a line of symmetry. 9.2 Rotational Symmetry The paper windmill in the picture looks symmetrical but there is no line of symmetry! However, if you fold it, the two halves will not exactly overlap. On the other hand, if you rotate it by 90 about the red point at the centre, the windmill looks exactly the same. We say that the windmill has rotational symmetry. When talking of rotational symmetry, there is always a fixed point about which the object is rotated. This fixed point is called the centre of rotation. Will the windmill above look exactly the same when rotated through an angle of less than 90 ?