0674CHO9 SYMMETRY Look around you you may find many objects that catch your attention. Some such things are shown below: Flower Butterfly @'Dp XN V4 TS \ GI Rangoli Pinwheel There is something beautiful about the pictures above. The flower looks the same from many different angles. What about the butterfly? No doubt, the colours are very attractive. But what else about the butterfly appeals to you? In these pictures, it appears that some parts of the figure are repeated and these repetitions seem to occur in a definite pattern. Can you see what repeats in the beautiful rangoli figure? In the Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 9 Symmetry.indd 217 13-08-2024 17:05:22 Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 rangoli, the red petals come back onto themselves when the flower is rotated by 90 around the centre and so do the other parts of the rangoli. Whataboutthe pinwheel? Can youspot which pattern is repeating? Hint: Look at the hexagon first. Now, can you say what figure repeats along each side of the hexagon? What is the shape of the figure that is stuck to each side? Do you recognise it? How do these shapes move as you move along the boundary of the hexagon? What about the other pictures what is it about those structures that appeals to you and what are the patterns in those structures that repeat? Clouds On the other hand, look at this picture of clouds. There is no such repetitive pattern. We can say that the first four figures are symmetrical and the last one is not symmetrical. A symmetry refers to a part or parts of a figure that are repeated in some definite pattern. Taj Mahal Gopuram Whatare the symmetries that you seein these beautiful structures? Symmetry 9.1 Line of Symmetry Figure (a) shows the picture of a blue triangle with a dotted line. What if you fold the triangle along the dotted line? Yes, one half of the triangle covers the other half completely. These are called mirror halves! (a) (b) What about Figure (b) with the four puzzle pieces and a dotted line passing through the middle? Are they mirror halves? No, when we fold along the line, the left half does not exactly fit over the right half. A line that cuts a figure into two parts that exactly overlap when folded along that line is called a line of symmetry of the figure. % Figure it Out 1. Do you see any line of symmetry in the figures at the start of the chapter? What about in the picture of the cloud? 2. For each of the following figures, identify the line(s) of symmetry if it exists. 42 ONES Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Figures with more than one line of symmetry Does a square have only one line of symmetry? Take a square piece of paper. By folding, find all its lines of symmetry. Fold 1 |S : var Fold 3 ~ Fold 4 Here are the different folds giving different lines