you get? 10. How many lines of symmetry do the shapes in the last shape sequence in Chapter 1, Table 3, the Koch Snowflake sequence, have? How many angles of symmetry? 11. How many lines of symmetry and angles of symmetry does Ashoka Chakra have? Playing with Tiles a. Use the colour tiles WV given at the end of the book to complete the following figure so that it has exactly 2 lines of symmetry. b. Use 16 such tiles to make figures that have exactly: 1 line of symmetry 2 lines of symmetry c. Use these tiles in making creative symmetric designs. Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Symmetry % Game Draw a6 by 6 grid. Two players take turns covering two adjacent squares by drawing Not allowed a line. The line can be placed x either way: horizontally or vertically. The lines cannot overlap. The game goes on till a player is not able to place any more lines. The player who is not able to place a line loses. With what strategy can one play to win this game? = When a figure is made up of parts that repeat in a definite pattern, we say that the figure has symmetry. We say that such a figure is symmetrical. = A line that cuts a plane figure into two parts that exactly overlap when folded along that line is called a line of symmetry or axis of symmetry of the figure. = A figure may have multiple lines of symmetry. = Sometimes a figure looks exactly the same when it is rotated by an angle about a fixed point. Such an angle is called an angle ofsymmetry of the figure. A figure that has an angle of symmetry strictly between O and 360 degrees is said to have rotational symmetry. The point of the figure about which the rotation occurs is called the centre of rotation. = A figure may have multiple angles of symmetry. = Some figures may have a line of symmetry but no angle of symmetry, while others may have angles of symmetry but no lines of symmetry. Some figures may have both lines of symmetry as well as angles of symmetry. CHAPTER 9 SOLUTIONS Symmetry Section 9.1 Page No. 219 Os Figure it Out Q1. Do you see any line of symmetry in the figures at the start of the chapter? What about in the picture of the cloud? Ans. Yes, there are 6, 4 and 1 lines of symmetry in the figures of flower, rangoli and butterfly respectively. There is no line of symmetry in the figures of pinwheel and cloud. Q2. For each of the following figures, identify the line(s) of symmetry if it exists. Ans. | Section 9.1 Page no. 221 Q. Is there any other way to fold the square so that the two halves overlap? How many lines of symmetry does the square shape have? Ans. No, there is no other way to fold the square. The square shape