flower, rangoli and butterfly respectively. There is no line of symmetry in the figures of pinwheel and cloud. Q2. For each of the following figures, identify the line(s) of symmetry if it exists. Ans. | Section 9.1 Page no. 221 Q. Is there any other way to fold the square so that the two halves overlap? How many lines of symmetry does the square shape have? Ans. No, there is no other way to fold the square. The square shape has 4 lines of symmetry. Q. We saw that the diagonal of a square is also a line of symmetry. Let us take a rectangle that is not a square. Is its diagonal a line of symmetry? Ans. No, Rectangle s diagonal is not a line of symmetry. Page no. 222 Q. What if we reflect along the diagonal from A to C? Where do points A, B, C and D go? What if we reflect along the horizontal line of symmetry? Ans. If we reflect along the diagonal from A to C, D occupies the position occupied by B earlier. A and C remain at the same place. If we reflect along the horizontal line of symmetry, D and C occupies the position earlier occupied by A and B respectively. [1] Section 9.1 Page no. 223 Q1 In each of the following figures, a hole was punched in a folded square sheet of paper and then the paper was unfolded. Identify the line along which the paper was folded. Figure (d) was created by punching a single hole. How was the paper folded? Ans. For figure (d), paper was folded vertically and then horizontally or vice versa. Q2. Given the line(s) of symmetry, find the other hole(s): b. C. d. Q4. After each of the following cuts, predict the shape of the hole when the paper is opened. After you have made your prediction, make the cutouts and verify your answer. a. [2] Ans. Q5. Suppose you have to get each of these shapes with some folds and a single straight cut. How will you do it? a. The hole in the centre is square. b. The hole in the centre is a square. Note : For the above two questions, check if the 4-sided figures in the centre satisfy both the properties of a square. Ans. a. At first fold the paper horizontally then vertically. Now cut a small square at the center (all sides closed corner). b. At first fold the paper horizontally then vertically. Now at closed corner, cut along with a slanting line. ] . . + ! BN ! AS [3] Q6. How many lines of symmetry do these shapes have? Ans. a. 4 Lines of Symmetry 8 Lines of Symmetry b. A triangle with equal sides and equal angles. 3 Lines of Symmetry c. A hexagon with equal sides and equal angles. 6 Lines of Symmetry Q7. Trace each figure and draw the lines of symmetry, if any: R 100 BS [4] Ans.