We will read about how this works in a section below. One can buy goods ranging from books, clothes, furniture, and grocery items to electronic items like TVs, mobile phones, and laptops, and get them delivered to their doorstep. Manufacturers can also buy components online to be used as inputs for production of goods. Apart from goods, one can also avail of services like online classes without having to step outside the home. Payments for such services can also Fig. 12.8 be made online. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 ) ADD To cart | Chapter 12.indd 254 4/8/2025 11:21:32 AM Y THINK ABOUT IT What do you think are the pros and cons of online and physical shopping respectively? Explore this question from the point of view of both, sellers and buyers. Some services require in-person contact like tailoring and cannot be provided online. Can you suggest other services where physical markets are needed? There are other types of markets that do not transact goods and services. One of them is the share or stock market. Ask your family members, teachers, or members in your community about it. We will explore these concepts later in the year. | Export: Selling goods or services Fig. 12.9. Stock Market produced in one country Domestic and international markets o a buyer A market where goods and services are bought and sold within country. the geographical boundaries of the country is called a domestic Import: . 8 market. For example, to print this book, paper was procured Buying 28 from big paper mills located all over India. The transaction goods or 32 between the buyer and the seller took place within the country. from other # 5 . . . . tri as International markets exist outside a nation s boundary; the oa (_ Zs sellers in one country export their products to another country, bringing 29 j UN or the buyers in one country import products produced in hem ae ue another country. Thus, trade occurs across borders of countries. country. & Chapter 12.indd 255 4/8/2025 11:21:34 AM North America: Outsourced services like software South America: Chemical products 3. | Africa: Pharmaceuticals India s exports and imports around the < al Europe: Engineering goods like machinery in food processing, boilers 5s. | West Asia: Refined petroleum products Pacific Ocean ee => 5. a = = 0 1,400 2,800 5,600 = = _ North America: Aircraft and components South America: Mineral ores like copper 3. | Africa: Diamonds NA 2. | 4. | Europe: Electrical AQ equipment West Asia: Crude petroleum, fertilizers South East Asia: Fig. 12.10 Vegetable oils DON'T MISS OUT India was the world s largest importer of vegetable oils like palm oil, sunflower oil, and soybean oil in 2024. Most of the palm oil is imported from Malaysia, Indonesia, and Thailand. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Se Chapter 12.indd 256 4/8/2025 11:21:45 AM Wholesale and Retail Markets Several participants play their