because of distances and terrains. Distributors help to bridge this gap. Do you remember the middlemen for milk in the AMUL story from Grade 6? However, the distribution channel is different in the case of online markets. Here manufacturers send bulk quantities of their products to the warehouse of the business that sells through online apps. Consumers buy the product from the online option (website or mobile application). These businesses are called aggregators. The aggregator then packs the products and delivers them to the online buyer. Ze 2) onl =< Lv) ~< Lu Fig. 12.18. Garment shop Fig. 12.19. Salon Distributor Individuals or businesses who supply goods from manufactur Ss: ers and wholesalers to retailers. Aggregator: Website or mobile application that organizes and combines offers from multip sellers and le sells them to consumers at one place. 12 - Understanding Markets Economic Life Around Us 10-Apr-25 11:01:30 AM Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 12.indd 260 Fig. 12.20. Mall Let s explore the chain of supply in physical markets for the textile market in Surat, Gujarat Asia s oldest textile market, and the city famously known as a textile hub. The Surat textile market consists of thousands of factories manufacturing cotton and _ synthetic textiles. In the case of cotton textiles, raw cotton is received here through cotton mandis from nearby states like Maharashtra, as well as from other parts of Gujarat. It is transformed into finished fabric or garments after processing at various stages weaving on power looms, dyeing in processing units and so on. The product moves from one stage to another through markets for woven fabric, for dyed fabric, and for finished products (sarees, or ready-made garments, for example). Fig. 12.22. 4/8/2025 11:21:58 AM The finished product from the fabric is traded by the manufacturing units in the wholesale market. The wholesalers are an important channel of supply as they oversee the distribution of products to small shopkeepers and big retail stores across the country and internationally. They also assess how much product is required by retailers. This helps maintain the stock of products with the manufacturers and ensures an uninterrupted supply of products to the end consumers. Surendranagar at. Jamnagar MP vcac i { | Amreli Surat Amravati " Nagpur Loe Akola Wardha PS Yavatmal Adilabad & Port River 4 Airport Ml Surat City HH Railway [)) Textile Road Market 12 - Understanding Markets Economic Life Around Us Fig. 12.24. Surat City Map c) Chapter 12.indd 261 4/8/2025 11:21:58 AM Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 @ Chapter 12.indd 262 Fig. 12.25. A wholesaler s warehouse of fabric LET'S EXPLORE Ask your nearest retailer about a product, its place of origin, and the chain of suppliers in the process of the product reaching the shop. Trace this using a flow chart like Fig. 12.11 and share it in class. DON T MISS OUT > Apart from textiles, Surat is home to the largest diamond industry in the