strict regulations to mitigate these negative effects. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 12.indd 266 4/8/2025 11:22:01 AM Similarly, the government puts in place systems to monitor the weights and measures of the packaged products to check the net quantity contained in the package. Y THINK ABOUT IT The practice of rulers protecting consumers is not a phenomenon of modern India. Kautilya s Arthashastra includes instructions for the traders trading in clarified butter (ghee). It mentions that buyers shall be given 1/50 part more as manasrava to compensate for the reduction in quantity owing to (the ghee)...sticking to the measuring can. Governments make rules to ensure markets work fairly and consumers are not exploited. However, too many rules can make it difficult for markets to function properly. Providing public goods Producers make and sell goods and services to be able to make a profit. However, there are some goods and services that Public goods: producers do not expect to make a profit on; for example, public Service or parks, roads, policing, and so on. In addition, you read about commodity the rights that citizens have to certain welfare provisions in a accessible or previous chapter. So, the government provides these public avaliable 0 goods and services. of a society. Their present does not yy THINK ABOUT IT diminish their availability for Whatare the other areas where you can see the government future use. being involved in the markets? Are there areas where government intervention needs to be reduced? Discuss with family or relatives. How can consumers assess the quality of products and services? Markets enable access to a wide variety of goods and services to consumers. How will consumers decide what they would like to buy? 12 - Understanding Markets Economic Life Around Us @ Chapter 12.indd 267 4/8/2025 11:22:01 AM Y THINK ABOUT IT There is a marbles competition in your neighbourhood with the team in the next street. You want to buy new marbles for the competition. You have 150 saved up. You go to a shop to buy the marbles. What are the qualities you would look for in the marbles so that you can win = the competition? Fig. 12.28 Did you think about the price, size of the marbles, strength and the attractive colours? As you can see, every consumer would need to assess the quality of products that they are buying. In the following section, we will look at various ways in which this can be done. Suppose your parent asks you to get a 1 kg packet of gram flour from the nearby grocer. There are different types of packets available at the shop such as the one shown below. Observe it carefully. How would you determine that the quality of gram flour meets the required standards? Net quantity Date of manufacture Batch number Best before date MRP JOIN OUR COMMUNITY ui ie Name & address of the iti Sas Nutrition facts panel eee manufacturer Sete FSSAI mark