you will find all kinds of rubies and diamonds and pearls, with every other kind of precious stone for sale... sellers of cloths... they being of cotton... grass and straw in infinite abundance. I do not know who could describe it to be believed, so barren a country is this... it is a mystery how there should be an abundance of everything therein. LET'S EXPLORE > Can you imagine what this bazaar must have looked like during its peak? > Do you know of any old markets from your state? How would they be similar or different from today s markets? Discuss with elders in the family and community. Let s learn more about markets and how they function! LET'S EXPLORE Observe the illustration. What are these people discussing? Imagine you and your partner as a buyer and a seller of guavas. Prepare a set of dialogues between both of you and present it in your class as a skit. Fig. 12.4 Certain features are required for places to be called markets. As you observed in the figure 12.2 (on introductory big spread page number 248) every market has a buyer and a seller. They both need to agree on a price at which the transaction would take place. Price is an important feature in completing a transaction. Chapter 12.indd 251 Price: Price is the amount at which a buyer is willing to buy, and a seller is willing to sell particular goods or services. 12 - Understanding Markets Economic Life Around Us @ 4/8/2025 11:21:30 AM Often the buyers and sellers negotiate and bargain to arrive at an acceptable price. What type of negotiation and bargaining took place in your skit? Y THINK ABOUT IT Can you think of a type of market where negotiation is less common and why? Prices and Markets What happens when there are many buyers and sellers in the market? How do prices respond to how buyers and sellers interact in the market? In the figure given below, the seller wants to sell the guavas at 80 per kg. However, buyers may not be willing to buy at that price. If a buyer finds the price very high, he will ask for a price that he is willing to pay. The seller may not be willing to sell at the price offered by the buyer because it would not be profitable for him. The buyer and seller negotiate until a mutually agreeable price is reached. The transaction can then be completed. If such a point is not reached, i.e. the point where the buyer and the seller agree on a price, the transaction may not take place. Let s see some scenarios below to understand this. 1. What happens in case the seller fixes the price very high? Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 @ Fig. 12.5 Chapter 12.indd 252 4/8/2025 11:21:30 AM 2. What happens in case the seller fixes the price very low? Fig. 12.6 3. Over time