Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 @ Chapter 12.indd 262 Fig. 12.25. A wholesaler s warehouse of fabric LET'S EXPLORE Ask your nearest retailer about a product, its place of origin, and the chain of suppliers in the process of the product reaching the shop. Trace this using a flow chart like Fig. 12.11 and share it in class. DON T MISS OUT > Apart from textiles, Surat is home to the largest diamond industry in the world. Approximately 1.5 million artisans are involved in activities like cutting and polishing diamonds on a gigantic scale. Trade flourished here from the 16th century onwards. The city s location on the west coast led to the setting up of ports and road networks that continue to be important today. Communities of expert artisans and skilled persons have lived here for centuries; their skills have been passed on over generations making | it a flourishing city. > Can you spot the port, highway and railway network on the map in Fig. 12.24? How do you think they helped make Surat a trading hub? 4/8/2025 11:21:58 AM The Role of Markets in People s Lives As we can see from the sections above, markets play an important role in the economic life of the people. It facilitates transactions between producers and consumers. It helps individuals, households and businesses access goods and services that they need and cannot produce themselves. Y THINK ABOUT IT We have discussed different dimensions of markets. Can we imagine what life might be like without markets? What would happen if farmers did not bring rice, wheat, dal, vegetables and fruits to the market? What would happen if the producers of cloth in Surat could not procure inputs like cotton from markets? In this section, we will explore a few other dimensions of the role of markets. Aakriti is a professional artist who creates oil paintings on canvas. Her paintings are appreciated, but she finds it difficult to find buyers. She is worried about where to sell the paintings and what price she should offer them for. Unlike the case of guavas, there are fewer local buyers and sellers for artwork. Can you think of other products which do not have a ready market? How does it affect those willing to buy or sell? What are the different ways in which artists can find buyers for their work today? How markets benefit society LET'S EXPLORE Consumers prefer to buy refrigerators that use less electricity. When a large number of consumers begin to ask for refrigerators that use less electricity, what do you think happens in the network you saw in Fig. 12.11? 12 - Understanding Markets Economic Life Around Us Chapter 12.indd 263 4/8/2025 11:21:58 AM The producers get an indication as to what consumers would buy. They produce refrigerators which use less electricity. This benefits society through the production of energy-efficient refrigerators. Although buying and selling is an economic activity that involves monetary exchange, interactions in the