of consumers begin to ask for refrigerators that use less electricity, what do you think happens in the network you saw in Fig. 12.11? 12 - Understanding Markets Economic Life Around Us Chapter 12.indd 263 4/8/2025 11:21:58 AM The producers get an indication as to what consumers would buy. They produce refrigerators which use less electricity. This benefits society through the production of energy-efficient refrigerators. Although buying and selling is an economic activity that involves monetary exchange, interactions in the markets often move beyond just enquiring about the product or service or negotiations between parties. Often, a relationship develops between buyers and sellers that continues even across generations. Some families have long-lasting trusted relationships with their tailor, jeweller, and doctor over decades. Many families in India maintain an account with the local grocer that is settled at the end of the month. So, while the primary role of the market is to promote economic activities, it also has non-economic significance in many people s lives. Mother s Market, Ima Keithal in the Meitei language of Manipur, is a unique market in Imphal. About 3000 women own and run all the shops in this market. They sell vegetables, clothes including traditional Manipuri attire, hand-loom and handicrafts, local produce, and daily essentials that people in the city and the surrounding areas require. On one hand, the market provides employment, becoming an important source of income for thousands of families; on the other hand, the market is a melting pot of cultures. People from different communities Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Fig. 12.26. Ima Keithal of Imphal | Chapter 12.indd 264 10-Apr-25 11:03:27 AM ' DON'T MISS OUT There are many traditions followed even today that go beyond just buying and selling. In south India, the sellers of haldi and kumkum (turmeric and vermilion) give a small quantity of haldi and kumkum separately, at no charge, as a mark of auspiciousness and good wishes to the buyer. LET'S EXPLORE Have you observed any such practices in your community or neighbourhood? Describe the practice as a drawing or in a short paragraph. Fig. 12.27 Government s Role in the Market Markets function through interactions of demand from buyers Demand: and supply by sellers. However, there are some situations in Quantity of PPly PY , ; a product or which this may not work very well. The government plays service that a crucial role in such situations. It monitors the interaction willing and oe between consumers and producers, and fair determination to purchase at a of price. particular price at a given time. Controlling prices for protecting buyers Supply: and sellers Quantity of a product The government controls the prices of certain goods. For or service example, it sets the maximum price that the seller can charge. sewing. g Several essential goods and services, such as lifesaving drugs, and able 35 ToT have an upper limit on their prices. Another instance is where tosellata % , . ; : particular