determination to purchase at a of price. particular price at a given time. Controlling prices for protecting buyers Supply: and sellers Quantity of a product The government controls the prices of certain goods. For or service example, it sets the maximum price that the seller can charge. sewing. g Several essential goods and services, such as lifesaving drugs, and able 35 ToT have an upper limit on their prices. Another instance is where tosellata % , . ; : particular of the government sets the minimum price at which essential riceata Ze , . .; price ara gs agricultural products like wheat, paddy and maize can be sold. giventime. 3% : : cs This ensures that farmers do not incur losses. The government 55 also sets minimum wages for work done by employees so that ga employers make fair payments to them. Chapter 12.indd 265 4/8/2025 11:22:01 AM However, the government needs to carefully implement such price limits. If the price is too low, producers would not have any motivation to produce. If the prices are too high, consumers would be disadvantaged. LET'S EXPLORE v > Onions are an important part of the cuisine in most parts of India. In some seasons, the supply of onions comes down in the market. What do you think happens to the price of onions when this happens? > What will happen if the people supplying onions do not bring the required quantities to the market? What do you think the government should do in this situation? Ensuring quality and safety standards The government has a role in ensuring the welfare of consumers and protecting them from unfair practices. The government ensures that manufacturers follow the required quality and safety standards while producing goods and delivering services. For instance, pharmaceutical companies manufacture medicines for treating diseases. The government sets procedures for approvals of medicines and conducts sample testing to check if the produced drug meets standards of quality. These regulations ensure the quality and safety of the drugs so that there is no risk to the consumers health. Mitigating the external effects of markets Markets sometimes have significant effects beyond the selling and buying. For example, the markets for certain goods require production in factories that could pollute the environment. The government plays a crucial role in understanding and controlling such effects of markets. For example, what happens when the manufacturing of certain items, like single-use plastics, pollutes the environment and poses health risks to consumers? In such cases, the government intervenes by implementing strict regulations to mitigate these negative effects. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 12.indd 266 4/8/2025 11:22:01 AM Similarly, the government puts in place systems to monitor the weights and measures of the packaged products to check the net quantity contained in the package. Y THINK ABOUT IT The practice of rulers protecting consumers is not a phenomenon of modern India. Kautilya s Arthashastra includes instructions for the traders trading in clarified butter (ghee). It