Understanding Markets Prosperity emanates from the market that develops when people need goods and services that they can t create themselves. Adam Smith, 18th century economist In the picture on the following page you will see people buying and selling goods vegetables, fruits, clothes, groceries, mobile phones, refrigerators, and so on. These goods result from various types of economic activities primary, secondary, and tertiary that you studied in Grade 6. But how do these goods reach us? A fb > | Wasa ea FRE rN. aoe)! It, << SS > i mn a i a : nie ag) i , x \ Needs: In economics, a need is something that a person requires to survive, such as food, water, clothing, and shelter Wants: In economics, a want is something that a person desires but is not essential for survival. What is a Market? A place where people buy and sell goods is called a market. It is also known as bazaar, haat (in Hindi), and marukatt (in Kannada). What is it called in your region? This can be at a physical place or, as is becoming popular today, online. Goods and services become available to individuals, households, and businesses through markets. For a long time, people have relied on markets to fulfil their needs and wants for goods and services. In addition, markets connect people, traditions, and ideas. Let s see an example of a market from 16th century India. The Glorious Hampi Bazaar, Karnataka ~~ _ a BS 3) TS _ 1u] ToT Cc [e) > 3) a To Sc & ToT i= s nf ~~ x 1S) fe} n fo] Cc << S a x< lu Trade: buying and selling or exchange of goods and services between people or countries SS Chapter 12.indd 250 Fig. 12.3. Hampi Bazaar today The Hampi Bazaar in Karnataka was one of the prosperous markets in the Vijayanagara Empire which was the centre of flourishing trade. The bazaar was located opposite the Virupaksha temple. The sheer abundance and prosperity of the city have been described in many foreign accounts. The famous Portuguese traveller, Domingos Paes, called Hampi the best-provided city in the world due to the wide variety of products traded in the market grains, seeds, milk, oil, silk, animals like cows, rabbits, horses, and even birds like quails and partridges. Another Portuguese traveller, Fernao Nuniz, wrote about the bazaar, There were craftsmen, also, working in their streets, so that you 4/8/2025 11:21:29 AM ] saw made there, golden jewels and gewgaws, and you will find all kinds of rubies and diamonds and pearls, with every other kind of precious stone for sale... sellers of cloths... they being of cotton... grass and straw in infinite abundance. I do not know who could describe it to be believed, so barren a country is this... it is a mystery how there should be an abundance of everything therein. LET'S EXPLORE > Can you imagine what this bazaar must have looked like during its peak? >