2. | 4. | Europe: Electrical AQ equipment West Asia: Crude petroleum, fertilizers South East Asia: Fig. 12.10 Vegetable oils DON'T MISS OUT India was the world s largest importer of vegetable oils like palm oil, sunflower oil, and soybean oil in 2024. Most of the palm oil is imported from Malaysia, Indonesia, and Thailand. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Se Chapter 12.indd 256 4/8/2025 11:21:45 AM Wholesale and Retail Markets Several participants play their role in the smooth functioning of the markets. : Retailer : : Retailer : Retailer Wholesaler - 4 Retailer Wholesaler ee | - 4 Retailer Wholesaler - 4 : Retailer : : Retailer : Retailer Fig. 12.11 LET'S EXPLORE Observe the diagram and describe the flow of goods from the manufacturer / producer to the consumer. What is the role of the wholesaler and the retailer in the flow? ak Fe) In the case of physical markets, y wholesalers buy goods in large | quantities from the producer or manufacturer of the product. For example, grains, vegetables, and fruits are bought by wholesalers directly from the farms. The produce is then stored in large warehouses called godowns. In the case of perishables, the warehouses 12 - Understanding Markets Economic Life Around Us Fig. 12.12. Cold storage facility for vegetables Chapter 12.indd 257 4/8/2025 11:21:46 AM Cold storage: Specialized warehouses or designed to maintain specific low temperatures Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 to preserve perishable goods. may also have cold storage facilities. They are then brought to markets called mandis. Fig. 12.13. Warehouse Fig. 12.14. Large warehouses storing grains of wholesalers Similarly, there exist wholesale markets for other commodities like chemicals, electronic items and components, construction materials, automotive parts, etc. Fig. 12.15. Khari Baoli spice market, Fig. 12.16. Flower Old Delhi (spices and dry fruits) market, Bengaluru SE Chapter 12.indd 258 | The wholesalers supply goods to the shops and stores located near households. These shopkeepers are called retailers. They sell goods to final consumers like us. Unlike wholesalers, retailers sell in smaller quantities, and the products are meant for consumption rather than resale. Retail stores also exist for services like salons, movie theatres, and restaurants. Retailers 10-Apr-25 11:01:19 AM Chapter 12.indd 259 (an ar hey bha 3 5 iit ae Se Fig. 12.17. Johari Bazaar, Jaipur (gems and jewellery) help increase the availability of goods and services to households. In some cases, it may be difficult for wholesalers to reach a large number of retailers because of distances and terrains. Distributors help to bridge this gap. Do you remember the middlemen for milk in the AMUL story from Grade 6? However, the distribution channel is different in the case of online markets. Here manufacturers send bulk quantities of their products to the warehouse of the business that sells through online apps. Consumers buy the product from the online option (website or mobile application). These businesses are called aggregators. The aggregator then packs the products and