shopping online. Fig. 12.30 Before we move on... > Markets facilitate exchange between buyers and sellers at a mutually agreed price which is determined by the demand from buyers and supply by sellers. > Markets have a chain of participants like manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors and retailers that enables supply of goods to the final consumers. > Markets are also places for interaction as they bring people together and enable exchange of ideas and traditions. > The government plays a regulatory role in the markets to promote quality standards for products and services and fair practices in the market. However, consumers can also assess the quality of products and services through certification marks on the products from government agencies and through online reviews. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 SS Chapter 12.indd 270 4/8/2025 11:22:05 AM Questions and activities 1. What are the main features of a market? Recall a recent visit to a market to purchase a product. What are the different features of a market that you observed during this visit? 2. Remember the epigraph from a famous economist at the beginning of the chapter? Discuss its relevance in the context of the chapter you have read. 3. Inthe example of buying and selling of guavas, imagine that the seller is getting a good price, and is able to make a profit. He will try to get more guavas from farmers to be able to sell them at the same price and increase his earnings. What is the farmer likely to do in this kind of a situation? Do you think he will start thinking about the demand for guavas in the next season? What is likely to be his response? 4. Match the following types of markets with their characteristics: Markets Criteria Physical Goods and services flow outside the market nation s boundaries Online . ae 2 Deals in bulk quantities market Domestic Serves the final consumers with goods and market services A International | Requires physical presence of buyers and market seller P Wholesale Buyers and sellers meet virtually and can market transact at any time Retail . wy . . Lies within the boundaries of a nation market 5. Prices are generally determined by the interaction between demand from buyers and supply by sellers. Can you think of products where prices are high despite lesser number of buyers demanding the product? What could be the reasons for that? 12 - Understanding Markets Economic Life Around Us @) Chapter 12.indd 271 4/8/2025 11:22:05 AM 6. Lookat the real life situation that a retail seller of vegetables encountered: A family came to shop for vegetables. The price of beans that the seller on the cart was offering was ~30/kg. The lady started to bargain with the seller to bring the price down to 25/kg. The seller protested and refused to sell at that price saying he would make a loss at that price. The lady walks away. The family then goes to a super