point is not reached, i.e. the point where the buyer and the seller agree on a price, the transaction may not take place. Let s see some scenarios below to understand this. 1. What happens in case the seller fixes the price very high? Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 @ Fig. 12.5 Chapter 12.indd 252 4/8/2025 11:21:30 AM 2. What happens in case the seller fixes the price very low? Fig. 12.6 3. Over time the price of guavas is fixed at one that is just right, not very high for the buyer, not too low for the seller! Fig. 12.7 Learning from all three scenarios, the seller can assess approximately what quantity of guavas are needed by the buyers and offer that quantity in the market in future. Over time, the amount of goods offered by the sellers and the amount required by the buyers help determine the price of the goods that is just right, high enough for the seller, and low enough for the buyer. 12 - Understanding Markets Economic Life Around Us Chapter 12.indd 253 4/8/2025 11:21:31 AM Y THINK ABOUT IT Vegetables are sold cheaper late at night at the weekly market compared to during the day. Why do you think this is so? Garment stores offer heavy discounts on woollen clothing at the end of the winter season. Why does this happen? Markets Around Us Markets are present everywhere and in various forms. Physical and online markets A physical market is where buyers can meet the seller physically, and purchase goods or services in exchange for money. This is the most common type of market. It includes weekly markets and reduction. haats where vendors sell vegetables, other essential items, and Materials or handicraft items lined up on a cart. Local markets with shops ; . ourees ane : and buzzing with vendors selling street food, knick-knacks, and production so on are also physical markets. There are also multi-storey of goods and buildings, i.e., malls in cities and towns spanning large areas services. with stores inside. Manufacturer: . : A person or Today buyers and sellers need not necessarily meet in person company that to engage in a transaction. They can transact from a convenient makes goods for sale location even thousands of kilometres away from each other. They can use shopping applications (apps) or websites on a phone or a computer. These apps or websites are created by businesses that make available a wide variety of goods and services. We will read about how this works in a section below. One can buy goods ranging from books, clothes, furniture, and grocery items to electronic items like TVs, mobile phones, and laptops, and get them delivered to their doorstep. Manufacturers can also buy components online to be used as inputs for production of goods. Apart from goods, one can also avail of services like online classes without having to step outside the home. Payments for such services can also Fig.