parent asks you to get a 1 kg packet of gram flour from the nearby grocer. There are different types of packets available at the shop such as the one shown below. Observe it carefully. How would you determine that the quality of gram flour meets the required standards? Net quantity Date of manufacture Batch number Best before date MRP JOIN OUR COMMUNITY ui ie Name & address of the iti Sas Nutrition facts panel eee manufacturer Sete FSSAI mark & license number IR ili i iit Ingredients list Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Allergen declaration Fig. 12.29 Chapter 12.indd 268 10-Apr-25 11:04:43 AM Chapter 12.indd 269 Did you notice the FSSAI logo? FSSAI means Food Safety & Standards Authority of India and its symbol on the food packets and AY AY Al cartons indicates that food has been tested by Z2 = ==" the government and is safe to consume. Government agencies provide such certifications that help buyers to assess product quality. Their presence on the product or its package confirms that the product fulfills the minimum quality standards. Let s see what each of these labels mean: = Just like FSSAI, there is Indian Standards Institution (ISI) Mark issued by the Bureau of India Standards (BIS). This symbol is generally present on electrical appliances, construction materials, automotive tires, paper, etc. This ensures quality and that the product is safe to use. = Similarly, AGMARK (Ag for agriculture) is the certification mark for agricultural products like vegetables, fruits, cereals, pulses, spices, honey, etc. = Electronics items like TVs, laptops, air conditioners, etc. have BEE STAR rating. BEE stands for Bureau of Energy Efficiency. These ratings are printed on the product package as stars. Higher stars indicate that the appliance uses less energy and electricity. This is good for consumers as the electricity bill would be lesser and good for the environment as well. LET'S EXPLORE Check out the BEE Star labels on the electronic devices in your home and make a chart of all the devices in an increasing order of their energy efficiency. On the other hand, purchase decisions of buyers are influenced by the reputation of the product. This is built through word of mouth. Have your family members bought some product because their friends or relatives suggested it to them? 12 - Understanding Markets Economic Life Around Us 10-Apr-25 11:04:52 AM Online reviews and feedback from other consumers about products and services help us decide whether to buy or not while shopping online. Fig. 12.30 Before we move on... > Markets facilitate exchange between buyers and sellers at a mutually agreed price which is determined by the demand from buyers and supply by sellers. > Markets have a chain of participants like manufacturers, wholesalers, distributors and retailers that enables supply of goods to the final consumers. > Markets are also places for interaction as they bring people together and enable exchange of ideas and traditions. > The government plays a regulatory