A Letter to God G.LFuentes Berore You READ They say faith can move mountains. But what should we put our faith in? This is the question this story delicately poses. Lencho is a farmer who writes a letter to God when his crops are ruined, asking for a hundred pesos. Does Lencho s letter reach God? Does God send him the money? Think what your answers to these questions would be, and guess how the story continues, before you begin to read it. Activity 1. Oneofthe cheapest ways to send money to someone is through the post office. Have you ever sent or received money in this way? Here s what you have to do. (As you read the instructions, discuss with your teacher in class the meanings of these words: counter, counter clerk, appropriate, acknowledgement, counterfoil, record. Consult a dictionary if necessary. Are there words corresponding to these English words in your languages?) Inside the post office, go to the counter marked Money Order Buy a Money Order (MO) form by paying 50 paise to the person behind the counter Fill in the appropriate boxes in the form (preferably in BLOCK letters) Pay the counter clerk the amount of money to be sent along with the charges Take back the MO acknowledgement counterfoil for your record Reprint 2025-26 First Flight 2. Fill out the Money Order form given below using the clues that follow the form. DEPARTMENT OF POSTS, INDIA 50 Paise MONEY ORDER Combined Oblong Stamp Assistant Postmaster Round M. O. Stam Signature of Payee f Signature of witness / identifier Oblong Stamp Signature of paying official | ean ay ay ae a =) i ira & (Space for Communication) Reprint 2025-26 Think about who you will send the money to, and how much. You might want to send money for a magazine subscription, or to a relative or a friend. Oryou may fill out the form with yourself as sender and your partner as receiver. Use a part of your pocket money, and submit the form at the nearest post office to see how it s done. See how your partner enjoys getting money by post! Notice that the form has three parts the Money Order form, the part for official use and the Acknowledgement. What would you write in the Space for Communication ? Now complete the following statements. (@) In addition to the sender, the form has to be signed by the (ii) The Acknowledgement section of the form is sent back by the post office to the __________ after the signs it. (iii) The Space for Communication section is used for (iv) The form has six sections. The sender needs to /ill out __CCSECti soON'SS. arn. thee receiver THE house the only one in the entire valley sat on the crest of a low hill. From this height one crest could see the river and the field of ripe corn dotted top of hil with the flowers that always promised a good harvest. The