(with cloth) locusts insects which fly in big swarms (groups) and destroy crops have left more than this. The hail has left nothing. This year we will have no corn. That night was a sorrowful one. All our work, for nothing. There s no one who can help us. We'll all go hungry this year. Oral Comprehension Check 1. What did Lencho hope for? 2. Why did Lencho say the raindrops were like new coins ? 3. How did the rain change? What happened to Lencho s fields? 4. What were Lencho s feelings when the hail stopped? But in the hearts of all who lived in that solitary house in the middle of the valley, there was a single hope: help from God. Don t be so upset, even though this seems like a total loss. Remember, no one dies of hunger. That s what they say: no one dies of hunger. All through the night, Lencho thought only of his one hope: the help of God, whose eyes, as he had been instructed, see everything, even what is deep in one s conscience. Lencho was an ox of a conscience man, working like an animal in the fields, but still 9 inner sense of he knew how to write. The following Sunday, at "9htand wrong daybreak, he began to write a letter which he himself would carry to town and place in the mail. It was nothing less than a letter to God. God, he wrote, if you don t help me, my family and I will go hungry this year. I need a hundred pesos in order to sow my field again and to live peso until the crop comes, because the hailstorm.... currency of several He wrote To God on the envelope, put the letter eatin American inside and, still troubled, went to town. At the post office, he placed a stamp on the letter and dropped it into the mailbox. One of the employees, who was a postman and also helped at the post office, went to his boss laughing heartily and showed him the letter to God. Qigbie Never in his career as a postman had he known friendly and that address. The postmaster a fat, amiable pleasant > = a o = s a a Reprint 2025-26 First Flight los fellow also broke out laughing, but almost immediately he turned serious and, tapping the letter on his desk, commented, What faith! I wish I had the faith of the man who wrote this letter. Starting up a correspondence with God! So, in order not to shake the writer s faith in God, the postmaster came up with an idea: answer the letter. But when he opened it, it was evident that to answer it he needed something more than goodwill, ink and paper. But he stuck to his resolution: he asked for money from his employees, he himself gave part of his salary, and several friends of his were obliged to give something