above). This is our new home. Sarah has just about started going to school. We have admitted her to Little Feet as this is very close to our new home. I m sitting here by the window sill, writing to you. There is a slight drizzle outside and I m reminded of the good times we had together at Bangalore last year. Do write back. Love, Jaya What You Can Do Before You Read: Encourage students to share their ideas about what will happen in the story. Activity: Before filling out the form, get the students to read through the form and decide which parts they should fill out, and which parts will be filled in by the postal department. Ask a few students to volunteer to actually send a money order (the amount need not be large) and share the experience with the rest of the class. Reading: Break the text up into manageable chunks for reading (three paragraphs, for example), and encourage students to read silently, on their own. Give them enough time to read, and then discuss what they have read before going on to the next portion. Use the Oral Comprehension Checks in the appropriate places, and use the Thinking about the Text questions at the end of the passage to help them go beyond the text. Grammar: After they have done the exercise, ask students to make their own sentences with non-defining relative clauses for example, Meena, who's a very clever girl, is always first in class. Or, Our gardener, who knows a lot about plants, loves to talk about them. Speaking: Take the first turn talk to the students about an instance from your own life, or from that of someone you know. Reprint 2025-26 \bby xo > = o cy s ap) a Dust of Snow The way a crow Shook down on me The dust of snow From a hemlock tree Has given my heart A change of mood And saved some part Of a day I had rued. ROBERT FROST 4 Glossary hemlock: A poisonous plant (tree) with small white flowers rued: held in regret Thinking about the Poem This poem presents a moment that seems simple, but has a larger significance. [Compare this other quotation from Robert Frost: Always, always a larger significance... A little thing touches a larger thing. ) 1. 2. What is a dust of snow ? What does the poet say has changed his mood? How has the poet s mood changed? How does Frost present nature in this poem? The following questions may help you to think of an answer. (i) What are the birds that are usually named in poems? Do you think a crow is often mentioned in poems? What images come to your mind when you think of a crow? (ii) Again, what is a hemlock tree ? Why doesn t the poet write about a more beautiful tree such as a maple, or an oak, or a pine? (iii) What do