I trusted him. (whom) Sometimes the relative pronoun in a relative clause remains hidden . For example, look at the first sentence of the story: (a) The house the only one in the entire valley sat on the crest of a low hill. We can rewrite this sentence as: (b) The house which was the only one in the entire valley sat on the crest of a low hill. In (a), the relative pronoun which and the verb was are not present. . Using Negatives for Emphasis We know that sentences with words such as no, not or nothing show the absence of something, or contradict something. For example: (a) This year we will have no corn. (Corn will be absent) (b) The hail has left nothing. (Absence of a crop) (c) These aren t raindrops falling from the sky, they are new coins. (Contradicts the common idea of what the drops of water falling from the sky are) But sometims negative words are used just to emphasise an idea. Look at these sentences from the story: (d) Lencho...had done nothing else but see the sky towards the northeast. (He had done only this) (e) The man went out for no other reason than to have the pleasure of feeling the rain on his body. (He had only this reason) () Lencho showed not the slightest surprise on seeing the money. (He showed no surprise at all) Now look back at example (c). Notice that the contradiction in fact serves to emphasise the value or usefulness of the rain to the farmer. Find sentences in the story with negative words, which express the following ideas emphatically. 1. The trees lost all their leaves. 2. The letter was addressed to God himself. 3. The postman saw this address for the first time in his career. Reprint 2025-26 V. Metaphors The word metaphor comes from a Greek word meaning transfer . Metaphors compare two things or ideas: a quality or feature of one thing is transferred to another thing. Some common metaphors are e the leg of the table: The leg supports our body. So the object that supports a table is described as a leg. the heart of the city: The heart is an important organ in the centre of our body. So this word is used to describe the central area of a city. In pairs, find metaphors from the story to complete the table below. Try to say what qualities are being compared. One has been done for you. Object Metaphor Quality or Feature Compared Cloud Huge mountains The mass or hugeness of clouds of mountains An epidemic (a disease) that spreads very rapidly and leaves many people dead | af OS | > = a o = s ap) a a : Speaking " Have you ever been in great difficulty, and felt that only a miracle could help you? How was your problem solved? Speak about this in class with your teacher. Reprint 2025-26 First Flight ~