Object Metaphor Quality or Feature Compared Cloud Huge mountains The mass or hugeness of clouds of mountains An epidemic (a disease) that spreads very rapidly and leaves many people dead | af OS | > = a o = s ap) a a : Speaking " Have you ever been in great difficulty, and felt that only a miracle could help you? How was your problem solved? Speak about this in class with your teacher. Reprint 2025-26 First Flight ~ 1) Listening 4 Listen to the letter (given under In This Lesson ) read out by your teacher/on the audio tape. As you listen fill in the table given below. The writer apologises (Says sorry) because The writer has sent this to the reader The writer sent it in the month of The reason for not writing earlier Sarah goes to Who is writing to whom? Where and when were they last together? Lencho suffered first due to drought and then by floods. Our country is also facing such situations in the recent years. There is flood and there is drought. There is a need to save water through water harvesting. Design a poster for your area on how to save water during summer and when it is available in excess. In This Lesson What WE Have Done Introduced students to the story that they are going to read. Related a thought-provoking story about the nature of belief. Helped students, through an interesting activity, to understand something that happens in the story how to send money using a money order. Guided them through the reading activity by providing periodic comprehension checks as they read, and checked for holistic understanding at the end of the reading activity. Provided interesting exercises to strengthen students grasp of the specific vocabulary found in the story, and also introduced them to related vocabulary. Reprint 2025-26 Explained specific areas of grammar non-defining relative clauses and the use of negatives for emphasis providing illustrations from the text, and exercises for practice. Explained what metaphors are, and helped students identify metaphors in the text by providing clues. Provided a context for authentic speaking. Provided an interesting listening activity. Given below is the passage for listening activity Bhatt House 256, Circuit Road Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh, India 25 January 2006 Dear Arti, How are you? I m sorry | haven't written for a very long time. | think | last sent you a birthday card in the month of September 2005. We have just moved house (see our new address above). This is our new home. Sarah has just about started going to school. We have admitted her to Little Feet as this is very close to our new home. I m sitting here by the window sill, writing to you. There is a slight drizzle outside and I m reminded of the good times we had together at Bangalore last year. Do write back. Love, Jaya What You Can Do Before You Read: Encourage students to share their ideas