office to the __________ after the signs it. (iii) The Space for Communication section is used for (iv) The form has six sections. The sender needs to /ill out __CCSECti soON'SS. arn. thee receiver THE house the only one in the entire valley sat on the crest of a low hill. From this height one crest could see the river and the field of ripe corn dotted top of hil with the flowers that always promised a good harvest. The only thing the earth needed was a downpour or at least a shower. Throughout the morning Lencho who knew his fields intimately had done nothing else but see the sky towards the north-east. Now we're really going to get some water, woman. The woman who was preparing supper, replied, Yes, God willing . The older boys were working in the field, while the smaller ones were playing near the house until the woman called to them all, Come for dinner . It was during the meal that, just as > = a a Let cy ap) a Reprint 2025-26 First Flight =~ Lencho had predicted, big drops of rain began to fall. In the north-east huge mountains of clouds could be seen approaching. The air was fresh and sweet. The man went out for no other reason than to have the pleasure of feeling the rain on his body, and when he returned he exclaimed, These aren t raindrops falling from the sky, they are new coins. The big drops are ten cent pieces and the little ones are fives. With a satisfied expression he regarded the field of ripe corn with its flowers, draped in a curtain of draped rain. But suddenly a strong wind began to blow and along with the rain very large hailstones began to fall. These truly did resemble new silver coins. The boys, exposing themselves to the rain, ran out to collect the frozen pearls. It s really getting bad now, exclaimed the man. I hope it passes quickly. It did not pass quickly. For an hour the hail rained on the house, the garden, the hillside, the cornfield, on the whole valley. The field was white, as if covered with salt. Not a leaf remained on the trees. The corn was totally destroyed. The flowers were gone from the plants. Lencho s soul was filled with sadness. When the storm had passed, he stood in the middle of the field and said to his sons, A plague of locusts would Reprint 2025-26 covered (with cloth) locusts insects which fly in big swarms (groups) and destroy crops have left more than this. The hail has left nothing. This year we will have no corn. That night was a sorrowful one. All our work, for nothing. There s no one who can help us. We'll all go hungry this year. Oral Comprehension Check 1. What did Lencho hope for? 2. Why did Lencho say the raindrops were like new coins ? 3. How did the