letter. Starting up a correspondence with God! So, in order not to shake the writer s faith in God, the postmaster came up with an idea: answer the letter. But when he opened it, it was evident that to answer it he needed something more than goodwill, ink and paper. But he stuck to his resolution: he asked for money from his employees, he himself gave part of his salary, and several friends of his were obliged to give something for an act of charity . It was impossible for him to gather together the hundred pesos, so he was able to send the farmer only a little more than half. He put the money in an envelope addressed to Lencho and with it a letter containing only a single word as a signature: God. Oral Comprehension Check 1. Who or what did Lencho have faith in? What did he do? 2. Whoread the letter? 3. What did the postmaster do then? The following Sunday Lencho came a bit earlier than usual to ask if there was a letter for him. It was the postman himself who handed the letter to him while the postmaster, experiencing the contentment of a man who has_ performed a good deed, looked on from his office. Lencho showed not the slightest surprise on seeing the money; such was his confidence but he became angry when he counted the money. God could not have made a mistake, nor could he have denied Lencho what he had requested. Immediately, Lencho went up to the window to ask for paper and ink. On the public writing-table, he started to write, with much wrinkling of his brow, caused by the effort he had to make to express his ideas. When he finished, he went to the window to buy a stamp which he licked and then affixed to Reprint 2025-26 contentment satisfaction i the envelope with a blow of his fist. The moment the letter fell into the mailbox the postmaster went to open it. It said: God: Of the money that I asked for, only seventy pesos reached me. Send me the rest, since I need it very much. But don t send it to me through the mail because the post office employees are a bunch of crooks. Lencho. Oral Comprehension Check 1. Was Lencho surprised to find a letter for him with money in it? 2. What made him angry? Thinking about the Text 1. Who does Lencho have complete faith in? Which sentences in the story tell you this? 2. Why does the postmaster send money to Lencho? Why does he sign the letter God ? 3. Did Lencho try to find out who had sent the money to him? Why/Why not? 4. Who does Lencho think has taken the rest of the money? What is the irony in the situation? (Remember that the irony of a situation is an unexpected aspect of it. An ironic situation is strange or amusing because it is