subjects you want to study in college? I hope so. I hope you don t mind my saying this, but I don t like the way you are arguing. This discovery will give new hope to HIV/AIDS sufferers. We were hoping against hope that the judges would not notice our mistakes. I called early in the hope of speaking to her before she went to school. Match the sentences in Column A with the meanings of hope in Column B. B a feeling that something good will probably happen thinking that this would happen (It may or may not have happened.) stopped believing that this good thing would happen wanting something to happen (and thinking it quite possible) showing concern that what you say should not offend or disturb the other person: a way of being polite wishing for something to happen, \bby xo although this is very unlikely Just when everybody had given up hope, the fishermen came back, seven days after the cyclone. Ill. Relative Clauses Look at these sentences (a) All morning Lencho who knew his fields intimately looked at the sky. (b) The woman, who was preparing supper, replied, Yes, God willing. The italicised parts of the sentences give us more information about Lencho and the woman. We call them relative clauses. Notice that they begin with a relative pronoun who. Other common relative pronouns are whom, whose, and which. The relative clauses in (a) and (b) above are called non-defining, because we already know the identity of the person they describe. Lencho is a particular person, and there is a particular woman he speaks to. We don t need the information in the relative clause to pick these people out from a larger set. A non-defining relative clause usually has a comma in front of it and a comma after it (some writers use a dash ( ) instead, as in the story). If the relative clause comes at the end, we just put a full stop. > = a o = s a a Join the sentences given below using who, whom, whose, which, as suggested. 1. I often go to Mumbai. Mumbai is the commercial capital of India. (which) 2. My mother is going to host a TV show on cooking. She cooks very well. (who) Reprint 2025-26 First Flight ~ 3. These sportspersons are going to meet the President. Their performance has been excellent. (whose) 4. Lencho prayed to God. His eyes see into our minds. (whose) 5. This man cheated me. I trusted him. (whom) Sometimes the relative pronoun in a relative clause remains hidden . For example, look at the first sentence of the story: (a) The house the only one in the entire valley sat on the crest of a low hill. We can rewrite this sentence as: (b) The house which was the only one in the entire valley sat on the crest of a low hill. In (a), the relative pronoun which and the verb was are