the story tell you this? 2. Why does the postmaster send money to Lencho? Why does he sign the letter God ? 3. Did Lencho try to find out who had sent the money to him? Why/Why not? 4. Who does Lencho think has taken the rest of the money? What is the irony in the situation? (Remember that the irony of a situation is an unexpected aspect of it. An ironic situation is strange or amusing because it is the opposite of what is expected.) Reprint 2025-26 > = im a = o a i) et Are there people like Lencho in the real world? What kind of a person would you say he is? You may select appropriate words from the box to answer the question. greedy naive stupid ungrateful selfish comical unquestioning There are two kinds of conflict in the story: between humans and nature, and between humans themselves. How are these conflicts illustrated? Thinking about I. First Flight oO Look at the following sentence from the story. Suddenly a strong wind began to blow and along with the rain very large hailstones began to fall. Hailstones are small balls of ice that fall like rain. A storm in which hailstones fall is a hailstorm . You know that a storm is bad weather with strong winds, rain, thunder and lightning. There are different names in different parts of the world for storms, depending on their nature. Can you match the names in the box with their descriptions below, and fill in the blanks? You may use a dictionary to help you. gale, whirlwind, cyclone, hurricane, tornado, typhoon 1. A violent tropical storm in which strong winds move in a circle: c An extremely strong wind: _a__ __ A violent tropical storm with very strong winds : p A violent storm whose centre is a cloud in the shape of a funnel: n 5. A violent storm with very strong winds, especially in the western Atlantic Ocean: r 6. A very strong wind that moves very fast in a spinning movement and causes a lot of damage: 1 . Notice how the word hope is used in these sentences from the story: (a) I hope it (the hailstorm) passes quickly. (b) There was a single hope: help from God. In the first example, hope is a verb which means you wish for something to happen. In the second example it is a noun meaning a chance for something to happen. Reprint 2025-26 A Will you get the subjects you want to study in college? I hope so. I hope you don t mind my saying this, but I don t like the way you are arguing. This discovery will give new hope to HIV/AIDS sufferers. We were hoping against hope that the judges would not notice our mistakes. I called early in the hope of speaking to her before she went to school. Match the sentences in Column A with the meanings of hope in Column B.