. Write the six elements (i.e., the 3 sides and the 3 angles) of AABC.
2. Write the:

(ui) Angle opposite to the side LM of ALMN
(ii) Vertex opposite to the side RT of ARST
. Lookat Fig 6.2 and classify each of the triangles according to its

Chapter 6

0756CHO6

A triangle, you have seen, is a simple closed curve made of three line A
segments. It has three vertices, three sides and three angles.

Here is AABC (Fig 6.1). It has

Sides: AB, BC, CA

Angles: ZBAC, ZABC, ZBCA

Vertices: A,B,C

The side opposite to the vertex Ais BC. Can you name the angle opposite to the side AB?

Fig 6.1

You know how to classify triangles based on the (1) sides (ii) angles.
(i) Based on Sides: Scalene, Isosceles and Equilateral triangles.
(ii) Based on Angles: Acute-angled, Obtuse-angled and Right-angled triangles.

Make paper-cut models of the above triangular shapes. Compare your models with
those of your friends and discuss about them.

(i) Side opposite to the vertex Q of APQR

(a) Sides
(b) Angles

2024-25

THE TRIANGLE AND ITS PROPERTIES ii iii ii

P
ry
O
y | Zi
Q 6om 7com
(ii) (111)
Se \
B 3cm Q 6cm
(v) (vi)
Fig 6.2
Now, let us try to explore something more about triangles.
6.2 MEDIANS oF A TRIANGLE
Given a line segment, you know how to find its perpendicular bisector by paper folding.
Cut out a triangle ABC from a piece of paper (Fig 6.3). Consider any one of its sides, say,
BC. By paper-folding, locate the perpendicular bisector of BC . The folded crease meets
BC at D, its mid-point. Join AD .
a
| A A
l
B C
'D B D C
l
v Fig 6.3
The line segment AD, joining the mid-point of BC toits opposite vertex A is called a
median of the triangle.
Consider the sides AB and CA and find two more medians of the triangle.
A median connects a vertex of a triangle to the mid-point of the opposite side.
Tuink, Discuss AND WRITE 
fr

1. How many medians can a triangle have? iS

oe
2. Does a median lie wholly in the interior of the triangle? (If you think that this is not AW)
true, draw a figure to show such a case).

2024-25

EE a i emarics

6.3 ALTITUDES OF A TRIANGLE

Make a triangular shaped cardboard ABC. Place it
upright on a table. How tall is the triangle? The height
is the distance from vertex A (in the Fig 6.4) to the

base BC .

From A to BC, you can think of many line
segments (see the next Fig 6.5). Which among them
will represent its height? A

The height is given by the line segment that starts from A,

comes straight down to BC, andis perpendicular to BC.

This line segment AL is an altitude of the triangle. B C
An altitude has one end point at a vertex of the triangle Fig 6.5

and the other on the line containing the opposite side. Through

each vertex, an altitude can be drawn.

Tuink, Discuss AND WRITE

1. How many altitudes can a triangle have?

2. Draw rough sketches of altitudes from A to BC for the following triangles (Fig 6.6):

| A
ON = | B C

Acute-angled Right-angled Obtuse-angled
(i) (ii) (iit)
Fig 6.6

3. Willan altitude always lie in the interior of a triangle? If you think that this need not be
true, draw a rough sketch to show such a case.
4. Can you think of a triangle in which two altitudes of the triangle are two of its sides?
5. Can the altitude and median be same for a triangle?
(Hint: For Q.No. 4 and 5, investigate by drawing the altitudes for every type of triangle).

Take several cut-outs of
(i) anequilateral triangle (ii) anisosceles triangle and
(ii) ascalene triangle.

Find their altitudes and medians. Do you find anything special about them? Discuss it
with your friends.

2024-25

1.

3.

THE TRIANGLE AND ITS PROPERTIES i iit

EXERCISE 6.1

In A PQR, Dis the mid-point of QR .

 Pp
PM is .
PD is .
Is QM = MR?
Qi D R

Draw rough sketches for the following:

(a) InAABC, BE is a median.

(b) In APQR, PQ and PR are altitudes of the triangle.

(c) In AXYZ, YLis an altitude in the exterior of the triangle.

Verify by drawing a diagram if the median and altitude of an isosceles triangle can be
same.

6.4 EXTERIOR ANGLE OF A TRIANGLE AND ITS. PROPERTY

Draw a triangle ABC and produce one of its sides, x

say BC as shown in Fig 6.7. Observe the angle ACD

formed at the point C. This angle lies in the exterior

of AABC. We call it an exterior angle of the AABC

formed at vertex C. B C D

Clearly ZBCA is an adjacent angle to ZACD. The Fig 6.7
remaining two angles of the triangle namely ZA and

ZB are called the two interior opposite angles or the two remote interior angles
of ZACD. Now cut out (or make trace copies of) ZA and ZB and place them
adjacent to each other as shown in Fig 6.8.

Do these two pieces together entirely cover ZACD?
Can you say that

m ZACD=m ZA +m ZB?

As done earlier, draw a triangle ABC and form an
exterior angle ACD. Now take a protractor and
measure ZACD, ZA and ZB.

Find the sum ZA + ZB and compare it with the
measure of ZACD. Do you observe that ZACD is A
equal (or nearly equal, if there is an error in B
measurement) to ZA + 7B?

2024-25

EE a emarics

You may repeat the two activities as mentioned by drawing some more triangles along
with their exterior angles. Every time, you will find that the exterior angle of a triangle is
equal to the sum of its two interior opposite angles.

A logical step-by-step argument can further confirm this fact.
An exterior angle of a triangle is equal to the sum of its interior opposite

angles.
: . A E
Given: Consider AABC.
ZACD is an exterior angle.
To Show: mZACD = mZA+mZB Af y
Through C draw CE, parallelto BA. B C D
Fig 6.9
Justification
Steps Reasons
(a) Z1= 2x BA||CE and AC isa transversal.
Therefore, alternate angles should be equal.
(b) 22= Zy BA||CE and BD isa transversal.

Therefore, corresponding angles should be equal.
(c) Z1+22=24+4+Zy
(d) Now, 2x + Zy=m ZACD From Fig 6.9
Hence, 71 + 22 = ZACD

The above relation between an exterior angle and its two interior opposite angles is
referred to as the Exterior Angle Property of a triangle.

Tuink, Discuss AND WRITE

1. Exterior angles can be formed for a triangle in many ways. Three of them are shown
here (Fig 6.10)

Fig 6.10

There are three more ways of getting exterior angles. Try to produce those rough
sketches.
2. Are the exterior angles formed at each vertex of a triangle equal?
3. What can you say about the sum of an exterior angle of a triangle and its adjacent
interior angle?
2024-25

THE TRIANGLE AND ITS PROPERTIES iI TT

EXAMPLE 1 Find angle xin Fig 6.11. .
SOLUTION Sum of interior opposite angles = Exterior angle

or 50 +x = 110 110 .
or x = 60 Fig 6.11

Tuink, Discuss AND WRITE

1. Whatcan you say about each of the interior opposite angles, when the exterior angle is
(i) aright angle? (ii) an obtuse angle? (ii) anacute angle?

2. Can the exterior angle of a triangle be a straight angle?

Try THESE

1. Anexterior angle of a triangle is of measure 70 and one of its interior opposite
angles is of measure 25 . Find the measure of the other interior opposite
angle.

2. The two interior opposite angles of an exterior angle of a triangle are 60 and
80 . Find the measure of the exterior angle.

3. Is something wrong in this diagram (Fig 6.12)? Comment.

EXERCISE 6.2

1. Find the value of the unknown exterior angle x in the following diagrams:

2024-25

EE a i emarics

2. Find the value of the unknown interior angle x in the following figures:

?

(iii)

AW
(vi) 7
6.5 ANGLE SuM PROPERTY OF A TRIANGLE

There is aremarkable property connecting the three angles of a triangle. You are going to
see this through the following four activities.

1. Draw atriangle. Cut on the three angles. Rearrange them as shown in Fig 6.13 (1), (ii).
The three angles now constitute one angle. This angle is a straight angle and so has
measure 180 .

@

(ii) Fig 6.13
Thus, the sum of the measures of the three angles of a triangle is 180 .

2. The same fact you can observe in a different way also. Take three copies of any
triangle, say AABC (Fig 6.14).

Fig 6.14

2024-25

THE TRIANGLE AND ITS PROPERTIES Iii

Arrange them as in Fig 6.15.
What do you observe about 71 + 22 + 23?
(Do you also see the exterior angle

ty ?
property"?) Fig 6.15

3. Take apiece of paper and cut out a triangle, say, AABC (Fig 6.16).
Make the altitude AM by folding AABC such that it passes through A.
Fold now the three corners such that all the three vertices A, B and C touch at M.

Fig 6.16

You find that all the three angles form together a straight angle. This again shows that
the sum of the measures of the three angles of a triangle is 180 .

4. Draw any three triangles, say AABC, APQR and AX YZ in your notebook.
Use your protractor and measure each of the angles of these triangles.
Tabulate your results

Name of A Measures of Angles Sum of the Measures
of the three Angles

AABC mZA = mZB= mZC= mZA+m/B+m/C=

APQR mZP= mZQ= m/ZR= mZP+m4Q+mZR=
AXYZ mZX= m/ZY= m/ZZ= mZX+mZY+mZZ=

Allowing marginal errors in measurement, you will find that the last column always
gives 180 (or nearly 180 ).

When perfect precision is possible, this will also show that the sum of the measures of
the three angles of a triangle is 180 .

You are now ready to give a formal justification of your assertion through logical
argument.

Statement The total measure of s
the three angles of a
triangle is 180 . 4
To justify this let us use the exterior B
angle property of a triangle. . C D
Fig 6.17

2024-25

EE Ss i eMatics

Given Z1, 22, Z3 are angles of AABC (Fig 6.17).

Z4 is the exterior angle when BC is extended to D.
Justification 21+ 22 = 4 (by exterior angle property)

Z14+ 22+ 23= 24+ 23 (adding Z3 to both the sides)
But 24 and 23 form a linear pair so it is 180 . Therefore, 71 + 72 + 23 = 180 .
Let us see how we can use this property in a number of ways.

EXAMPLE 2 In the given figure (Fig 6.18) find mZP. P

SoLution By angle sum property of a triangle,
mZP + 47 + 52 = 180 
Therefore mZP = 180 47 -52 QQ) AR
~ 180 99 = 81 Fig 6.18

EXERCISE 6.3

1. Find the value of the unknown x in the following diagrams:

| A X
>
350 607, RP a)
(i

Q

)
CJ
(iv) <q (v)
2. Find the values of the unknowns x and y in the following diagrams:
LS
ke

(ii)

2024-25

THE TRIANGLE AND ITS PROPERTIES

90 x

(v) (wi)

Try THESE

1. Two angles of a triangle are 30 and 80 . Find the third angle.
2. One of the angles of a triangle is 80 and the other two angles are equal. Find the

measure of each of the equal angles. S
3. The three angles of a triangle are in the ratio 1:2:1. Find all the angles of the triangle. Ww
) 

Classify the triangle in two different ways.

Tuink, Discuss AND WRITE

1. Can you have a triangle with two right angles? daily
2. Can you have a triangle with two obtuse angles? ay d
3. Can you have a triangle with two acute angles? XY =
4. Can you have a triangle with all the three angles greater than 60 ? Ww
5. Can you have a triangle with all the three angles equal to 60 ? =

6. Can you have a triangle with all the three angles less than 60 ?

6.6 Two SPECIAL TRIANGLES } EQUILATERAL AND ISOSCELES

A triangle in which all the three sides are of equal lengths is called an equilateral
triangle.

Take two copies of an equilateral triangle ABC (Fig 6.19). Keep one of them fixed.
Place the second triangle on it. It fits exactly into the first. Turn it round in any way and still
they fit with one another exactly. Are you able to see that

when the three sides of a triangle have equal lengths then A A
the three angles are also of the same size? L\
We conclude that in an equilateral triangle:
(i) all sides have same length.
: Ao 60 
(i) each angle has measure 60 . B C B F
(i) (ii)

Fig 6.19
2024-25

EE a i emarics

A triangle in which two sides are of equal lengths is called an isosceles triangle.
l

xX IY
: , Uo ,
(i) Gi.
Fig 6.20 i

From a piece of paper cut out an isosceles triangle XYZ, with XY=XZ (Fig 6.20).
Fold it such that Z lies on Y. The line XM through X is now the axis of symmetry (which
you will read in Chapter 14). You find that ZY and Z fit on each other exactly. XY and
XZ are called equal sides; YZ is called the base; ZY and ZZ are called base angles and
these are also equal.

Thus, in an isosceles triangle:
(i) two sides have same length.

(ii) base angles opposite to the equal sides are equal.

Try THESE

1. Find angle xin each figure:

= a
(i)

(ii)

(iv) (v) D (vi)
120 
(vii) (viii) (ix)

2024-25

THE TRIANGLE AND ITS PROPERTIES EL ITT

2. Find angles x and y in each figure. y
120 y
(i)

(ii) (iii)

6.7 Sum OF THE LENGTHS oF Two SDES OF A TRIANGLE

1.

Mark three non-collinear spots A, B and C in your playground. Using lime powder
mark the paths AB, BC and AC.

Ask your friend to start from A and reach C, walking along one or more a

of these paths. She can, for example, walk first along 4B and then a \
along BC to reach C; or she can walk straight along AC. She will , Yo \
naturally prefer the direct path AC. If she takes the other path (AB and Be ------------% C

then BC ), she will have to walk more. In other words,
AB +BC>AC @

Similarly, if one were to start from B and go to A, he or she will not take the route

BC and CA but will prefer BA This is because

BC+CA> AB (it)
By asimilar argument, you find that
CA+AB > BC (iti)

These observations suggest that the sum of the lengths of any two sides of a
triangle is greater than the third side.
Collect fifteen small sticks (or strips) of different lengths, say, 6 cm, 7 cm, 8 cm,
9cm,..., 20cm.
Take any three of these sticks and try to form a triangle. Repeat this by choosing
different combinations of three sticks.
Suppose you first choose two sticks of length 6 cm and 12 cm. Your third stick has to
be of length more than 12 6=6 cm and less than 12 +6= 18 cm. Try this and find
out why it is so.
To form a triangle you will need any three sticks such that the sum of the lengths of
any two of them will always be greater than the length of the third stick.
This also suggests that the sum of the lengths of any two sides of a triangle is greater
than the third side.

2024-25

EE emarics

3. Draw any three triangles, say AABC, APQR and AXYZ in your notebook
(Fig 6.22).

A \ Z
aN > Q x a Y
@ i (ait)

Fig 6.22

Use your ruler to find the lengths of their sides and then tabulate your results as follows:

renee of Sides Is this True? SC

AB-BC<CA (Yes/No)
i ae |
BC CA < AB (Yes/No)
+ >
CA- AB<BC (Yes/No)

+ >

PQ QR<RP (Yes/No)
+ >

QR- RP<PQ (Yes/No)
+ >

RP PQ<QR (Yes/No)
+ >

XY-YZ<ZX (Yes/No)
+ >

YZ-ZX<XY (Yes/No)
+ >

ZX -XY<YZ (Yes/No)
+ >

This also strengthens our earlier guess. Therefore, we conclude that sum of the lengths
of any two sides of a triangle is greater than the length of the third side.

We also find that the difference between the length of any two sides of a triangle is
smaller than the length of the third side.

2024-25

THE TRIANGLE AND ITS PROPERTIES ER iii iit

EXAMPLE 3Js there a triangle whose sides have lengths 10.2 cm, 5.8 cm and 4.5 cm?

SOLUTION Suppose such atriangle is possible. Then the sum of the lengths of any two
sides would be greater than the length of the third side. Let us check this.

Is 4.5 + 5.8 >10.2? Yes
Is 5.8 + 10.2 > 4.5? Yes
Is 10.2 + 4.5 > 5.8? Yes

Therefore, the triangle is possible.

EXAMPLE 4 The lengths of two sides of a triangle are 6 cm and 8 cm. Between which
two numbers can length of the third side fall?

SOLUTION We know that the sum of two sides of a triangle is always greater than
the third.

Therefore, third side has to be less than the sum of the two sides. The third side is thus,
less than 8+ 6= 14cm.

The side cannot be less than the difference of the two sides. Thus, the third side has to
be more than 8 6=2 cm.

The length of the third side could be any length greater than 2 and less than 14 cm.

EXERCISE 6.4

1. Isit possible to have a triangle with the following sides?
a) 2cm,3cm,5cm (i) 3cm,6cm,7cm

(i) 6cm,3cm,2cm R

2. Take any point O in the interior of a triangle PQR. Is
1) OP+OQ> PQ?
(i) Q>PQ P J oom 0

(i) OQ + OR> QR?

A
(ii) OR+OP>RP?
3. AMisamedian of a triangle ABC.
Is AB + BC + CA>2 AM?
B M C
(Consider the sides of triangles
AABM and AAMC.) D Cc

4. ABCD isa quadrilateral. _
Is AB+ BC +CD+DA>AC+BD? i
5. ABCD is quadrilateral. Is

AB +BC+CD+DA <2 (AC + BD)?
2024-25

MATHEMATICS

6. The lengths of two sides of a triangle are 12 cm and 15 cm. Between what two
measures should the length of the third side fall?

TuHink, Discuss AND WRITE

in 1. Isthe sum of any two angles of a triangle always greater than the third angle?

, Pythagoras, a Greek philosopher of sixth century
=== B.C. is said to have founda very important and useful
property of right-angled triangles given in this section.

A
The property is, hence, named after him. In fact, this
property was known to people of many other
countries too. The Indian mathematician Baudhayan
has also given an equivalent form of this property. B C

We now try to explain the Pythagoras property.

|
vy
we 6.8 RIGHT-ANGLED TRIANGLES AND PYTHAGORAS PROPERTY

Fig 6.23
In aright-angled triangle, the sides have some

special names. The side opposite to the right angle
is called the hypotenuse; the other two sides are
known as the legs of the right-angled triangle.

In AABC (Fig 6.23), the right-angle is at B. So,
AC is the hypotenuse. AB and BC are the legs of
AABC. b a
Make eight identical copies of right angled
triangle of any size you prefer. For example, you
make a right-angled triangle whose hypotenuse is a
Cc

units long and the legs are of lengths b units and
c units (Fig 6.24). Fig 6.24
Draw two identical squares on a sheet with sides
of lengths b +c.
You are to place four triangles in one square and the remaining four triangles in the
other square, as shown in the following diagram (Fig 6.25).

c b

c b
Square A Fig 6.25 Square B

2024-25

THE TRIANGLE AND ITS PROPERTIES iii iii iit

The squares are identical; the eight triangles inserted are also identical.
Hence the uncovered area of square A= Uncovered area of square B.
i.e., Area of inner square of square A = The total area of two uncovered squares in square B.

C=h+c

This is Pythagoras property. It may be stated as follows:

In aright-angled triangle,
the square on the hypotenuse = sum of the squares on the legs.

Pythagoras property is a very useful tool in mathematics. It is formally proved as a
theorem in later classes. You should be clear about its meaning.

It says that for any right-angled triangle, the area of the square on the hypotenuse is b
equal to the sum of the areas of the squares on the legs.

Draw aright triangle, preferably on
a square sheet, construct squares on
its sides, compute the area of these
squares and verify the theorem
practically (Fig 6.26).

If you have a right-angled triangle,
the Pythagoras property holds. If the
Pythagoras property holds for some
triangle, will the triangle be rightangled? (Such problems are known as
converse problems). We will try to
answer this. Now, we will show that,
if there is a triangle such that sum of
the squares on two of its sides is equal
to the square of the third side, it must
be a right-angled triangle.

1. Have cut-outs of squares with sides 4 cm,
5 cm, 6 cm long. Arrange to get a triangular
shape by placing the corners of the squares
suitably as shown in the figure (Fig 6.27).

7m iw Trace out the triangle formed. Measure each

angle of the triangle. You find that there is no
right angle at all.

In fact, in this case each angle will be acute! Note
that 4 + 574 6 , 5 + 6? # 4 and 67+ 4 #5 .

2024-25

EE is emarics

2. Repeat the above activity with squares whose sides have lengths 4 cm, 5 cm and
7 cm. You get an obtuse-angled triangle! Note that

V 4+5 47 etc.

This shows that Pythagoras property holds if and only if the triangle is right-angled.
Hence we get this fact:

If the Pythagoras property holds, the triangle must be right-angled.

EXAMPLE 5Determine whether the triangle whose lengths of sides are 3 cm, 4 cm,
5 cmis aright-angled triangle.

SOLUTION 3?=3x3=9;4=4x4=16;5 7=5x5=25
We find 3? + 47 = 5 .
Therefore, the triangle is right-angled.

Note: In any right-angled triangle, the hypotenuse happens to be the longest side. In this
example, the side with length 5 cm is the hypotenuse.

EXAMPLE 6 A ABC is right-angled at C. If a
AC =5 cm and BC = 12 cm find 5 cm ?
the length of AB.
. . C B
SoLuTion Arough figure will help us (Fig 6.28). 12cm
By Pythagoras property, Fig 6.28

AB? = AC? + BC?
= 5? 412? = 25+ 144 = 169 = 13?

or AB = 137. So, AB = 13

or the length of AB is 13 cm.

Note: To identify perfect squares, you may use prime factorisation technique.
Try THESE

Find the unknown length x in the following figures (Fig 6.29):

15 cm
x
x
3 6 8 cm
4 8
(i)

(ii)

2024-25

THE TRIANGLE AND ITS PROPERTIES ii pi i iit

24 37 37
~ 7 12cm 5cm
< _ x
(iv) (v) (vi)
Fig 6.29
EXERCISE 6.5
PQR is a triangle, right-angled at P. IfPQ= 10cm
and PR = 24 cm, find QR.
ABC is a triangle, right-angled at C. If AB =25
cm and AC =7 cm, find BC.
15m 12m

A 15 m long ladder reached a window 12 m high
from the ground on placing it against a wall ata
distance a. Find the distance of the foot of the
ladder from the wall. a
Which of the following can be the sides of a right
triangle?

Gi) 2.5cm,6.5 cm, 6cm.

(ii) 2cm, 2cm, Scm.
(i) 15cm, 2cm, 2.5 cm.

In the case of right-angled triangles, identify the
right angles.

A tree is broken at a height of 5 m from the ground
and its top touches the ground at a distance of
12 m from the base of the tree. Find the original
height of the tree.
Angles Q and R of a APQR are 25 and 65 . P
Write which of the following is true:
(i) PQ? + QR = RP?
(i) PQ? + RP? = QR? o O C\
(iii) RP? + QR? = PQ?

R

7. Find the perimeter of the rectangle whose length is 40 cm and a diagonal is 41 cm.

~

The diagonals of a rhombus measure 16 cm and 30 cm. Find its perimeter.

2024-25

EE | i emarics

1.
2.
3.
4.

Tuink, Discuss AND WRITE

Which is the longest side in the triangle PQR, right-angled at P?
Which is the longest side in the triangle ABC, right-angled at B?
Which is the longest side of a right triangle?

 The diagonal of a rectangle produce by itself the same area as produced by its
length and breadth This is Baudhayan Theorem. Compare it with the Pythagoras

property.

Enrichment activity

There are many proofs for Pythagoras theorem, using dissection and rearrangement 
procedure. Try to collect a few of them and draw charts explaining them.

WHAT HAVE WE DISCUSSED?

1. The six elements of a triangle are its three angles and the three sides.

2. The line segment joining a vertex of a triangle to the mid point of its opposite side is
called a median of the triangle. A triangle has 3 medians.

3. The perpendicular line segment from a vertex of a triangle to its opposite side is
called an altitude of the triangle. A triangle has 3 altitudes.

4. Anexterior angle of a triangle is formed, when a side of a triangle is produced. At
each vertex, you have two ways of forming an exterior angle.

5. A property of exterior angles:

The measure of any exterior angle of a triangle is equal to the sum of the measures of
its interior opposite angles.

6. The angle sum property of a triangle:
The total measure of the three angles of a triangle is 180 .
7. A triangle is said to be equilateral, if each one of its sides has the same length.
In an equilateral triangle, each angle has measure 60 .
8. A triangle is said to be isosceles, if atleast any two of its sides are of same length.

The non-equal side of an isosceles triangle is called its base; the base angles of an
isosceles triangle have equal measure.
9. Property of the lengths of sides of a triangle:

The sum of the lengths of any two sides of a triangle is greater than the length of the
third side.

The difference between the lengths of any two sides is smaller than the length of the
third side.

2024-25

THE TRIANGLE AND ITS PROPERTIES

This property is useful to know if it is possible to draw a triangle when the lengths of
the three sides are known.

10. Inaright angled triangle, the side opposite to the right angle is called the hypotenuse
and the other two sides are called its legs.

11. Pythagoras property:
In aright-angled triangle,
the square on the hypotenuse = the sum of the squares on its legs.

If a triangle is not right-angled, this property does not hold good. This property is
useful to decide whether a given triangle is right-angled or not.

2024-25