high growth of population. With the spread of irrigation and the Green Revolution, many job opportunities were created in the agriculture sector. But the impact was limited to some parts of India. The industries, both in the public and the private sector, did provide some jobs. But these were not enough to absorb all the job seekers. Unable to find jobs with better income in cities, many people started working as rickshaw pullers, vendors, construction workers, domestic servants, etc. With irregular small incomes, these people could not afford wm, reasonable shelter. They started living in slums & on the outskirts of the cities and the problems eam 38 Economics 10 REDUCED 11 SUSTAINABLE CITIES 1 INEQUALITIES ARD COMMUNITIES 16 AND STRONG 1] FOR THE GOALS QUALITY EDUCATION GENDER EQUALITY g CLEAN WATER AND SANITATION Y RESPONSIBLE CONSUMPTION AND PRODUCTION QO SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT ALS aids PEACE, JUSTICE PARTNERSHIPS INSTITUTIONS % 1 @ of poverty, largely a rural phenomenon also became a feature of urban India. Another feature of high poverty rates has been the huge income inequalities. One of the major reasons for this is the unequal distribution of land and other resources. Despite many policies, we have not been able to tackle the issue of poverty. Major policy initiatives like land reforms which aimed at redistribution of assets in rural areas have not been implemented effectively by most of the state governments. Effective implementation of policy could have improved the life of millions of rural poor. Many other socio-cultural and economic factors are also responsible for poverty. In order to fulfil social obligations and observe religious ceremonies, people in India, including the very poor, spend a lot of money and waste their hard earned income. Small farmers need money to buy agricultural inputs like seeds, fertilizer, pesticides, etc. Since poor people hardly have any savings, they borrow or accept loan at higher risk. Unable to repay because of poverty, they become victims of indebtedness. So the high level of indebtedness is both the cause and effect of poverty. Reprint 2025-26 Fd o ZN Let s Discuss Observe some of the poor families around you and try to find the following: e Which social and economic group do they belong to? e Who are the earning members in the family? e What is the condition of the old people in the family? e Are all the children (both boys and girls) attending schools? Anti-Poverty Measures Removal of poverty has been one of the major objectives of Indian developmental strategy. The current anti-poverty strategy of the government is based broadly on two factors (i) promotion of economic growth (ii) targeted antipoverty programmes. Over a period of thirty years of independent India, lasting up to the early eighties, there were little per capita income growth and not much reduction in poverty. Official poverty estimates which were about 45 per cent in the early 1950s remained the same even in the early eighties. Since the eighties, India s economic growth has been one of