times, a variety of other indicators have also been used to recognise whether a person is poor or not. For example, National Multidimensional Poverty Index is calculated on the basis of three broad indicators: health indicators like nutrition, child and adolescent mortality, maternal health. Education indicators like years of schooling and school attendance, and standard of living indicator like cooking fuel, sanitation, drinking water, housing, electricity, assets, bank account. Indicators such as social exclusion and vulnerability are also used to understand poverty (see box). Social Exclusion According to this concept, poverty must be seen in terms of the poor having to live only in a poor surrounding with other poor people, excluded from enjoying social equality of better-off people in better surroundings. Social exclusion can be both a cause as well as a consequence of poverty in the usual sense. Broadly, it is a process through which individuals or groups are excluded from facilities, benefits and opportunities that others (the better-offs ) enjoy. A_ typical example is the working of the caste system in India in which people belonging to certain castes are excluded from equal opportunities. Social exclusion thus may lead to or can cause more damage than having a very low income. Vulnerability Vulnerability to poverty is a measure, which describes the greater probability of certain communities (say, members of a backward caste) or individuals (such as a widow or a _ physically handicapped person) of becoming or remaining poor. Vulnerability is determined by the options available to different communities for finding an alternative living in terms of assets, education, health and job opportunities. Further, it is analysed on the basis of the greater risks these groups face at the time of natural disasters (earthquakes, tsunami). Additional analysis is made of their social and economic ability to handle these risks. In fact, vulnerability describes the greater probability of being more adversely affected than other people when bad time comes for everybody, whether a flood or an earthquake or simply a fall in the availability of jobs! Poverty as a Challenge 31 Reprint 2025-26 - Pe r y cham 32 Poverty Line At the centre of the discussion on poverty is the concept of the poverty line . A common method used to measure poverty is based on the income or consumption levels. The term consumption means the amount spent on various items such as food, clothing, etc., by a family. A person is considered poor if his or her income or consumption level falls below a given minimum level necessary to fulfill the basic needs. What is necessary to satisfy basic needs is different at different times and in different countries. Therefore, poverty line may vary with time and place. Each country uses an imaginary line that is considered appropriate for its existing level of development and its accepted minimum social norms. For example, a person not having a car in the United States may be considered poor. In India, owning a car is still considered a luxury.