both the proportion and the number of poor declined. The proportion of multidimensional poor during 2015-2021 declined from 25 to 15 percent. As per the official record, 13.5 crore people have escaped multidimensional poverty during this period. Specifically deprivation against various indicators have declined more sharply in rural areas than in urban areas. Reprint 2025-26 Table 3.1: Estimates of Poverty in India 1993 - 2019 Year Head Count Ratio (%) Number of poor (in millions) Consumption-based Multidimensional (Indicator) based Source: India in figures, 2018, Government of India Central Statistics office, niti.gov.in/state-statistics (accessed on Nov. 15, 2021); National Multidimensional Poverty Index: A Progress Review 2023, NITI Aayog, Government of India. Twelve Indicators of National Multidimensional Poverty Index NITI Aayog, a Government of India organisation evolved the National Multidimensional Poverty Index (NMPI) using the following 12 indicators. If an individual is found deprived on these indicators, he or she is considered as multidimensional poor. 1. Nutrition: A household is considered deprived if any child between the ages of 0 to 59 months, or woman between the ages of 15 to 49 years, or man between the ages of 15 to 54 years is found to be undernourished. . Child-Adolescent Mortality: A household is deprived if any child or adolescent under 18 years of age has died in the household in the five-year period preceding the survey. Maternal Health: A household is deprived if any woman in the household who has given birth in the 5 years preceding the survey has not received assistance from trained skilled medical personnel during the recent childbirth. . Years of Schooling: A household is deprived if not even one member of the household aged 10 years or older has completed six years of schooling. . School attendance: A household is deprived if any school-aged child is not attending school up to the age at which he/she would complete class. . Cooking Fuel: A household is deprived if a household cooks with dung, agricultural crops, shrubs, wood, charcoal, or coal. . Sanitation: A household is deprived if the household has unimproved or no sanitation facility or it is improved but shared with other households. . Drinking Water: A household is deprived if the household does not have access to improved drinking water or safe drinking water is at least a 30-minute walk from home (as a round trip). . Housing: A household is deprived if the household has inadequate housing: the floor is made of natural materials, or the roof or wall are made of rudimentary materials. . Electricity: A household is deprived if the household has no electricity. . Assets: A household is deprived if the household does not own more than one of these assets: radio, TV, telephone, computer, animal cart, bicycle, motorbike, or refrigerator; and does not own a car or truck. . Bank Account: A household is deprived if no household member has a bank account or a post office account. Poverty as a Challenge Reprint 2025-26 BS 34 ZN ? Let's Discuss Study