belongs to a small village near Meerut in Uttar Pradesh. His family does not own any land. So, they do odd jobs for the big farmers. Work is erratic and so is income. At times they get paid 200 for a hard day s work. But often it is in kind like a few kilograms of wheat or dal or even vegetables for toiling in the farm throughout the day. The family of six are barely able to manage two square meals a day. Lakha lives in a kuchha hut on the outskirts of the village. The women of the family spend the day chopping fodder and collecting firewood in the fields. His father, a tuberculosis patient, passed away two years ago due to lack of medication. His mother now suffers from the same disease and life is slowly ebbing away. Although, the village has a primary school, Lakha never went there but he is happy to find his children going to school. New clothes happen once in a few years. Even soap and oil are a luxury for the family. ____& Study the above cases of poverty and discuss the following issues related to poverty: e Landlessness weetzomea Unemployment a Le re . ys ps NN NS Size of families ~ a ail e Literacy levels e Health/nutrition e Helplessness Picture 3.2 Story ofLakha Singh Economics Reprint 2025-26 These two typical cases illustrate many dimensions of poverty. They show that poverty means hunger and lack of shelter. This also speaks about a situation in which parents are not able to give their children nutritious food three times a day ora situation where sick people cannot afford treatment. Poverty also means lack of clean water and sanitation facilities. It also means lack of a regular job with decent minimum wages. Above all, it means living with a sense of helplessness. Poor people are in a situation in which they are illtreated at almost every place, in farms, factories, government offices, hospitals, railway stations, etc. Obviously, nobody would like to live in poverty. One of the biggest challenges of independent India has been to bring millions of its people out of abject poverty. Mahatama Gandhi said that India would be truly independent only when the poorest of its people become free of human suffering. Poverty as seen by social scientists Since poverty has many facets, social scientists look at it through a variety of indicators. Usually the indicators are used to relate with the levels of income and consumption. In recent times, a variety of other indicators have also been used to recognise whether a person is poor or not. For example, National Multidimensional Poverty Index is calculated on the basis of three broad indicators: health indicators like nutrition, child and adolescent mortality, maternal health. Education indicators like years of schooling and school attendance, and standard of living indicator like cooking fuel, sanitation, drinking water, housing, electricity, assets, bank account. Indicators such as social exclusion and vulnerability are also used to