of local governments and various community organisations. This programme encourages poor children, belonging to disadvantaged sections, to attend school more regularly and helps them concentrate on classroom activities. Poverty as a Challenge eo 40 Pradhan Mantri Surakshit Matritva Abhiyan was launched in 2016 with the aim to reduce maternal and infant mortality by providing quality antenatal care to the pregnant women throughout the country. The scheme works towards safe pregnancies, deliveries and addresses gaps in the service of the maternal care, to ensure constant and regular treatment to the beneficiaries. Services are provided on the ninth day of every month. This programme follows a systematic approach for engagement with private practitioners, motivating them to volunteer in the scheme at government health facilities. Pradhan Mantri Ujjwala Yojana (PMUY) aims towards women empowerment in rural areas. It encourages the use of smoke-free kitchen, thereby, saving them from chronic respiratory disorders and poor eye sights. It was launched in 2016 with an aim to provide clean cooking fuel (liquefied petroleum gas or LPG) to economically poor households especially in the rural areas, who cook using traditional methods by using either coal, wood or cow dungs. Its target beneficiaries are Below Poverty Line (BPL) households, Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes, forest dwellers and marginalised group households. To encourage the use of LPG, the scheme provides a completely free connection, including the first refill and a stove. Over the years there is an increase in the LPG coverage throughout the country. Connections are issued in the name of the female member of the family. This scheme also promotes environment sustainability by reducing deforestation and carbon emission generated from burning coal and firewood. The use of clean cooking fuel, i.e., LPG means less time and effort in collecting firewood and encourages women to participate in social and economic activities. Economics The Challenges Ahead Poverty has certainly declined in India. But despite the progress, poverty reduction remains India s most compelling challenge. Wide disparities in poverty are visible between rural and urban areas and among different States also. Certain social and economic groups are more vulnerable to poverty. Poverty reduction is expected to make better India. This would be possible mainly due to higher economic growth, increasing focus on universal education, declining population growth; empowerment of the women and the economically weaker sections of society would also facilitate the same. The income based definition of poverty captures only a limited part of what poverty really means to people. It is about a minimum subsistence level of living rather than a reasonable level of living. Many scholars advocate that we must broaden the concept into human poverty. A large number of people may have been able to feed themselves. But do they have education? Or shelter? Or health care? Or job security? Or self-confidence? Are they free from caste and gender discrimination? Is the practice of child labour still common? Worldwide experience shows that with development, the definition of what constitutes poverty also changes. In this chapter we have