than a reasonable level of living. Many scholars advocate that we must broaden the concept into human poverty. A large number of people may have been able to feed themselves. But do they have education? Or shelter? Or health care? Or job security? Or self-confidence? Are they free from caste and gender discrimination? Is the practice of child labour still common? Worldwide experience shows that with development, the definition of what constitutes poverty also changes. In this chapter we have looked at the different approaches to measure poverty. The National Multidimensional Poverty Index put forward by NITI Aayog reveals that the number and proportion of multidimensionally poor has declined in India. This may be due to the array of Government interventions initiated in recent years. What do you think? Reprint 2025-26 Lb Summary In this chapter, we have looked at the different approaches of measuring poverty. The National Multidimensional Poverty Index, put forward by NITI Aayog in collaboration with UNDP and Oxford Policy and Human Development Initiative reveals that on the Headcount Ratio of multidimensionally poor, there has been a considerable reduction. Even when some of the states like Kerala and Tamil Nadu have reached less than 10 per cent on the HCR front, much is yet to be achieved by the other states. However, it is also to be noted that due to the array of Government intervention policies between 2005-06 and 2019-21 there has been significant decline in the number of MPI poor in the states of Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan. aj Exercises 1. How is the poverty line estimated in India? 2. Do you think that the present methodology of poverty estimation is appropriate? 3. Describe poverty trends in India since 1993. 4. Discuss the major reasons for poverty in India. 5. Identify the social and economic groups which are most vulnerable to poverty in India. 6. Give an account of interstate disparities of poverty in India. 7. Describe global poverty trends. 8. Describe the role of government in reducing poverty in India? 9. What do you understand by human poverty? 10. Who are the poorest of the poor? 11. What are the main features of the Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act 2005? 12. Differentiate between consumption based poverty line and NMP Index based poverty estimates. 13. List the indicators used to estimate multidimensional poor in India. &, References Deaton, ANGUS AND VALERIE KozeL (Eds.) 2005. The Great Indian Poverty Debate. MacMillan India Limited, New Delhi. Economic Survey 2015-2016. Ministry of Finance, Government of India, New Delhi. (Chapter on social sectors, [Online web] URL: http: / /indiabudget.nic.in /es_2004 05/social. htm) Mid-Term Appraisal of the Tenth Five Year Plan 2002-2007. Planning Commission, New Delhi. Part II, Chapter 7: Poverty Elimination and Rural Employment, [Online web] URL: http:// www.planningcommission.nic.in/midterm/english-pdf/chapter-07.pdf NITI Aayog. 2023 National Multidimensional Poverty Index: A Progress Review 2023 NITI Aayog/Government of India PANAGRIYA ARVIND AND VISHAL More Poverty by social, religious and economic groups in India and its largest state , working