0970CHO3 Poverty aS a Challenge Overview This chapter deals with one of the challenges faced by independent India poverty. After discussing this multidimensional problem through examples, the chapter discusses the way poverty is analysed by social scientists. Poverty trends in India and the world are illustrated through the concept of the poverty line. Causes of poverty as well as anti-poverty measures taken by the government are also discussed. The chapter ends with broadening the official concept of poverty into human poverty. Introduction In our daily life, we come across many people who we think are poor. They could be landless labourers in villages or people living in overcrowded jhuggis in cities. NITI Aayog uses Multidimensional Picture 3.1 Story of Ram Saran Reprint 2025-26 Poverty Index to analyse the problem of poverty faced by the country. The ratio of multidimensional poverty has fallen from approximately 55 per cent in 2005-06, 25 per cent in 2015-16 and to 15 per cent in 2019-21. It is also expected that multidimensional poverty will soon reach single digit. Two Typical Cases of Poverty Urban Case Thirty-three year old Ram Saran works as a daily-wage labourer in a wheat flour mill near Ranchi in Jharkhand. He manages to earn around %3,500 a month when he finds employment, which is not often. The money is not enough to sustain his family of six his Poverty as a Challenge wife and four children aged between 12 years to six months. He has to send money home to his old parents who live in a village near Ramgarh. His father, a landless labourer, and his brother who lives in Hazaribagh depend on Ram Saran for sustenance. Ram Saran lives in a one-room rented house in a crowded basti in the outskirts of the city. It is a temporary shack built of bricks and clay tiles. His wife Santa Devi, works as a part time maid in a few houses and manages to earn another ~1500. They manage a meagre meal of dal and rice twice a day, but there is never enough for all of them. His elder son works as a helper in a tea shop to supplement the family s income and earns another *~700 while his 10-year old daughter goes to school and takes care of the younger siblings. They have only two pairs of hand-medown clothes each. New ones are bought only when the old clothes become unwearable. Shoes are a luxury. The younger one relishes the dal-rice served at school. Rural case Lakha Singh belongs to a small village near Meerut in Uttar Pradesh. His family does not own any land. So, they do odd jobs for the big farmers. Work is erratic and so is income. At times they get paid 200 for a hard day s work. But often it is in kind like a few kilograms of wheat or dal or even vegetables for toiling in the farm throughout the day. The family of six are barely able to manage two