poverty line is also not same for all social groups and economic categories in India. Social groups, which are most vulnerable to poverty are Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe households. Similarly, among the economic groups, the most vulnerable groups are the _ rural agricultural-labour households and the urban casual-labour households. Graph 3.2 shows the percentage of poor people Reprint 2025-26 in all these groups. Although the average of people below poverty line for all groups in India is 22; however, 43 out of 100 (see graph 3.2) people belonging to Scheduled Tribes are not able to meet their basic needs. Similarly, 34 per cent of casual workers in urban areas are below poverty line. About 34 per cent of casual farm labour (in rural areas) and 29 per cent of Scheduled Castes are also poor. The double disadvantage of being a landless casual wage labour household in the socially disadvantaged social groups of the scheduled caste or the scheduled tribe population highlights the seriousness of the problem. Some recent studies have shown that except for the scheduled tribe households, all the other three groups (i.e., Scheduled Castes, rural agricultural labourers and the urban casual labour households) have seen a decline in poverty in the 1990s. Apart from these social groups, there is also inequality of incomes within a family. In poor families all suffer, but some suffer more than others. In some cases, women, elderly people and female infants are denied equal access to resources available to the family. Global Poverty Scenario Is India the only country having poor people? For making comparisons between developing countries, many international organisations like the World Bank use a uniform standard for the poverty line: minimum availability of the equivalent of $2.15 per person per day. The proportion of people in different countries living in extreme economic poverty defined by the World Bank as living on less than $2.15 per day has fallen from 16.27 per cent in 2010 to 9.05 per cent in 2019. Why $ (dollar) has been used there? In India, we use rupee as a national currency, each country has its own currency. American dollar is used by international agencies to compare data across countries. Although there has been a substantial reduction in global poverty, it is marked with great regional differences. Poverty declined substantially in China and Southeast Asian countries as a result of rapid economic growth and massive investments in human_ resource development (Read table 3.2 and graph 3.3 and 3.4). The proportion of poor in China has become 0.1 per cent in 2020. The World Bank reports reveal that in the countries of South Asia (India, Pakistan, Graph 3.2: Poverty in India 2011-12: Most Vulnerable Groups $ o GH ~ =) w or va w E 2) Zz 34 34 ; {e) Sb 5) ~ I (Ss) o s ~ =| & n g n te o a eo) } re Castes e) Scheduled Tribes Scheduled Average Indian Poverty Ratio Casual Labour (non-farm) (Urban) Casual Labour Farm