anti-poverty strategy of the government is based broadly on two factors (i) promotion of economic growth (ii) targeted antipoverty programmes. Over a period of thirty years of independent India, lasting up to the early eighties, there were little per capita income growth and not much reduction in poverty. Official poverty estimates which were about 45 per cent in the early 1950s remained the same even in the early eighties. Since the eighties, India s economic growth has been one of the fastest in the world. The growth rate jumped from the average of about 3.5 per cent a year in the 1970s to about 6 per cent during the 1980s and 1990s. The two decades of 21st century (2000-2020) has also witnessed the rapid economic development. The higher growth rates have significantly helped in the reduction of poverty. Therefore, it is becoming clear that there is a strong link between economic growth and poverty reduction. Economic growth widens opportunities and provides the resources needed to invest in human development. This also encourages people to send their children, including the girl child, to schools in the hope of getting better Reprint 2025-26 economic returns by investing in education. The poor may not be able to take advantage from the opportunities created by economic growth. However, growth in the agriculture sector is much below expectations. This has a direct bearing on poverty. A large number of poor people live in villages and are dependent on agriculture. In these circumstances, there is a clear need for targeted anti-poverty programmes. Although there are many schemes which are formulated to affect poverty directly or indirectly. Some of them are worth mentioning. Mahatma Gandhi National Rural Employment Guarantee Act, 2005 aims to provide 100 days of wage employment to every household to ensure livelihood security in rural areas. It also aimed at sustainable development to address the cause of drought, deforestration and soil erosion. One-third of the proposed jobs have been reserved for women under this act. The wage rate for unskilled manual workers is revised regularly, Pradhan Mantri Poshan Shakti Abhiyan (PM Poshan) is a flagship programme of Government of India. It was initiated with twin purpose (i) to improve the nutritional requirement especially calorie and the protein intake of the child, (ii) improve the school enrolment and eliminate the drop out from the school. It targets students from Classes I to VIII in Government, Government aided schools and special training centres under the Right to Education Act. This scheme is implemented with the support of local governments and various community organisations. This programme encourages poor children, belonging to disadvantaged sections, to attend school more regularly and helps them concentrate on classroom activities. Poverty as a Challenge eo 40 Pradhan Mantri Surakshit Matritva Abhiyan was launched in 2016 with the aim to reduce maternal and infant mortality by providing quality antenatal care to the pregnant women throughout the country. The scheme works towards safe pregnancies, deliveries and addresses gaps in the service of the maternal