of the world MM Middle East and North Africa @ @ Latin America and the Caribbean Forecasts from 2015 to 2030 2015 2020 2025 2030 By 2030, forecasts indicate that nearly 9 in10 of the extreme poor will live in Sub-Saharan Africa. Source: World Bank PovcalNet and Poverty & Equity Data Portal (http: / /databank.worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=poverty-and-equity-database) Poverty and Sustainable Development Goals The new Sustainable Development Goals of the United Nations (UN) propose ending poverty of all types by 2030. It provides a shared blueprint for peace and prosperity for people and the planet, now and into the future. At its centre point are the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). This requires urgent action from the part of both the developed and the developing countries (see box). Developed countries ought to support the developing countries in the endeavour of ending poverty, improve health and education, reduce inequalities, tackling climate change and promote sustainable development. Reprint 2025-26 The United Nations (UN) Organisation, an international organisation works with many countries to eradicate poverty. In _ collaboration with governments of member countries, UN came out with 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) to be achieved by 2030. They are given in the form of infographics on the next page. Each goal was split into various targets to be achieved by the countries who are members of UN. One of the targets of SDG 1 is reducing the proportion of men, women and children in all ages living in poverty in all its dimensions at least to half by 2030. The decline in the proportion of poor reflects India s commitment to achieve the target related to Goal 1: No Poverty (End poverty in all its forms everywhere). Poverty as a Challenge ZERO GOOD HEALTH AND WELL-BEING =e 1 NO POVERTY HUNGER AFFORDABLE AND CLEAN ENERGY vl ~ DECENT WORK AKD ECONOMIC GROWTH aid 13 crow 14 stow ff 19 ok a0 <> Source: https: //sdgs.un.org/goals INDUSTRY, INNOVATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE Take the help of your teacher and gather the details of each SDG. Do a project report on how your country/ state is achieving these goals. Causes of Poverty There were number of causes for the widespread poverty in India. One historical reason is the low level of economic development under the British colonial administration. The policies of the colonial government ruined traditional handicrafts and discouraged development of industries like textiles. The low rate of growth persisted until the 1980s. This resulted in less job opportunities and low growth rate of incomes. This was accompanied by a high growth of population. With the spread of irrigation and the Green Revolution, many job opportunities were created in the agriculture sector. But the impact was limited to some parts of India. The industries, both in the public and the private sector, did provide some jobs. But these were not enough to absorb all the job seekers. Unable to find jobs with better income in cities, many people started working as rickshaw pullers, vendors, construction workers, domestic servants, etc. With