level necessary to fulfill the basic needs. What is necessary to satisfy basic needs is different at different times and in different countries. Therefore, poverty line may vary with time and place. Each country uses an imaginary line that is considered appropriate for its existing level of development and its accepted minimum social norms. For example, a person not having a car in the United States may be considered poor. In India, owning a car is still considered a luxury. While determining the poverty line in India, till a few years ago, a minimum level of food requirement, clothing, footwear, fuel and electricity, educational and medical needs, etc., were taken into consideration. The physical quantities of these needs were multiplied by their prices in rupees. The formula for food requirement while estimating the poverty line was based on the desired calorie requirement. Food items, such as cereals, pulses, vegetables, milk, oil, sugar, etc., together provided these needed calories. The calorie needs vary depending on age, sex and the type of work that a person does. The accepted average calorie requirement in India was 2400 calories per person per day in rural areas and 2100 calories per person per day in urban areas. Since people living in rural areas engage themselves in more physical work, calorie requirements in rural areas were considered to be higher than in urban areas. The bare monetary expenditure per capita needed for Economics buying these calorie requirements in terms of food grains, etc., and reported by families has been considered as poverty line. This amount was revised periodically, taking into consideration the rise in prices. Based on the global developments, the Government of India has begun to estimate the proportion of poor in India using 12 developmental indicators, which is popularly known as Multidimensional Poverty Index (see box). This national index complements the income or consumption expenditure based poverty measurement because it measures and compares deprivations directly. > ? Let s Discuss Discuss the following: e What could be the difference between consumption based expenditure Poverty Line and National Multidimensional Poverty Index? e What do you think would be the minimum necessary level in your locality? Poverty Estimates Based on the methodology described in the previous section, the number and proportion of poor people in India, called Head Count Ratio (HCR), is estimated. Table 3.1 shows that during the 1990s, the proportion of consumption expenditure based poor declined from 45 to 37 per cent. However, the number of poor remained at about 40 crores. During 2000-2011, both the proportion and the number of poor declined. The proportion of multidimensional poor during 2015-2021 declined from 25 to 15 percent. As per the official record, 13.5 crore people have escaped multidimensional poverty during this period. Specifically deprivation against various indicators have declined more sharply in rural areas than in urban areas. Reprint 2025-26 Table 3.1: Estimates of Poverty in India 1993 - 2019 Year Head Count Ratio (%) Number of poor (in millions) Consumption-based Multidimensional (Indicator) based Source: