people who normally lead an easy and slow life get smitten by the high-energy adventure sports of Coorg. (para 6) (v) The theory of the Arab origin is supported by the long coat with embroidered waist-belt they wear. (para 3) (vi) Macaques, Malabar squirrels observe you carefully from the tree canopy. (para 7) Thinking about Language Collocations Certain words go together . Such word friends are called collocations. The collocation of a word is the company it keeps . For example, look at the paired sentences and phrases below. Which is a common collocation, and which one is odd? Strike out the odd sentence or phrase. (a) How old are you? (b) e a pleasant person e How young are you? e a pleasant pillow 1. Here are some nouns from the text. culture monks surprise experience weather tradition Work with a partner and discuss which of the nouns can collocate with which of the adjectives given below. The first one has been done for you. unique terrible unforgettable serious ancient wide sudden erpuy je sosdurtyry (i) culture: unique culture, ancient culture (ii) monks: (iii) surprise: (iv) experience: (v) weather: (vi) tradition: Reprint 2025-26 2. Complete the following phrases from the text. For each phrase, can you find at least one other word that would fit into the blank? (i) tales of (ii) coastal (iii) a piece of ____ (iv) evergreen (v) ___E SFSsSCSSS rplanttattionss (vi) ____ C_ bridge (vii) wild You may add your own examples to this list. III Tea from Assam Pranjol, a youngster from Assam, is Rajvir s classmate at school in Delhi. Pranjol s father is the manager of a tea-garden in Upper > Assam and Pranjol has invited Rajvir to visit his home during the =a sumumner vacation. c= Cnar-caram... garam-chai, a vendor called out in a high-pitched voice. 72 He came up to their window and asked, "Chai, sa ab? Give us two cups, Pranjol said. They sipped the steaming hot liquid. Almost everyone in their compartment was drinking tea too. Do you know that over eighty crore cups of tea are drunk every day throughout the world? Rajvir said. Whew! exclaimed Pranjol. Tea really is very popular. The train pulled out of the station. Pranjol buried his nose in his detective book again. Rajvir too was an ardent fan of detective stories, but at the moment he was keener on looking at the beautiful scenery. It was green, green everywhere. Rajvir had never seen so much greenery before. Then the soft green paddy fields gave way to tea bushes. It was a magnificent view. Against the backdrop of densely wooded hills a sea of tea bushes stretched as far as the eye could see. Dwarfing the tiny tea plants were tall sturdy shade-trees and amidst the orderly rows of bushes busily moved doll-like figures. Reprint 2025-26 In the distance was an ugly building with smoke billowing out of tall chimneys. Hey, a tea garden! Rajvir cried excitedly. Pranjol, who had been born