5 Glimpses of India OF 1059CHO7 I. A Baker from Goa Lucio Rodrigues II. Coorg Lokesh Abrol Ill. Tea from Assam Arup Kumar Datta BEForRE You READ Activity Discuss in class 1. What images of people and of places come to your mind, when you think of our country? 2. What parts of India have you lived in, or visited? Can you name some popular tourist destinations? 3. You may know that apart from the British, the Dutch and the French, the Portuguese have also played a part in the history of our country. Can you say which parts of India show French and Portuguese influences? 4. Can you say which parts of India grow (i) tea, (ii) coffee? I A Baker from Goa This is a pen-portrait of a traditional Goan village baker who still has an important place in his society. Our elders are often heard reminiscing nostalgically about those good old Portuguese days, the Portuguese and their famous loaves of bread. Those eaters of loaves might have vanished but the makers are still there. We still have amongst us the mixers, the moulders and those who bake the loaves. Those age-old, timetested furnaces still exist. The fire in the furnaces has not yet been extinguished. The thud and jingle of Reprint 2025-26 reminiscing nostalgically thinking fondly of the past [= F First Flight the traditional baker s bamboo, heralding his arrival heralding in the morning, can still be heard in some places. announcing Maybe the father is not alive but the son still carries on the family profession. These bakers are, even today, known as pader in Goa. During our childhood in Goa, the baker used to be our friend, companion and guide. He used to come at least twice a day. Once, when he set out in the morning on his selling round, and then again, when he returned after emptying his huge basket. The jingling thud of his bamboo woke us up from sleep and we ran to meet and greet him. Why was it so? Was it for the love of the loaf? Not at all. The loaves were bought by some Paskine or Bastine, the maid-servant of the house! What we longed for were those bread-bangles which we chose carefully. Sometimes it was sweet bread of special make. The baker made his musical entry on the scene with the jhang, jhang sound of his specially made bamboo staff. One hand supported the basket on his head and the other banged the bamboo on the ground. He would greet the lady of the house with Good morning and then place his basket on the vertical bamboo. We kids would be pushed aside with a mild rebuke and the loaves would be delivered rebuke to the servant. But we would not give up. We would expression of climb a bench or the parapet and peep into the 4isapproval; a basket, somehow. I can still recall the typical scolding fragrance of those loaves. Loaves for the