two texts so different? Are the facts the same? Do both writers give you a picture of the baker? Our elders are often heard reminiscing nostalgically about those good old Portuguese days, the Portuguese and their famous loaves of bread. Those eaters of loaves might have vanished but the makers are still there. We still have amongst us the mixers, the moulders and those who bake the loaves. Those age-old, time-tested furnaces still exist. The fire in the furnaces had not yet been extinguished. The thud and the jingle of the traditional baker s bamboo, heralding his arrival in After Goa s liberation, people used to say nostalgically that the Portuguese bread vanished with the paders. But the paders have managed to survive because they have perfected the art of door-todoor delivery service. The paders pick up the knowledge of breadmaking from traditions in the family. The leavened, oven-baked bread is a gift of the Portuguese to India. [Adapted from Nandakumar Kamat s The Unsung Lives of Goan Paders| the morning, can still be heard in some places. May be the father is not alive but the son still carries on the family profession. 2. Now find a travel brochure about a place you have visited. Look at the description in the brochure. Then write your own account, adding details from your own experience, to give the reader a picture of the place, rather than an impersonal, factual description. Group Discussion 1. 2. In groups, collect information on how bakeries bake bread now and how the process has changed over time. There are a number of craft-based professions which are dying out. Pick one of the crafts below. Make a group presentation to the class about the skills required, and the possible reasons for the decline of the craft. Can you think of ways to revive these crafts? (i) Pottery (v (ii) Batik work (vi (iii) Dhurri (rug) weaving (vii Carpentry Bamboo weaving Making jute products Se oa SS SS (iv) Embroidery (viii) Handloom Reprint 2025-26 1? a = B ~ a Oo a = =) on = First Flight II Coorg Coorg is coffee country, famous for its rainforests and spices. Mipway between Mysore and the coastal town of Mangalore sits a piece of heaven that must have drifted from the kingdom of god. This land of rolling hills is inhabited by a proud race of martial men, beautiful women and wild creatures. Coorg, or Kodagu, the smallest district of Karnataka, is home to evergreen rainforests, spices and coffee plantations. Evergreen rainforests cover thirty per cent of this district. During the monsoons, it pours enough to keep many visitors away. The season of joy commences from September and continues till March. The weather is perfect, with some showers thrown in for good measure. The air breathes of invigorating coffee. Coffee estates and colonial bungalows stand tucked under tree canopies in prime corners. The fiercely independent people of Coorg are possibly of Greek or Arabic descent. As one story goes,