you feel when you open a present? (v) how you feel when you watch your favourite programme on > television? (vi) the look on your mother s face as you waited in a queue? (vii) how you feel when tracking a tiger in a tiger reserve forest? (viii) the story you have recently read, or a film you have seen? 5 2. Now use the adjectives in the exercise above, as appropriate, to write o a paragraph about Coorg. a Speaking and Waiting 4 1. Read the following passage about tea. India and tea are so intertwined together that life without the brew is unimaginable. Tea entered our life only in the mid-nineteenth century when the British started plantations in Assam and Darjeeling! In the beginning though, Indians shunned the drink as they thought it was a poison that led to umpteen diseases. Ironically, tea colonised Britain where it became a part of their social diary and also led to the establishment of numerous tea houses. Reprint 2025-26 First Flight SN los Today, scientific research across the world has attempted to establish the beneficial qualities of tea a fact the Japanese and the Chinese knew anyway from ancient times, attributing to it numerous medicinal properties. [Source: History: Tea Anytime by Ranjit Biswas from Literary Review, The Hindu, 1 October 2006] Collect information about tea, e.g. its evolution as a drink, its beneficial qualities. You can consult an encyclopedia or visit Internet websites. Then form groups of five and play the following roles: Imagine a meeting of a tea planter, a sales agent, a tea lover (consumer), a physician and a tea-shop owner. Each person in the group has to put forward his/her views about tea. You may use the following words and phrases. I feel ... e It is important to know ... I disagree with you ... e I think that tea ... I would like you to know ... e I agree with ... It is my feeling ... e I suggest ... May I know why you ... e I am afraid ... 2. You are the sales executive of a famous tea company and you have been asked to draft an advertisement for the product. Draft the advertisement using the information you collected for the role play. You can draw pictures or add photographs and make your advertisement colourful. In This Lesson Wuat WE Have Done Given a picture of three different regions of India, giving an idea of how varied and charming and beautiful our country is. Wuat You Can Do Get your students to arrange an exhibition of photographs of different places in India good sources are travel articles in Sunday newspapers, or in travel magazines, or in brochures available at travel agents. Ask students to bring in two or three pictures each, accompanied by a short, neatly hand-written write-up on the place shown in the pictures. Arrange them on your classroom walls. Let the students study them. They can then discuss, and later