sosdurtyry First Flight biking. Numerous walking trails in this region are a favourite with trekkers. Birds, bees and butterflies are there to give you company. Macaques, Malabar squirrels, langurs and slender loris keep a watchful eye from the tree canopy. I do, however, prefer to step aside for wild elephants. The climb to the Brahmagiri hills brings you into a panoramic view of the entire misty landscape of Coorg. A walk across the rope bridge leads to the sixty-four-acre island of Nisargadhama. Running into Buddhist monks from India s largest Tibetan settlement, at nearby Bylakuppe, is a bonus. The monks, in red, ochre and yellow robes, are amongst the many surprises that wait to be discovered by visitors searching for the heart and soul of India, right here in Coorg. FACT FILE How to Reach trails paths created by walking panoramic view a view of a wide area of land Madikeri, the district headquarters, is the only gateway to Coorg. The misty hills, lush forests and coffee plantations will cast a spell on you. Find a resort, coffee estate or stay in a home for a truly Coorgi experience. By Air: The nearest airports are Mangalore (135 km) and Bangalore (260 km). There are flights to Mangalore from Mumbai, and to Bangalore from Ahmedabad, Chennai, Delhi, Goa, Hyderabad, Kochi, Kolkata, Mumbai and Pune. By Rail: The nearest railheads are at Mysore, Mangalore and Hassan. By Road: There are two routes to Coorg from Bangalore. Both are almost the same distance (around 250-260 km). The route via Mysore is the most frequented one. The other route is via Neelamangal, Kunigal, Chanrayanapatna. Thinking about the Text q 1. Where is Coorg? 2. What is the story about the Kodavu people s descent? 3. What are some of the things you now know about (i) the people of Coorg? (ii) the main crop of Coorg? (iii) the sports it offers to tourists? Reprint 2025-26 (iv) the animals you are likely to see in Coorg? (v) its distance from Bangalore, and how to get there? 4. Here are six sentences with some words in italics. Find phrases from the text that have the same meaning. (Look in the paragraphs indicated) (i) During monsoons it rains so heavily that tourists do not visit Coorg. (para 2) = (ii) Some people say that Alexander s army moved south along the coast and settled there. (para 3) (iii) The Coorg people are always ready to tell stories of their sons and fathers valour. (para 4) (iv) Even people who normally lead an easy and slow life get smitten by the high-energy adventure sports of Coorg. (para 6) (v) The theory of the Arab origin is supported by the long coat with embroidered waist-belt they wear. (para 3) (vi) Macaques, Malabar squirrels observe you carefully from the tree canopy. (para 7) Thinking about Language Collocations Certain words go together . Such word friends are called collocations. The collocation of a word is the company it keeps . For