country is. Wuat You Can Do Get your students to arrange an exhibition of photographs of different places in India good sources are travel articles in Sunday newspapers, or in travel magazines, or in brochures available at travel agents. Ask students to bring in two or three pictures each, accompanied by a short, neatly hand-written write-up on the place shown in the pictures. Arrange them on your classroom walls. Let the students study them. They can then discuss, and later vote on the place they would most like to see. Reprint 2025-26 The Trees Can there be a forest without trees? Where are the trees in this poem, and where do they go? The trees inside are moving out into the forest, the forest that was empty all these days where no bird could sit no insect hide no sun bury its feet in shadow the forest that was empty all these nights will be full of trees by morning. All night the roots work to disengage themselves from the cracks in the veranda floor. The leaves strain toward the glass small twigs stiff with exertion long-cramped boughs shuffling under the roof like newly discharged patients half-dazed, moving to the clinic doors. I sit inside, doors open to the veranda writing long letters in which I scarcely mention the departure of the forest from the house. The night is fresh, the whole moon shines in a sky still open the smell of leaves and lichen still reaches like a voice into the rooms. Reprint 2025-26 First Flight My head is full of whispers which tomorrow will be silent. Listen. The glass is breaking. The trees are stumbling forward into the night. Winds rush to meet them. The moon is broken like a mirror, its pieces flash now in the crown of the tallest oak. ADRIENNE RICH Adrienne Rich was born in Baltimore, Maryland, U.S.A. in 1929. She is the author of nearly twenty volumes of poetry, and has been called a feminist and a radical poet. Glossa ry 4 to disengage themselves: to separate themselves strain: make efforts to move bough: branch shuffling: moving repeatedly from one position to another lichen: crusty patches or bushy growth on tree trunks/bare ground formed by association of fungus and alga. Thinking about the Poem Find, in the first stanza, three things that cannot happen in a treeless forest. What picture do these words create in your mind: ... sun bury its feet in shadow... ? What could the poet mean by the sun s feet ? Where are the trees in the poem? What do their roots, their leaves, and their twigs do? What does the poet compare their branches to? How does the poet describe the moon: (a) at the beginning of the third stanza, and (b) at its end? What causes this change? What happens to the house when the trees move out of it? Why do you think the poet does not mention the departure of the forest from the