baker. Oral Comprehension Check 1. Match the following. What is a must plump physique pleasantly fat body open testimony public statement about a character or quality fi) as marriage gifts? cakes and bolinhas (ii) for a party ora feast? sweet bread called bol fii) fora daughter's engagement? bread (iv) for Christmas? sandwiches 2. What did the bakers wear: (i) in the Portuguese days? (ii) when the author was young? 3. Who invites the comment he is dressed like a pader ? Why? iN 5. What does a jackfruit -like appearance mean? Reprint 2025-26 Where were the monthly accounts of the baker recorded? a = B ao) a Oo a = =) on = First Flight Thinking about the Text 1. Which of these statements are correct? (i) The pader was an important person in the village in old times. ) Paders still exist in Goan villages. ) The paders went away with the Portuguese. (iv) The paders continue to wear a single-piece long frock. ) Bread and cakes were an integral part of Goan life in the old days. ) Traditional bread-baking is still a very profitable business. (vii) Paders and their families starve in the present times. 2. Is bread an important part of Goan life? How do you know this? 3. Tick the right answer. What is the tone of the author when he says the following? (i) The thud and the jingle of the traditional baker s bamboo can still be heard in some places. (nostalgic, hopeful, sad) (ii) Maybe the father is not alive but the son still carries on the family profession. (nostalgic, hopeful, sad) (iii) I still recall the typical fragrance of those loaves. (nostalgic, hopeful, naughty) (iv) The tiger never brushed his teeth. Hot tea could wash and clean up everything so nicely, after all. (naughty, angry, funny) (v) Cakes and bolinhas are a must for Christmas as well as other festivals. (sad, hopeful, matter-of-fact) (vi) The baker and his family never starved. They always looked happy and prosperous. (matter-of-fact, hopeful, sad) Writing 4 I. In this extract, the author talks about traditional bread-baking during his childhood days. Complete the following table with the help of the clues on the left. Then write a paragraph about the author's childhood days. Clues Author s childhood days the way bread was baked how the pader looked Reprint 2025-26 \ II. 1. Compare the piece from the text (on the left below) with the other piece rd on Goan bakers (on the right). What makes the two texts so different? Are the facts the same? Do both writers give you a picture of the baker? Our elders are often heard reminiscing nostalgically about those good old Portuguese days, the Portuguese and their famous loaves of bread. Those eaters of loaves might have vanished but the makers are still there. We still have amongst us the mixers, the moulders and those who bake the loaves. Those age-old, time-tested furnaces still exist. The fire in the furnaces had