the ground. He would greet the lady of the house with Good morning and then place his basket on the vertical bamboo. We kids would be pushed aside with a mild rebuke and the loaves would be delivered rebuke to the servant. But we would not give up. We would expression of climb a bench or the parapet and peep into the 4isapproval; a basket, somehow. I can still recall the typical scolding fragrance of those loaves. Loaves for the elders and _ fragrance the bangles for the children. Then we did not even scent care to brush our teeth or wash our mouths properly. And why should we? Who would take the trouble of plucking the mango-leaf for the toothbrush? And why was it necessary at all? The tiger never brushed his teeth. Hot tea could wash and clean up everything so nicely, after all! Oral Comprehension Check What are the elders in Goa nostalgic about? Is bread-making still popular in Goa? How do you know? What is the baker called? When would the baker come everyday? Why did the children run to meet him? A & NS Reprint 2025-26 Marriage gifts are meaningless without the sweet bread known as the bol, just as a party or a feast loses its charm without bread. Not enough can be said to show how important a baker can be for a village. The lady of the house must prepare sandwiches on the occasion of her daughter s engagement. Cakes and bolinhas are a must for Christmas as well as other festivals. Thus, the presence of the baker s furnace in the village is absolutely essential. The baker or bread-seller of those days had a peculiar dress known as the kabai. It was a singlepiece long frock reaching down to the knees. In our childhood we saw bakers wearing a shirt and trousers which were shorter than full-length ones and longer than half pants. Even today, anyone who wears a half pant which reaches just below the knees invites the comment that he is dressed like a pader! The baker usually collected his bills at the end of the month. Monthly accounts used to be recorded on some wall in pencil. Baking was indeed a profitable profession in the old days. The baker and his family never starved. He, his family and his servants always looked happy and prosperous. Their plump physique was an open testimony to this. Even today any person with a jackfruit-like physical appearance is easily compared to a baker. Oral Comprehension Check 1. Match the following. What is a must plump physique pleasantly fat body open testimony public statement about a character or quality fi) as marriage gifts? cakes and bolinhas (ii) for a party ora feast? sweet bread called bol fii) fora daughter's engagement? bread (iv) for Christmas? sandwiches 2. What did the bakers wear: (i) in the Portuguese days? (ii) when the author was young? 3. Who invites the comment he is dressed like a pader