influence in governance. Sn an THE BOSSES OF THE SENATE. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Fig. 9.13. A cartoon from 1889 depicting an oligarchic situation. | Chapter 9.indd 204 08-04-2025 11:43:55 Chapter 9.indd 205 LET'S EXPLORE > Look carefully at the picture in Fig. 9.13 on the previous page. It depicts an elected body in the USA in the late 19th century. The people shown in the cartoon are all elected members. What do you observe? What do you see at the top left-hand corner of the cartoon? Who do you think is making decisions in this elected body? > Cana democracy turn into an oligarchy? What can people do to keep democracy strong? Why Democracy Matters These different types of governments show us that democracy is not the only way in which countries are governed. But in most countries, democracy is considered to be a better form of government than others. Let us do a quick comparison to understand this better. Consider the characteristics below in different forms of government and fill in the blank boxes with Yes or No: Absolute Characteristics | Democrac Dictatorshi y P Monarchy Universal Adult Franchise Equality amongst citizens Freedom of speech Separation of powers Wellbeing and Prosperity of all citizens Table 9.2. Characteristics of different forms of government Oligarchy 9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government Governance and Democracy o 08-04-2025 11:43:55 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 9.indd 206 LET'S EXPLORE You have learnt the basic characteristics of various forms of governments. Do a small role play of the various forms in your classroom: > Enact democracy Enact monarchy Enact dictatorship Vvv What do you find to be the most suitable form of government? You have read about different forms of government above and how the form of government defines the lives of its citizens. In the previous table, we could see that the representation of people s choices and rights varies across the different forms. In a genuine democracy, the people can lead their everyday lives in the way they want. They can choose what to speak, what to wear, what beliefs to follow, and how to express themselves. All of this can be done in a democracy until and unless it harms someone else s rights. In a democratic government, the people choose their government. The government is accountable for protecting the rights of its people and is responsible for providing basic needs to its citizens. If the government does not perform its functions properly, the people can change their representatives through elections. This ensures that there is a constant check of what the government does. Thus, the values and ideals of the government in a democracy should focus on the well-being of all its people. Our country is ademocracy, and you can see many of the features of a democracy in our lives every day. It is therefore no wonder that more than half of