democratic government have different structures. You can understand the basic differences from the table 9.1 on the facing page. What do these terms mean? Executive: The executive is the organ of the government which is responsible for implementing the law. But the process of its election is different in different countries. 08-04-2025 11:43:49 Chapter 9.indd 195 USA South resident single house (National P Assembly) Korea Australia Different forms of democratic government Lower House (Lok Sabha) is more powerful than Upper House (Rajya Sabha) prime minister and the council of ministers equal power between Upper House president (Senate) and Lower House (House of Representatives) equal power between Upper House (Senate) and Lower House (House of Representatives) prime minister and the council of ministers independent from executive and legislature (separation of power) independent from executive and legislature (separation of power) independent from executive and legislature (separation of power) independent from executive and legislature (separation of power) Table 9.1 Different forms of democratic government Legislature: The legislature is the body of the government whichis responsible for making laws. Itis known by different names in different countries. In India, itis called Parliament; in the USA, it is called Congress. In most democracies, it has two houses, the Upper House and the Lower House. 9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government Governance and Democracy 08-04-2025 11:43:49 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 9.indd 196 = Upper House and Lower House: In most countries, the Lower House is elected by direct voting and is generally more powerful than the Upper House, which is formed either by election or nomination. These Houses are known by different names in different countries. In India, the Lower House is called the Lok Sabha, and the Upper House is called the Rajya Sabha. = Separation of Power means that the three organs of the government Legislature, Executive, and Judiciary work independently and do not interfere in each other s functions. LET'S EXPLORE Fill the blank columns under Country A and Country B in table 9.1 given on the previous page by taking two different countries of your choice. > Analyse the table and discuss amongst yourselves the similarities and differences in all the examples. The exercise must have given you an understanding that different forms of democratic governments have different ways of formation, structures and functioning. Along with this, the relationships between the three organs of government also differs. But as we read in the beginning, some characteristics, like equality, freedom and universal adult franchise remain the same in all democracies. LET'S EXPLORE > After studying the above examples, list the core principles ofademocratic government. Basedon yourunderstanding, do the activity given below: > You have to form a Student Committee in your school. Make a plan and execute it in a democratic manner, ensuring that: Functions of the committee are well defined The election process of the committee members is democratic 08-04-2025 11:43:49 Chapter 9.indd 197 A Peek into History Early republics