committee will consist of representatives from each grade. This approach is a democratic way to choose representatives and form a committee. Functions of Government Previously, we discussed the various roles that a government plays in our lives, similar to the responsibilities of a student committee in a school. Just like the school committee, a government must create necessary rules, implement them, and ensure that everyone follows these rules. These three responsibilities are known as the functions of government. _ @ Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 9.indd 188 08-04-2025 11:43:46 The creation of rules is called the legislative function; these rules serve as the framework for running the country. The implementation of these rules and the administration of the country according to them is known as the executive function. Finally, ensuring that the rules are followed is referred to as the judicial function. Democracy is defined as the rule of the people . This means that, similar to the third method of electing representatives ina school, in a democracy, the people select their representatives to govern them. However, not every country uses the same method for choosing these representatives. We will explore this topic in more detail in the following sections. ~~ DO YOU KNOW? Chapter 9.indd 189 ACO iN OF THE PEOPLE BY THE PLOPLE FOR THE PEOPLE Fig. 9.4. An 1896 mural by the painter Vedder called Government from the Library of Congress, USA. Abraham Lincoln, a U.S. president in the late 19th century, described democracy as a government of the people, by the people, for the people , a phrase still widely used today. Mural: A large painting or artwork created directly on a wall or a ceiling 9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government Governance and Democracy 08-04-2025 11:43:47 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 9.indd 190 Who gets to decide that this is the government How is the government formed? What are the different parts of the government and what do they do? What Makes Governments Different? The government of any country evolves over time. Since countries have their own history, culture, and aspirations, it is natural that governments of different countries are different. Let s look at some aspects that can make one form of government different from another. These differences will become clearer when we look at various types of government later in the chapter. Key differences between governments 1. Who gets to decide that this is the government ? This is the most basic difference across many types of government. Who or what says that this is the government of our country ? That is, who or what gives the government its authority and power? For example, in a democracy like India, it is the people of the country who decide and are the source of authority, while in a theocracy, the source of authority is religious beliefs and the head of a religious institution. "? 2. How