Chapter Qiindd 1185 From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Governments A ruler s duties in the internal administration of the country are three-fold: raksha (protection of the state from external aggression), palana (maintenance of law and order within the state), and yogakshema (safeguarding the welfare of the people). Kautilya in Arthashastra (translation by L.N. Rangarajan) a ~< a= Fig. 9.1. Inside the Indian Parliament SS = <25 o781CHO9 (0370452025) k43x43) What is Government? What are its Functions? In Grade 6, we learned what government is and explored some of its roles. The government plays an important role in our lives. This role includes: = maintaining law and order in society; = _ ensuring peace, stability, and security for the people; = _- managing relationships with other countries; = taking care of national defence; = delivering essential goods and services (education, healthcare, infrastructure); = managing the economy and economic activities; = working for the welfare and improving people s lives. LET S EXPLORE > Do you remember this picture from your Grade 6 textbook? > The government also has many other roles. Try to list them. In Grade 6, we learned that India has a democratic form of government. Like India, many countries have a democratic government; but some countries have other forms of | governments. Even all democratic governments are not exactly the same. In this chapter, we will learn about various forms of government, how they differ from each other, and how they function. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 | Chapter 9.indd 186 08-04-2025 11:43:44 What is Democracy? As we studied in Grade 6, democracy is best understood as rule of the people. This means that the source of power and authority in a democracy are the people of the country. Let s understand this with the example of a school. A school example A school is full of activities and things that must be done. Many day-to-day tasks need to be managed, and things need to be organised. For example, there are timetables to be made and followed, sports activities to be organised, food to be served during lunch time (also called the mid-day-meal), utensils to be cleaned, speakers to be decided for the morning assembly, and activities to be arranged for No Bag Days . The list is very long in terms of all that needs to be done in the school. With so many things to be done, the Head Teacher realised that a Student Committee should be appointed so that students can be part of making the relevant rules to get all this done, then help in implementation of the rules, and ensure that the rules are being followed. The question before the Head Teacher was who will be part of the committee? The Head Teacher discussed this in the assembly. She proposed that it would be good if some students can take responsibility for these tasks. A student committee should be formed. Hearing this, the students got