he or she has only nominal power and the real power of the executive is exercised by the prime minister. The legislative power is exercised by the parliament. This means that all the laws are made by the elected parliament, and executive power is exercised by the Council of Ministers led by the prime minister. So while Britain has a king, it really is, today, a parliamentary democracy. This kind of monarchy is called a constitutional monarchy. Adjudicating: Judging a case when there is a dispute Chapter 9.indd 201 Fig. 9.9. King Charles III in a ceremonial coach during the visit of a foreign dignitary. 9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government Governance and Democracy 08-04-2025 11:43:53 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Se Chapter 9.indd 202 2. Theocracy A theocracy is a form of government where the country is ruled by the rules of religion and religious leaders. Iran, whose full official name is Islamic Republic of Iran has a unique political system combining elements of both a theocratic and democratic governance. Their constitution is based on the fundamental principles of Islam, the country s official religion. The Supreme Leader, who has the ultimate authority over the legislature, executive and judiciary, is selected by a group of Islamic clerics and his term is for life. There are also an elected president and a parliament that take care of everyday governance. The intent of the republic is to establish a society based on Islamic norms. Other theocracies currently in existence include Afghanistan and Vatican City. 3. Dictatorship A dictatorship is a form of government in which one person, or a small group possesses absolute power they do not have any limits imposed on them by a constitution or law. The 20th century witnessed many examples of dictators who created extremely difficult circumstances for the people; we will only see two of them here. = Soon after Adolf Hitler was appointed Chancellor of Germany in 1933, he passed laws that gave him full power and eliminated the opposition. He was now a dictator. Convinced of the superiority of his people, he believed that Germany should rule the world and dominate inferior races . He was responsible for the killing of at least : e475 2. Fig. 9.10. Caricature six million Jews (this is known as the of Adolf Hitler Holocaust ) as well as hundreds of thousands of Roma and other groups of people. In fact, he was the cause for World War II in the years 1939-1945, 08-04-2025 11:43:53 oy) Chapter 9.indd 203 which resulted in immense loss of life and property in many countries. Idi Amin was a military dictator in Uganda. He was directly responsible for the merciless killing of thousands of people. Many Indians whose ancestors had migrated to Uganda a few generations before were forced to flee the country. Fig. 9.11. Caricature of Idi Amin DON'T MISS OUT The Roma, or Romani people; were originally nomads. Based on