and bound by dharma. 9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government Governance and Democracy 08-04-2025 11:43:50 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 | Chapter 9.indd 200 King Chandrapida wanted to build a temple to his deity, but the hut of a stubborn cobbler stood in the way. When the builders complained to the king that he did not even allow them to take measurements, the king blamed them for not asking the cobbler s permission first. The king received the cobbler, who explained that his humble hut was like a mother to him and as precious to him as the palace was to the king: The misery people feel when their homes are forcibly taken away can be described only by a god who has fallen from his celestial car or by a king who has lost his kingdom! Nevertheless, the cobbler expressed his readiness to let go of his hut if only the king would come and respectfully ask for his permission which the king did, giving him adequate money as compensation. For those who desire happiness, there should be no false pride, concludes the text, while the cobbler praised the king s commitment to dharma, even towards a lowly subject! From Rdjatarangini by the Kashmiri scholar Kalhana (12th century CE) oh ali Pa A Sovereign: Sovereign indicates that the source of power of a country is independent from external influence. Monarchs: Kings or queens who inherit their position from their family, usually passing it from one generation to the next within the royal family. 2. Monarchies today A monarchy is the type of government that is ruled by a monarch. Kings and queens are called monarchs, who exercise their sovereign power. Monarchies are usually hereditary; typically, the eldest son of the ruling monarch becomes the next king. Today we have two types of monarchy: a. Absolute monarchy In an absolute monarchy the monarch has complete control in the making of laws, 08-04-2025 11:43:51 ensuring that they are followed and adjudicating when they are not. Saudi Arabia is an example of an absolute monarchy; here the king holds all power and governs according to Islamic law. However, he appoints a council that advises and assists him on governance; but he is not bound by the council s advice. Constitutional monarchy Let us consider an example of a different kind of monarchy. The United Kingdom or Britain is also a monarchy. The head of the state is the king or queen, but he or she has only nominal power and the real power of the executive is exercised by the prime minister. The legislative power is exercised by the parliament. This means that all the laws are made by the elected parliament, and executive power is exercised by the Council of Ministers led by the prime minister. So while Britain has a king, it really is, today, a parliamentary democracy. This kind of monarchy is called a constitutional monarchy. Adjudicating: Judging a