? This is the most basic difference across many types of government. Who or what says that this is the government of our country ? That is, who or what gives the government its authority and power? For example, in a democracy like India, it is the people of the country who decide and are the source of authority, while in a theocracy, the source of authority is religious beliefs and the head of a religious institution. "? 2. How is the government formed? In a democracy, a government is formed usually through some kind of election. While in kingdoms which have kings or queens, the kind that you have read about in other chapters, usually someone from within the family continues to rule and decide how the government will be set up. There are other ways of forming a government, and even in democracies there can be different kinds of elections. 3. What are the different parts of the government and what do they do? Any government has many parts and systems, and these vary across different types of government. For example, the three functions of government referred to _ earlier legislative, executive, and judiciary can be performed by totally independent bodies or by the same body. The system to decide how the government will work can be written down in a book of fundamental rules of the country, called the constitution , which is what happens in most 08-04-2025 11:43:47 democracies. Or it can be decided by the king or queen, as it happens in monarchies governments of kings or queens. 4. Whatis the government working for? What goals is it trying to achieve? Governments are designed to work towards certain values and ideals. Some governments, like the government of India, are designed to work towards equality and prosperity for all, while some other governments may be designed only for the prosperity of some families or groups. There are differences between different forms of government based on these four major aspects, but there could be other kind of differences. So, let us now look at some types or forms of government. Democratic Governments around the World Democracy is the most popular form of government in the modern world. In this part of the chapter, we will see that there are different kinds of democratic governments. Before we get into the differences, we should know that there are some fundamental principles of any democracy. Fundamental principles of democracy What is the government working for? What goals is it trying to achieve? Equality in a democracy means that every person has ow the right to be treated equally. It also means that everyone &O8 should have equal access to facilities like education and health, and that everyone is equal before the law. Freedom in democracy means that citizens have the right mee to make their own choices and express their opinions. Representative participation means that every person This is done through the process of elections. Elected has a right to