universal adult franchise remain the same in all democracies. LET'S EXPLORE > After studying the above examples, list the core principles ofademocratic government. Basedon yourunderstanding, do the activity given below: > You have to form a Student Committee in your school. Make a plan and execute it in a democratic manner, ensuring that: Functions of the committee are well defined The election process of the committee members is democratic 08-04-2025 11:43:49 Chapter 9.indd 197 A Peek into History Early republics A republic is a form of government in which the head of state is elected and is not a hereditary monarch. This was the case in at least two of India s ancient mahdjanapadas, as you might recall from the chapter New Beginnings: Cities and States . In the Vajji (or Vriji) mahadjanapada, the Lichchhavi clan, in particular, practised collective decision-making, and leaders were chosen based on merit rather than birth. Key positions were filled through elections, and representatives from various clans met regularly to address issues and develop solutions to ensure the people s welfare. As a result, such states have been called early republics. Indeed, the voice of the common people has been valued and upheld in India through the ages, even when the power was in the hands of a king or queen. A remarkable example from the Chola period is seen in the Uttaramerur inscriptions from the 10th century CE in Tamil Nadu, which provide us with details about the election of members to the village sabha (local administrative body). We learn about the election process, including sealed ballot boxes, qualifications of members, their duties, and also the conditions that could lead to their dismissal. Fig. 9.6. Chola period inscriptions on the walls of Vaikuntha Perumal temple, Uttaramerur, Tamil Nadu 9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government Governance and Democracy 08-04-2025 11:43:49 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 9.indd 198 Slave: A person who is forced to work for and obey another and is considered to be their property. Subjugate: To take control of people or a place by using force and make the people obey. Fig. 9.7. Adoration of the pillar of Sanchi Stipa For instance, members would be immediately removed if found to have indulged in any corruption. There were republics in other parts of the world too. In the 5th and 4th centuries BCE, Rome and Greece had republics. In some regions of Greece, free men could vote, but women, workers and slaves could not. Other areas had a system where only a small, privileged group could vote or make decisions. Other Forms of Government In the previous sections we saw that democracy is the most popular form of government in today s world, and that there are different forms of democracy as well. Let us now look at other forms of governments, and understand their basic structures. 1. Monarchy As we saw in chapters of Tapestry of the Past , mahdjanapadas were headed