not. Other areas had a system where only a small, privileged group could vote or make decisions. Other Forms of Government In the previous sections we saw that democracy is the most popular form of government in today s world, and that there are different forms of democracy as well. Let us now look at other forms of governments, and understand their basic structures. 1. Monarchy As we saw in chapters of Tapestry of the Past , mahdjanapadas were headed by kings, who were guided by the sabha or samitiand were expected to take decisions and advice of these institutions seriously. AS empires were built and expanded across India, kings began to gain immense power. Yet, they relied on a council of ministers and a network of officials to help them govern the empire. In many cases, the king also sought the advice of learnt scholars on matters related to dharma. Of course, there were also examples of kings who used their power to subjugate their people. In some parts of the world, kings had all the power; they made the laws, enforced them, and also decided the punishments. In some cases, they claimed to have received divine power from God. However, in many parts of India, the power of the raja was neither absolute nor beyond question. The king was 08-04-2025 11:43:50 Y THINK ABOUT IT Chapter 9.indd 199 expected to make decisions while staying within the limits of rajadharma; this meant ruling according to dharma and ensuring the welfare of all people. This was an ideal that kings did not necessarily achieve. What might happen if the king considered himself to have divine powers? How would he rule over the people? DON'T MISS OUT Fig. 9.8. A 17th-century Rajput miniature painting depicting Bhishma lying on a bed of arrows, teaching Yudhisthira while Krishna sits at the head, witnessing the moment. In the Shanti Parva of the Mahabharata, when Bhishma, the wise elder of the Kuru dynasty, lies on a bed of arrows awaiting his death, he teaches Yudhisthira, the eldest Pandava, at great length on good governance, justice, and the moral responsibilities of a raja. A raja is not just a ruler; the welfare of his people is his highest priority. He must apply the law without bias to ensure fairness and equality. He must not get attached to power, as it fosters ego and corruption. He must seek guidance from wise advisors to ensure just and well-informed decisions. The raja must understand that his authority is temporary and bound by dharma. 9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government Governance and Democracy 08-04-2025 11:43:50 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 | Chapter 9.indd 200 King Chandrapida wanted to build a temple to his deity, but the hut of a stubborn cobbler stood in the way. When the builders complained to the king that he did not even allow them to take measurements, the king blamed them for not asking the