If the government does not perform its functions properly, the people can change their representatives through elections. This ensures that there is a constant check of what the government does. Thus, the values and ideals of the government in a democracy should focus on the well-being of all its people. Our country is ademocracy, and you can see many of the features of a democracy in our lives every day. It is therefore no wonder that more than half of the countries in the world have adopted democracy and democratic forms of government. It is important to keep in mind, however, that even democracies have their problems. Issues such as corruption, wealth disparity, excessive control by a few over democratic institutions, erosion of the judiciary s independence, manipulation of information 08-04-2025 11:43:55 channels, and several more, can cause hurdles in achieving the ideals of democracy. What can we do as individuals, and as a society, to remain vigilant and minimize these issues and hurdles? Before we move on... > Government plays an important role in running a country. Different types of governments across the world have different answers to the following questions: Who decides This is the government ? What are the parts of the government and what do they do? Who or what is the government working for? What values and ideals should the government follow? The most popular form of government in the world today is democracy. Democratic governments across the world have variations, including direct democracy and representative democracy. There are two types of representative democracy presidential and parliamentary democracy. India is a parliamentary democracy. Other types of government include monarchy, theocracy, dictatorship and oligarchy. Democracy matters, but there are serious challenges to democracy that citizens need to remain vigilant about. Questions and activities 1. Chapter 9.indd 207 Write names of the various types of government that you have learnt in the chapter. Which type of Government does India have? And why is that called that type? You read that an independent judiciary is present in all types of democracies. State any three reasons why you think it is important for the judiciary to be independent. Do you think democratic government is better than other forms of government? Why? 9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government Governance and Democracy o 10-Apr-25 10:51:01 AM 5. These are some practices in a few different countries. Can you match the practice with the type of government? Type of Government L All citizens are treated equally Dictatorship before law The government refers to the II. | religious leader for each and every Monarchy decision it takes. S. No Practice in the country After the queen s death, her son Ill. . Democracy became the new king. The ruler is not bound to follow any Constitution. He makes all the Theocracy decisions as per his choice. 6. Belowisa list of countries. Find out the types of government these countries have: S. No Country Type of Government 4 South