to achieve? Equality in a democracy means that every person has ow the right to be treated equally. It also means that everyone &O8 should have equal access to facilities like education and health, and that everyone is equal before the law. Freedom in democracy means that citizens have the right mee to make their own choices and express their opinions. Representative participation means that every person This is done through the process of elections. Elected has a right to choose and elect their representatives. Se representatives become a part of the legislature. Chapter 9.indd 191 9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government Governance and Democracy 08-04-2025 11:43:47 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 9.indd 192 Universal adult franchise grants every citizen (above a certain age) the right to vote to choose their representative. Fundamental rights of a citizen, such as right to equality, right to freedom of speech and expression, and right against exploitation are all provided and protected in a democracy. RIGHTS Independent judiciary ensures that every citizen s fundamental rights are protected, and that laws are followed by the citizens and also by all the parts of the government. Hs It is useful to remember that even these fundamental principles have evolved over time. For example, India provided universal adult franchise (meaning the right to vote in elections to all adults) from the very beginning of the Indian republic in 1950; on the other hand, in Switzerland, women got the right to vote only in 1971. Clearly, the above principles are ideals; not all democracies are able to put them in practice. But equally clearly, it is important for the citizens to keep these ideals in front of them. Different forms of democratic governments Let us now understand the different forms of democratic governments around the world. 1. Direct democracy This is a form of democracy where all the citizens of a country are directly responsible for all the rules, regulations and functions. They participate in all the decisions directly. In contemporary times, some kinds of this form are followed in a few countries, like Switzerland. The limitation of this form of government is that it is very hard to carry out in practice, particularly in larger countries just as we saw in our school story: if everyone becomes a part of the 08-04-2025 11:43:47 committee, then decision-making and working on all tasks smoothly will be difficult. 2. Representative democracy This is the form of democratic government in which the people elect their representatives through universal adult franchise, just like in India. In this form of democracy, the people do not directly govern, but the government is always accountable to the people. Elections are an integral part of representative democracy through which people can express changes in their choices as well. To accomplish this, elections happen in regular and fixed intervals of time. In India we have general elections every five years, while in the United States of