so that students can be part of making the relevant rules to get all this done, then help in implementation of the rules, and ensure that the rules are being followed. The question before the Head Teacher was who will be part of the committee? The Head Teacher discussed this in the assembly. She proposed that it would be good if some students can take responsibility for these tasks. A student committee should be formed. Hearing this, the students got excited and started arguing. Naghma: Students in Grade 12 are the most senior; we will take care of everything. Shobha: But you will finish school ina few months. The students in Grade 11 should take care of everything. Gurpreet: If the students of only one grade will take care of everything, then how will they know about the problems that other grades face? Chapter 9.indd 187 yy THINK ABOUT IT The school example helps us to understand the concept of representation and how it works. However, the students committee is different from Parliamentary and Legislative committees, as class representatives in a school are quite different from Members of Parliament (MPs) and Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLAs). What are these differences? Discuss with your teacher in the classroom and make a list. 9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government Governance and Democracy 02-06-2025 09:59:48 In this exciting situation, the students finally came to three options: = Everyone in the school becomes part of the committee and Representative: takes responsibility. A person who is chosen to act or . The Head Teacher chooses the students herself for the make decisions on behalf of committee. anothe group of = The students choose their representatives through voting, people and the chosen representatives become the members of the committee. LET'S EXPLORE Which of the three methods do you think is most effective? Why? The first method may seem appealing, but if every student in the school is part of the committee, it will be difficult to reach decisions and manage implementation effectively. In the second method, since the Head Teacher selects the students for the committee, many students will not have a role and won t have a way to ensure that their voices are heard regarding what they need and want. However, in the third method, students from each grade can choose one representative from among themselves someone they believe will effectively advocate for their class s needs. This representative will serve on the committee, meaning that the student committee will consist of representatives from each grade. This approach is a democratic way to choose representatives and form a committee. Functions of Government Previously, we discussed the various roles that a government plays in our lives, similar to the responsibilities of a student committee in a school. Just like the school committee, a government must create necessary rules, implement them, and ensure that everyone follows these rules. These three responsibilities are known as the functions of government. _ @