II in the years 1939-1945, 08-04-2025 11:43:53 oy) Chapter 9.indd 203 which resulted in immense loss of life and property in many countries. Idi Amin was a military dictator in Uganda. He was directly responsible for the merciless killing of thousands of people. Many Indians whose ancestors had migrated to Uganda a few generations before were forced to flee the country. Fig. 9.11. Caricature of Idi Amin DON'T MISS OUT The Roma, or Romani people; were originally nomads. Based on their linguistic and cultural characteristics, scholars have determined that they originated in India. They first settled in parts of eastern Europe but have now migrated to several countries of the world. Fig. 9.12 Story of Shane Shane lives in North Korea which has a set of defined rules for his everyday living. He is currently serving in compulsory military service in which he is expected to serve in the military till the time government decides. There are also rules about how his hair should be cut and the clothes he should wear. He cannot access the global internet, and so is unaware of the world outside his own country. The government watches his every action closely and he is also expected to report about anyone who tries breaking any of the defined rules. One day he met a tourist who asked him, Why do all of you have the same haircut here? To this Shane responded, We all want to explore new styles, but the government decides the way we should keep our hair. Caricature: A drawing that makes someone look funny or foolish because some part of the person's appearance is exaggerated Governance and Democracy 9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government o 08-04-2025 11:43:54 LET S EXPLORE > Does Shane s country look like a democracy? > How do you think Shane s everyday life would be? > Would you like to live in such a country? Explain why. 4. Oligarchy The word oligarchy is of Greek origin, where oligos means a few and arkho means to rule or command. It is a type of government where a small, powerful group makes all the important decisions; usually they are wealthy families or influential people. commentators: In some places in ancient Greece, aristocratic families ruled enslbce snd as oligarchies. In modern times, political commentators have share their observed that even some democracies show signs of oligarchy opinions about | when a small group of politicians and wealthy businesspeople olitical events . P hold too much influence in governance. Sn an THE BOSSES OF THE SENATE. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Fig. 9.13. A cartoon from 1889 depicting an oligarchic situation. | Chapter 9.indd 204 08-04-2025 11:43:55 Chapter 9.indd 205 LET'S EXPLORE > Look carefully at the picture in Fig. 9.13 on the previous page. It depicts an elected body in the USA in the late 19th century. The people shown in the cartoon are all elected members. What do you