which the people elect their representatives through universal adult franchise, just like in India. In this form of democracy, the people do not directly govern, but the government is always accountable to the people. Elections are an integral part of representative democracy through which people can express changes in their choices as well. To accomplish this, elections happen in regular and fixed intervals of time. In India we have general elections every five years, while in the United States of America they occur every four years. < Chapter 9.indd 193 DON T MISS OUT As we stated in the beginning, democracies have evolved over time, and so have their characteristics. Even today, there are a lot of differences in the functioning of these democracies. It is useful to remember that when these countries adopted democracies, they may not have had all the principles of democracy as we understand them today. For example, effective Universal Adult Suffrage in the UK happened in 1928 and in the USA by 1965. Country Year when democracy was established Accountability: Accountability in democracy means that the government is answerable to the people who have elected them. Governance and Democracy 9 - From the Rulers to the Ruled: Types of Government 08-04-2025 11:43:48 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 7 Part 1 Chapter 9.indd 194 Most of the democracies today are representative democracies. But every democracy functions differently. Here are the two forms of representative democracy. a. Parliamentary democracy In this form of government, the members of the executive are also part of the legislature. For example, in India, the prime minister and the council of ministers are also members of the parliament. Fig. 9.5. Voting in India The council of ministers are accountable to the legislature and continue working as long as they have the confidence of the legislature. In India, the council of ministers can continue working while they have confidence of the Lok Sabha. In this form of government, people elect the legislature but not the executive. Selected members of the legislature become ministers. Presidential democracy In this form of government, the executive works independently of the legislature. The president is elected by the people. The president does not need to have the confidence of the legislature for his/her position. In some countries like India, states within the country such as Rajasthan or Kerala have their own governments, but they are not completely independent. They are still governed by a larger national government, the Union Government of India. The different forms of democratic government have different structures. You can understand the basic differences from the table 9.1 on the facing page. What do these terms mean? Executive: The executive is the organ of the government which is responsible for implementing the law. But the process of its election is different in different countries. 08-04-2025 11:43:49 Chapter 9.indd 195 USA South resident single house (National P Assembly) Korea Australia Different forms of democratic government Lower House (Lok Sabha) is more powerful than Upper