be compared. It is also done in a way so that every dollar would buy the same amount of goods and services in any country. DEVELOPMEN Thi > Reprint 2025-26 Isn't it surprising that a small country in our neighbourhood, Sri Lanka, is much ahead of India in every respect and a big country like ours has such a low rank in the world? Table 1.6 also shows that though Nepal and Bangladesh have low per capita income than that of India, yet they are better than India in life expectancy. Many improvements have been suggested in calculating HDI and many new components have been added to the Human Development Report but, by pre-fixing Human to Development, it has made it very clear that what is important in development is what is happening to citizens of a country. Itis people, their health, their well being, that is most important. Do you think there are certain other aspects that should be considered in measuring human development? SUSTAINABILITY OF DEVELOPMENT Suppose for the present that a particular country is quite developed. We would certainly like this level of development to go up further or at least be maintained for future generations. This is obviously desirable. However, since the second half of the twentieth century, a number of scientists have been warning that the present type, and levels, of development are not sustainable. We have not inherited the world from our forefathers we have borrowed it from our children. WHY LETS UNDERSTAND THIS IS 50 THROUGH THE FOLLOWING EXAMPLE: Example 1: Groundwater im India Recent evidence suggests that the groundwater is under serious threat of overuse in many parts of the country. About 300 districts have reported a water level decline of over 4 metres during the past 20 years. Nearly one-third of the country is overusing their groundwater reserves. In another 25 _ years, 60 per cent of the country would be doing the same if the present way of using this resource continues. Groundwater overuse is particularly found in the agriculturally prosperous regions of Punjab and Western U.P., hard rock plateau areas of central and south India, some coastal areas and the rapidly growing urban settlements. (a) Why groundwater is overused? (b) Can there be development without overuse? es 2 See) NDERSTANDING EConomic DEVELOPMENT Reprint 2025-26 Groundwater is an example of renewable resources. These resources are replenished by nature as in the case of crops and plants. However, even these resources may be overused. For example, in the case of groundwater, if we use more than what is being replenished by rain then we would be overusing this resource. Example 2: Middle East United States of America 5 World 1 .. Source : Energy Institute s Statistical Review of World Energy, 2024. The table gives an estimate of reserves of crude oil (column1). More important, it also tells us for how many years the stock of crude oil will last if people continue to extract it at the present rate. The