The most intelligent student may not be the friendliest one. So, how do we compare students? The criterion we may use depends on the purpose of comparison. We use different criterion to choose a sports team, a debate team, a music team or a team to organise a picnic. Still, if for some purpose, we have to choose the criterion for the all-round progress of children in the class, how shall we do it? Usually we take one or more important characteristics of persons and compare them based on these characteristics. Of course, there can be differences about what are important characteristics that should form the basis of comparison: friendliness and spirit of cooperation, creativity or marks secured? This is true of development too. For comparing countries, their income is considered to be one of the most important attributes. Countries with higher income are Reprint 2025-26 more developed than others with less income. This is based on the understanding that more income means more of all things that human beings need. Whatever people like, and should have, they will be able to get with greater income. So, greater income itself is considered to be one important goal. Now, what is the income of a country? Intuitively, the income of the country is the income of all the residents of the country. This gives us the total income of the country. However, for comparison between countries, total income is not such an useful measure. Since, countries have different populations, comparing total income will not tell us what an average person is likely to earn. Are people in one country better off than others ina different country? Hence, we compare the average income which is the total income of the country divided by its total population. The average income is also called per capita income. In World Development Reports, brought out by the World Bank, this criterion is used in classifying countries. Countries with per capita income of US$ 63,400 per annum and above in 2023, are called high income or rich countries and those with per capita income of about US$ 2400 or less are called low-income countries. India comes in the category of low middle income countries because its per capita income in 2023 was just about US$ 10030 per annum. The rich countries, excluding countries of Middle East and certain other small countries, are generally called developed countries. ee - eee J) NDERSTANDING ECoNnomic DEVELOPMENT Average Income While averages are useful for comparison, they also hide disparities For example, let us consider two countries, A and B. For the sake of simplicity, we have assumed that they have only five citizens each. Based on data given in Table 1.2, calculate the average income for both the countries. TABLE 1.2 COMPARISON OF TWO COUNTRIES Monthly incomes of citizens (in Rupees) wv rae Country A |9500 |10500| 9800 | 10000 10200] Will you be equally happy to live in both these countries? Are both equally developed? Perhaps some of us may