to keep in mind that Reprint 2025-26 different persons could have different as well as conflicting notions of a country s development. However, can all the ideas be considered equally important? Or, if there are conflicts how does one decide? What would be a fair and just path for all? We also have to think whether there is a better way of doing things. Would the idea benefit a large number of people or only a small group? National development means thinking about these questions. ee eee NDERSTANDING ECoNnomic DEVELOPMENT LET S WORK THESE OUT Discuss the following situations: 1. Look at the picture on the right. What should be the developmental goals for such an area? . Read this newspaper report and answer the questions that follow: A vessel dumped 500 tonnes of liquid toxic wastes inte open-air dumps in a city an in the surrounding sea. ant happened in a city calle Abidjan in Ivory Coast, a country in Africa. The fumes from the highly toxic waste caused nausea, skin rashes, fainting, diarrhoea etc. After a month seven persons were dead, twenty in hospital and twenty six thousand treated for symptoms of poisoning. A multinational company ing in petroleum an oes had contracted a local company of the Ivory Coast to dispose the toxic waste from its ship. K_ ES= EE) AEE. Goce eee meer Nal i (i) Who are the peo 9 benefited and who did (ii) What should be developm ?, goal i country? 3. What can e of the CO al goals for your village, town or locality? ao fs, ACTIVITY 1 If even the idea of what constitutes development can be varied and conflicting, then certainly there can be differences about ways of developing. If you know of any such controversy, try to find out arguments advanced by different people. You may do so by talking to different persons or you may find it from newspapers and television. DEVELOPMEN Ti Reprint 2025-26 HOW TO COMPARE DIFFERENT COUNTRIES OR STATES? You might ask if development can mean different things, how come some countries are generally called developed and others underdeveloped? Before we come to this, let us consider another question. When we compare different things, they could have similarities as well as differences. Which aspects do we use to compare them? Let us look at students in the class itself. How do we compare different students? They differ in their height, health, talents and interests. The healthiest student may not be the most studious one. The most intelligent student may not be the friendliest one. So, how do we compare students? The criterion we may use depends on the purpose of comparison. We use different criterion to choose a sports team, a debate team, a music team or a team to organise a picnic. Still, if for some purpose, we have to choose the criterion for the all-round progress of children in the class, how shall we do it? Usually we take one or more