rural labourers ; Assured a high family income through higher support prices for Prosperous farmers from Punjab | iheir crops and through hardworking and cheap labourers; they should be able to settle their children abroad. Farmers who depend only on rain for growing crops A rural woman from a land owning family A boy from a rich urban family She gets as much freedom as her brother and is able to A girl from a rich urban family decide what she wants to do in life. She is able to pursue her studies abroad. Having filled Table 1.1, letusnow They seek things that are most examine it. Do all of these persons important for them, i.e., that which have the same notion of development can fulfil their aspirations or desires. or progress? Most likely not. Each In fact, at times, two persons or one of them seeks different things. groups of persons may seek things ee Gee) NDERSTANDING ECoNomic DEVELOPMENT Reprint 2025-26 which are conflicting. A girl expects as much freedom and opportunity as her brother, and that he also shares in the household work. Her brother may not like this. Similarly, to get more electricity, industrialists may want more dams. But this may submerge the land and disrupt the lives of people who are displaced such as tribals. They might resent this and may prefer small check dams or tanks to irrigate their land. So, two things are quite clear: one, different persons can have different developmental goals and two, what may be development for one may not be development for the other. It may even be destructive for the other. INCOME AND OTHER GOALS If you go over Table 1.1 again, you will notice one common thing: what people desire are regular work, better wages, and decent price for their crops or other products that they produce. In other words, they want more income. Besides seeking more income, oneway or the other, people also seek things like equal treatment, freedom, security, and respect of others. They resent discrimination. All these are important goals. In fact, in some cases, these may be more important than more income or more consumption because material goods are not all that you need to live. Money, or material things that one can buy with it, is one factor on which our life depends. But the quality of our life also depends on non-material things mentioned above. If it is not obvious to you, then just think of the role of your friends in your life. You may desire their friendship. Similarly, there are many things that are not easily measured but they mean a lot to our lives. These are often ignored. THOSE PEOPLE DON T WANT TO DEVELOF! A demonstration meeting against raising the height of Sardar Sarovar Dam on Narmada River However, it will be wrong to conclude that what cannot be measured is not important. Consider another example. If you get a job in a far off place, before accepting