facilities. DEVELOPMEN Thi i A Reprint 2025-26 Kerala has a low Infant Mortality System (PDS) functions well. Health Rate because it has adequate and nutritional status of people of provision of basic health and _ such states is certainly likely to be educational facilities. Similarly, in better. some states, the Public Distribution LET S WORK THESE OUT . Look at data in Tables 1.3 and 1.4. ls Haryana ahead of Kerala in literacy rate etc., as it is in terms of per capita income? 2. Think of other examples where collective provision of goods and services is cheaper than individual provision. 3. Does availability of good health and educational facilities depend only on amount of money spent by the government on these facilities? What other factors could be relevant? 4. In a study, it was found that in Tamil Nadu, 90 per cent of the people living in rural areas used a ration shop, whereas in West Bengal only 35 per cent of rural people did so. Where would people did better off and why? ACTIVITY 2 Study Table 1.5 carefully and fill in the blanks in the following paragraphs. For this, you may need to make calculations based on the table. TABLE 1.5 EDUCATIONAL ACHIEVEMENT OF RURAL POPULATION OF UTTAR PRADESH Category | Male | Female Literacy rate for rural population Literacy rate for rural children in age group 10-14 years Percentage of rural children aged 10-14 attending school (a) The literacy rate for all age groups, including young and old, is for rural males and for rural females. However, it is not just that these many adults could not attend school but that there are who are currently not in school. It is clear from the table that % of rural girls and % of rural boys are not attending school. Therefore, illiteracy among children in the age group 1014 is as high as % for rural females and % for rural males. This high level of illiteracy among ________ age group, even after more than 75 years of our independence, is most disturbing. In many other states also we are nowhere near realisation of the constitutional goal of free and compulsory education for all children up to the age of 14, which was expected to be achieved by 1960. es bee J) NDERSTANDING EConomic DEVELOPMENT Reprint 2025-26 ACTIVITY 3 One way to find out if we are properly nourished is to calculate what nutrition scientists call Body Mass Index (BMI). This is easy to calculate. Let each student in the class find out his or her weight and height. Take the weight of each student in kilograms (kg). Then, take the height by drawing up a scale on the wall and measuring accurately with the head straight. Convert the height recorded in centimeters into meters. Divide the weight in kg by the square of the height. The number you get is called BMI. Then, look at the BMI-for-Age tables given on pages 90-91. A student s BMI