So the debate on development continues. EXERCISES 1. Development of a country can generally be determined by (i) its per capita income (ii) its average literacy level (iii) health status of its people (iv) all the above . Which of the following neighbouring countries has better performance in terms of human development than India? (i) Bangladesh (ii) Sri Lanka (iii) Nepal (iv) Pakistan . Assume there are four families in a country. The average per capita income of these families is Rs 5000. If the income of three families is Rs 4000, Rs 7000 and Rs 3000 respectively, what is the income of the fourth family? (i) Rs 7500 (ii) Rs 3000 (iii) Rs 2000 (iv) Rs 6000 . What is the main criterion used by the World Bank in classifying different countries? What are the limitations of this criterion, if any? . In what respects is the criterion used by the UNDP for measuring development different from the one used by the World Bank? . Why do we use averages? Are there any limitations to their use? Illustrate with your own examples related to development. . Kerala, with lower per capita income has a better human development ranking than Haryana. Hence, per capita income is not a useful criterion at all and should not be used to compare states. Do you agree? Discuss. . Find out the present sources of energy that are used by the people in India. What could be the other possibilities fifty years from now? . Why is the issue of sustainability important for development? UNDERSTANDING ECONomic DEVELOPMENT Reprint 2025-26 . The Earth has enough resources to meet the needs of all but not enough to satisfy the greed of even one person . How is this statement relevant to the disscusion of development? Discuss. . List a few examples of environmental degradation that you may have observed around you. . For each of the items given in Table 1.6, find out which country is at the top and which is at the bottom. . The following table shows the proportion of adults (aged 15-49 years) whose BMI is below normal (BMI <18.5 kg/m?) in India. It is based on a survey of various states for the year 2019-21. Look at the table and answer the following questions. Kerala Karnataka Madhya Pradesh All States Source: National Family Health Survey-5, 2019-21, http://rchiips.org (i) Compare the nutritional level of people in Kerala and Madhya Pradesh. (ii) Can you guess why around one-fifth of people in the country are undernourished even though it is argued that there is enough food in the country? Describe in your own words. ADDITIONAL PROJECT / ACTIVITY Invite three different speakers to talk to you about the development of your region. Ask them all the questions that come to your mind. Discuss these ideas in groups. Each group should prepare a wall chart, giving reasons about ideas that you agree or do not agree with. Reprint 2025-26