think of parents whose children die before they even celebrate their first birthday. How painful it must be to these parents? Next, note the year to which this data pertains. This was during 2018. So we are not talking of old times; it is 70 years after independence when our metro cities are full of high rise buildings and shopping malls! How is it that the average person in Haryana has more income than the average person in Kerala but lags behind in these crucial areas? The reason is money in your pocket cannot buy all the goods and services that you may need to live well. So, income by itself is not a completely adequate indicator of material goods and services that citizens are able to use. For example, normally, your money cannot buy you a pollution-free environment or ensure that you get unadulterated medicines, unless you can afford to shift to a community that already has all these things. Money may also not be able to protect you from infectious diseases, unless the whole of your community takes preventive steps. The problem does not end with Infant Mortality Rate. The last column of table 1.4 shows that about one-third of the children aged 15-17 years in Bihar are not attending school in secondary classes. This means that if you went to school in Bihar nearly one-third of your class friends would be missing. Those who could have been in school are not there! If this had happened to you, you would not be able to read what you are reading now. Most babies require basic healthcare PUBLIC FACILITIES Actually for many of the important things in life the best way, also the cheapest way, is to provide these goods and services collectively. Just think will it be cheaper to have collective security for the whole locality or for each house to have its own security staff? What if no one, other than you, in your village or locality is interested in studying? Would you be able to study? Not unless your parents could afford to send you to some private school elsewhere. So you are actually able to study because many other children also want to study and because many people believe that the government should open schools and provide other facilities so that all children have a chance to study Even now, in many areas, children, particularly girls, are not able | to go to high school because the * 1 government/society has not provided 4 adequate facilities. DEVELOPMEN Thi i A Reprint 2025-26 Kerala has a low Infant Mortality System (PDS) functions well. Health Rate because it has adequate and nutritional status of people of provision of basic health and _ such states is certainly likely to be educational facilities. Similarly, in better. some states, the Public Distribution LET S WORK THESE OUT . Look at data in Tables 1.3 and 1.4. ls Haryana ahead of Kerala in literacy rate etc., as it is in terms