if we use more than what is being replenished by rain then we would be overusing this resource. Example 2: Middle East United States of America 5 World 1 .. Source : Energy Institute s Statistical Review of World Energy, 2024. The table gives an estimate of reserves of crude oil (column1). More important, it also tells us for how many years the stock of crude oil will last if people continue to extract it at the present rate. The reserves would last only 50 years more. This is for the world as a whole. However, different countries face different situations. Countries like India depend on importing oil from abroad because they do not have enough stocks of their own. If prices of oil increase this becomes a burden for everyone. There are countries like USA which have low reserves and hence want to secure oil through military or economic power. The question of sustainability of development raises many fundamentally newissues about the nature and process of development. (a) Is crude oil essential for the development process in a country? Discuss. (b) India has to import crude oil. What problems do you anticipate for the country looking at the above situation? EXTRACT FROM THE EARTH IS A NON RENEWABLE RE MAY FIND A SOURCE O LIE NOT KNOW OF EAR : ARE BEING UNDERTAKEN ALL THE TIME. Exhaustiow of Natural Resourcey Look at the following data for crude oil. TABLE 1.7 CRUDE OIL RESERVES Region/Country Reserves (2017) Number of Years ee Million Barrels) | Reserves will last Non-renewable resources are those which will get exhausted after a few years of use. We have a fixed stock on earth which cannot be replenished. We do discover new resources that we did not know of earlier. New sources in this way add to the stock. However, over time, even this will get exhausted. FOR EXAMPLE, CRUDE OIL THAT WE SOURCE. HOWEVER WE F OIL THAT WE DID R, EXPLORATIONS DEVELOPMEN Thin io Reprint 2025-26 and Consequences of environmental degradation do not respect national or state boundaries; this issue is no longer region or nation specific. Our future is linked together. Sustainability of development is comparatively a new area of knowledge in which scientists, economists, philosophers and other social scientists are working together. In general, the question of development or progress is perennial. At all times as a member of society and as individuals we need to ask where we want to go, what we wish to become and what our goals are. So the debate on development continues. EXERCISES 1. Development of a country can generally be determined by (i) its per capita income (ii) its average literacy level (iii) health status of its people (iv) all the above . Which of the following neighbouring countries has better performance in terms of human development than India? (i) Bangladesh (ii) Sri Lanka (iii) Nepal (iv) Pakistan . Assume there are four families in a country. The average per capita income of these families