let us consider two countries, A and B. For the sake of simplicity, we have assumed that they have only five citizens each. Based on data given in Table 1.2, calculate the average income for both the countries. TABLE 1.2 COMPARISON OF TWO COUNTRIES Monthly incomes of citizens (in Rupees) wv rae Country A |9500 |10500| 9800 | 10000 10200] Will you be equally happy to live in both these countries? Are both equally developed? Perhaps some of us may like to live in country B if we are assured of being its fifth citizen but if it is a lottery that decides our citizenship number then perhaps most of us will prefer to live in country A. Even though both the countries have identical average income, country A is preferred because it has more equitable distribution. In this country people are neither very rich nor extremely poor. On the other hand most citizens in country B are poor and one person is extremely rich. Hence, while average income is useful for comparison it does not tell us how this income is distributed among people. ~\S4 .~ rvJ COUNTRY WITH RICH AND POOR COUNTRY WITH NO RICH AND NO POOR WE MADE THE CHAIRS AND WE USE THEM. WE MADE THE CHAIRS AND HE TOOK THEM. LET S WORK THESE OUT 1. Give three examples where an average is used for comparing situations. 2. Why do you think average income is an important criterion for development? Explain. 3. Besides size of per capita income, what other property of income is important in comparing two or more societies? 4. Suppose records show that the average income in a country has been increasing over a period of time. From this, can we conclude that all sections of the economy have become better? Illustrate your answer with an example. 5. From the text, find out the per capita income level of about 10-15 low-income countries as per World Development Reports. 6. Write a paragraph on your notion of what should India do, or achieve, to become a developed country. Reprint 2025-26 TABLE 1.4 Haryana Kerala Bihar When we looked at individual aspirations and goals, we found that people not only think of better income but also have goals such as security, respect for others, equal treatment, freedom, etc. in mind. Similarly, when we think ofa nation or a region, we may, besides average income, think of other equally important attributes. What could these attributes be? Let us examine this through an example. Table 1.3 gives the per capita income of Haryana, Kerala and Bihar. Actually, these figures are of Per Capita Net State Domestic Product at Current Prices for 2021-22. Let us ignore what this complicated term exactly means. Roughly, we can take it to be the per capita income of the state. We find that of the three, Haryana has the highest per capita INCOME AND OTHER CRITERIA TABLE 1.3 PER CAPITA INCOME OF SELECT STATES Per Capita Income for 2021-22 (in