NOTES FOR THE TEACHER CHAPTER | : DEVELOPMENT Development has many aspects. The purpose of this chapter is to enable students to understand this idea. They have to understand that people have different perspectives on development and there are ways by which we can arrive at common indicators for development. To do this, we have used situations that they can respond to in an intuitive manner; we have also presented analysis that is more complex and macro in nature. How can countries or states be compared using some _ selected development indicators is another question that students would read about in this chapter. Economic development can be measured and income is the most common method for measuring development. However, the income method, though useful, has several weaknesses. Hence, we need newer ways of looking at development using indicators of quality of life and environmental sustainability. It is necessary for you to expect the students to respond actively in the classroom and on a topic such as the above, there would be wide variation in opinion and possibility of debate. Allow students to argue their point of view. At the end of each section there are a few questions and activities. These serve two purposes: first, they recap the ideas discussed in the section and second, they enable better understanding of the themes discussed by bringing the learners closer to their real life situations. There are certain terms used in this chapter that would require clarification Per Capita Income, Literacy Rate, Infant Mortality Rate, Attendance Ratio, Life Expectancy, Gross Enrolment Ratio, and Human Development Index. Though data pertaining to these terms are provided, these would need further explanation. You may also need to clarify the concept of Purchasing Power Parity that is used to calculate Gross National Income per capita in Table 1.6. Itis necessary to keep in mind that these terms are used as an aid to the discussion and not something to be memorised. Sources for Information The data for this chapter is taken from reports published by the Government of India (Economic Survey, Reports of the National Family Health Survey and Handbook of Statistics on the Indian Economy), United Nations Development Programme (Human Development Report) and World Bank (World Development Indicators). Many of these reports are published every year. It may be interesting to look up these reports if they are available in your school library. If not, you may log on to the websites of these institutions (www.budgetindia.nic.in, www.undp.org,www.worldbank.org, Wwuww.rbi.org). Se Wee) NDERSTANDING ECoNnomic DEVELOPMENT Reprint 2025-26 Yl NAYS Y, S Ss % y < Y S | AS. \) j I & SPSS [ier aN SY . LX 3 LS mee Ze > i Sf SSL es RA a OS SUNOS SUN ROIS The idea of development or progress Tid iIiiti is has always been with us. We have aspirations or desires about what we would like to do and how we would like to live. Similarly, we have ideas about what a country should be