student in the class find out his or her weight and height. Take the weight of each student in kilograms (kg). Then, take the height by drawing up a scale on the wall and measuring accurately with the head straight. Convert the height recorded in centimeters into meters. Divide the weight in kg by the square of the height. The number you get is called BMI. Then, look at the BMI-for-Age tables given on pages 90-91. A student s BMI could be within the normal range or less than that (underweight) or more (obesity). For example, if a girl student is 14 years and 8 month old and the BMI is 15.2, then she is undernourished. Similarly, if the BMI of a boy aged 15 years and 6 months is 28, then he is overweight. Discuss the life situation, food and exercise habits of students, in general, without body shaming anyone. HUMAN DEVELOPMEN REPORT Once it is realised that even though the level of income is important, yet it is an inadequate measure of the level of development, we begin to think of other criterion. There could be a long list of such criterion but then it would not be so useful. What we need is a small number of the most important things. Health and education indicators, such as the ones we used in comparison of Kerala and Haryana, are among them. Over the past decade or so, health and education indicators have come to be widely used along with income as a measure of development. For instance, Human Development Report published by UNDP compares countries based on the educational levels of the people, their health status and per capita income. It would be interesting to look at certain relevant data regarding India and its neighbours from Human Development Report 2023-24. TABLE 1.6 SOME DATA REGARDING INDIA AND ITS NEIGHBOURS FOR 2022 Country Gross National Life Mean Years of HDI Rank in Income (GNI) Expectancy Schooling of the world per capita at birth People aged 25 (2021-22) (2017 PPP $) and above Sri Lanka India Myanmar Pakistan Nepal Bangladesh Source : Human Development Report, 2023-24, United Nations Development Programme, New York. NOTES 1. HDI stands for Human Development Index. HDI ranks in above table are out of 193 countries in all. 2. Life Expectancy at birth denotes, as the name suggests, average expected length of life of a person at the time of birth. 3. Per Capita Income is calculated in dollars for all countries so that it can be compared. It is also done in a way so that every dollar would buy the same amount of goods and services in any country. DEVELOPMEN Thi > Reprint 2025-26 Isn't it surprising that a small country in our neighbourhood, Sri Lanka, is much ahead of India in every respect and a big country like ours has such a low rank in the world? Table 1.6 also shows that though Nepal and Bangladesh have low per capita income than that