fish in the open sea using satellites and echo-sounders. Some marine fish of high economic value are also farmed in seawater. This includes finned fishes like mullets, bhetki, and pearl spots, shellfish such as prawns (Fig. 12.5), mussels and oysters as well as seaweed. Oysters are also cultivated for the pearls they make. Peneaus monodon (marine) Macrobrachium rosenbergii (fresh water) Fig. 12.5 : Fresh water and marine prawns As marine fish stocks get further depleted, the demand for more fish can only be met by such culture fisheries, a practice called mariculture. 12.2.3 (ii) INLAND FISHERIES Fresh water resources include canals, ponds, reservoirs and rivers. Brackish water resources, where seawater and fresh water mix together, such as estuaries and lagoons are also important fish reservoirs. While capture fishing is also done in such inland water bodies, the yield is not high. Most fish production from these resources is through aquaculture. Fish culture is sometimes done in combination with a rice crop, so that fish are grown in the water in the paddy field. More intensive fish farming can be done in composite fish culture systems. Both local and imported fish species are used in such systems. IMPROVEMENT IN FOOD RESOURCES In such a system, a combination of five or six fish species is used in a single fishpond. These species are selected so that they do not compete for food among them having different types of food habits. As a result, the food available in all the parts of the pond is used. As Catlas are surface feeders, Rohus feed in the middle-zone of the pond, Mrigals and Common Carps are bottom feeders, and Grass Carps feed on the weeds, together these species (Fig. 12.6) can use all the food in the pond without competing with each other. This increases the fish yield from the pond. Pe MES . sr ae Nes CO ae Fig. 12.6: (a) Catla (b) Silver carp (c) Rohu (d) Grass Carp (e) Mrigal (f) Common Carp One problem with such composite fish culture is that many of these fish breed only during monsoon. Even if fish seed is collected from the wild, it can be mixed with that of other species as well. So, a major problem in fish farming is the lack of availability of goodquality seed. To overcome this problem, ways have now been worked out to breed these fish in ponds using hormonal stimulation. This has ensured the supply of pure fish seed in desired quantities. Reprint 2025-26 uestions 1. Howare fish obtained? 2. What are the advantages of composite fish culture? Activity e Visit a fish farm in fish breeding season and note the following: (1) Varieties of fish in fish farm (2) Types of ponds (3) Feed ingredients used (4) Production capacity of the farm If there are no fish farms close to your locality, gather the above information from Internet, by referring books or talking to people who are engaged in fishery. 12.2.4 BEE-KEEPING Honey is widely used and