garden/agricultural field and make a list of the weeds and the flowers/crops found in the area. Also, make a list of insect pests, if any, infesting the flowers/crops. STORAGE OF GRAINS Storage losses in agricultural produce can be very high. Factors responsible for such losses are biotic insects, rodents, fungi, mites and bacteria, and abiotic inappropriate moisture and temperatures in the place of storage. These factors cause degradation in quality, loss in weight, poor germinability, discolouration of produce, all leading to poor marketability. These factors can be controlled by proper treatment and by systematic management of warehouses. Preventive and control measures are used before grains are stored for future use. They include strict cleaning of the produce before storage, proper drying of the produce first in sunlight and then in shade, and fumigation using chemicals that can kill pests. uestions 1. Why should preventive measures and biological control methods be preferred for protecting crops? 2. What factors may be responsible for losses of grains during storage? Vitamins B1, B2, B12, D, E B2, D B2, B12 Niacin, D, A Activity 12.2 Collect grains/seeds of cereals, pulses and oil seeds and gather information about the seasons in which they are sown and harvested. 12.2 Animal Husbandry Animal husbandry is the scientific management of animal livestock. It includes various aspects such as feeding, breeding and disease control. Animal-based farming includes cattle, goat, sheep, poultry and fish farming. As the population increases and as living standards increase, the demand for milk, eggs and meat is also going up. Also, the growing awareness of the need for humane treatment of livestock has brought in new limitations in livestock farming. Thus, livestock production also needs to be improved. 12.2.1 CATTLE FARMING Cattle husbandry is done for two purposes milk and draught labour for agricultural work such as tilling, irrigation and carting. Indian cattle belong to two different species, Bos indicus, cows, and Bos bubalis, buffaloes. Milk-producing females are called milch animals (dairy animals), while the ones used for farm labour are called draught animals. Milk production depends, to some extent, on the duration of the lactation period, meaning the period of milk production after SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 Fig. 12.3: Indigenous milch breed of cattle the birth of a calf. So, milk production can be increased by increasing the lactation period. Exotic or foreign breeds (for example, Jersey, Brown Swiss) are selected for long lactation periods, while local breeds (for example, Red Sindhi, Sahiwal) show excellent resistance to diseases. The two can be cross-bred to get animals with both the desired qualities. uestion 1. Which method is commonly used for improving cattle breeds and why? Activity _12.3 Visit a livestock farm. Note the following: (1) Number of cattle and number of different breeds. (2) The amount of daily milk production from the different breeds. Proper cleaning and shelter facilities for cows and buffaloes are required for humane farming, for the health of the animals and for production of clean milk as well. Animals require regular brushing