using agricultural by-products. uestion 1. Discuss the implications of the following statement: It is interesting to note that poultry is India s most efficient converter of low fibre food.stuff (which is unfit for human consumption) .into highly nutritious animal protein food. EGG AND BROILER PRODUCTION Broiler chickens are fed with vitamin-rich supplementary feed for good growth rate and better feed efficiency. Care is taken to avoid mortality and to maintain feathering and carcass quality. They are produced as broilers and sent to market for meat purposes. For good production of poultry birds, good management practices are important. These include maintenance of temperature and hygienic conditions in housing and poultry feed, as well as prevention and control of diseases and pests. The housing, nutritional and environmental requirements of broilers are somewhat different from those of egg layers. The ration (daily food requirement) for broilers is protein rich with adequate fat. The level of vitamins A and K is kept high in the poultry feeds. Poultry fowl suffer from a number of diseases caused by virus, bacteria, fungi, parasites, as well as from nutritional deficiencies. These necessitate proper cleaning, sanitation, and spraying of disinfectants at regular intervals. Appropriate vaccination can prevent the occurrence of infectious diseases and reduce loss of poultry during an outbreak of disease. uestions 1. What management practices are common in dairy and poultry farming? 2. Whatare the differences between broilers and Jayers and in their management? Activity 12.4 e Visit a local poultry farm. Observe types of breeds and note the type of ration, housing and lighting facilities given to them. Identify the growers, layers and broilers. 12.2.3 FISH PRODUCTION Fish is a cheap source of animal protein for our food. Fish production includes the finned true fish as well as shellfish such as prawns and molluscs. There are two ways of obtaining fish. One is from natural resources, which is called capture fishing. The other way is by fish farming, which is called culture fishery. The water source of the fish can be either seawater or fresh water, such as in rivers and ponds. Fishing can thus be done both by capture and culture of fish in marine and freshwater ecosystems. 12.2.3 (i) MARINE FISHERIES India s marine fishery resources include 7500 km of coastline and the deep seas SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 beyond it. Popular marine fish varieties include pomphret, mackerel, tuna, sardines, and Bombay duck. Marine fish are caught using many kinds of fishing nets from fishing boats. Yields are increased by locating large schools of fish in the open sea using satellites and echo-sounders. Some marine fish of high economic value are also farmed in seawater. This includes finned fishes like mullets, bhetki, and pearl spots, shellfish such as prawns (Fig. 12.5), mussels and oysters as well as seaweed. Oysters are also cultivated for the pearls they make. Peneaus monodon (marine) Macrobrachium rosenbergii (fresh water) Fig. 12.5 : Fresh water and marine prawns As marine fish stocks get further depleted, the demand for more fish