this energy from the food we eat. During digestion, food is broken down into simpler substances. For example, rice, potatoes and bread contain carbohydrates. These carbohydrates are broken down to form glucose. This glucose combines with oxygen in the cells of our body and provides energy. The special name of this reaction is respiration, the process of which you will study in Chapter 6. C,H,,0,(aqg),+ 60,(aq) > 6CO, (aq) + 6H,O()) + energy (1.18) (Glucose) (iii) The decomposition of vegetable matter into compost is also an example of an exothermic reaction. Identify the type of the reaction taking place in Activity 1.1, where heat is given out along with the formation of a single product. Chemical Reactions and Equations 7 Reprint 2025-26 Wafting gas gently towards nose Do not point the mouth of boiling tube at your neighbours or yourself Figure 1.4 Correct way of heating the boiling tube containing crystals of ferrous sulphate and of smelling the odour A pair of tongs 1.2.2 Decomposition Reaction = Take about 2 g ferrous sulphate crystals in a dry boiling tube. = Note the colour of the ferrous sulphate Boiling tube crystals. FR Heat the boiling tube over the flame of errous sulphate crystals a burner or spirit lamp as shown in Fig. 1.4. = Observe the colour of the crystals after heating. Have you noticed that the green colour of the ferrous sulphate crystals has changed? You can also smell the characteristic odour of burning sulphur. 2FeSO,(s) Heat Fe,O,(s) + SO,(g) + SO,(g) (1.19) (Ferrous sulphate) (Ferric oxide) In this reaction you can observe that a single reactant breaks down to give simpler products. This is a decomposition reaction. Ferrous sulphate crystals (FeSO,. 7H,O) lose water when heated and the colour of the crystals changes. It then decomposes to ferric oxide (Fe,O.,), sulphur dioxide (SO,) and sulphur trioxide (SO,). Ferric oxide is a solid, while SO, and SO, are gases. Decomposition of calcium carbonate to calcium oxide and carbon dioxide on heating is an important decomposition reaction used in various industries. Calcium oxide is called lime or quick lime. It has many uses - one is in the manufacture of cement. When a decomposition reaction is carried out by heating, it is called thermal decomposition. CaCO,(s) Heat , CaO(s) + CO,(g) (1.20) (Limestone) (Quick lime) Another example of a thermal decomposition reaction is given in Activity 1.6. Boiling tube Lead nitrate = Take about 2 g lead nitrate powder in a boiling tube. = Hold the boiling tube with a pair of tongs and heat it over a flame, as shown in Fig. 1.5. = What do you observe? Note down the change, if any. You will observe the emission of brown fumes. Figure 1.5 ; a Heating of lead nitrate and These fumes are of nitrogen dioxide (NO,). The emission of nitrogen dioxide reaction that takes place is 8 Science Reprint 2025-26 2Pb(NO,),(s) Heat 2PbO(s) + 4NO,(g) + 0,(9) (1.21) (Lead nitrate) (Lead oxide) (Nitrogen (Oxygen) dioxide) Let us perform