other words, the number of atoms of each element remains the same, before and after a chemical reaction. Hence, we need to balance a skeletal chemical equation. Is the chemical Eq. (1.2) balanced? Let us learn about balancing a chemical equation step by step. The word-equation for Activity 1.3 may be represented as Zinc + Sulphuric acid Zinc sulphate + Hydrogen The above word-equation may be represented by the following chemical equation Zn + H,SO, > ZnSO, +H, (1.3) Let us examine the number of atoms of different elements on both sides of the arrow. Element Number of atoms in Number of atoms reactants (LHS) in products (RHS) As the number of atoms of each element is the same on both sides of the arrow, Eq. (1.3) is a balanced chemical equation. Let us try to balance the following chemical equation Fe + H,O Fe,O, + H, (1.4) Chemical Reactions and Equations Reprint 2025-26 Step I: To balance a chemical equation, first draw boxes around each formula. Do not change anything inside the boxes while balancing the equation. [Fe] + [H,0] > [Fe,0,] + [1,] (1.5) Step II: List the number of atoms of different elements present in the unbalanced equation (1.5). Element Number of atoms Number of atoms in reactants (LHS) in products (RHS) Step III: It is often convenient to start balancing with the compound that contains the maximum number of atoms. It may be a reactant ora product. In that compound, select the element which has the maximum number of atoms. Using these criteria, we select Fe,O, and the element oxygen in it. There are four oxygen atoms on the RHS and only one on the LHS. To balance the oxygen atoms Atoms of oxygen (in H,O) (i) Initial C (ii) To balange 2 1Xom To equalise the number of atoms, it must be remembered that we cannot alter the formulae of the compounds or elements involved in the reactions. For example, to balance oxygen atoms we can put coefficient 4 as 4 H,O and not H,O, or (H,O),. Now the partly balanced equation becomes * 4[H,0| x * (partly balanced coutation Step IV: Fe and H atoms are still not balanced. Pick any of these elements to proceed further. Let us balance hydrogen atoms in the partly balanced equation. To equalise the number of H atoms, make the number of molecules of hydrogen as four on the RHS. Atoms of In reactants In products hydrogen (i) Initial 8 (in 4 H,O) 2 (in H,) (ii) To balance 8 2x4 4 (in Fe,O,) The equation would be (1.7) + 4 > + alH, | (partly balanced equation) Science Reprint 2025-26 Step V: Examine the above equation and pick up the third element which is not balanced. You find that only one element is left to be balanced, that is, iron. Atoms of iron (i) Initial 1 (in Fe) 3 (in Fe,O,) (ii) To balance 1x3 3 To equalise Fe, we take three atoms of Fe on the