decomposition reactions? We have seen that the decomposition reactions require energy either in the form of heat, light or electricity for breaking down the reactants. Reactions in which energy is absorbed are known as endothermic reactions. Carry out the following Activity Take about 2 g barium hydroxide in a test tube. Add 1 g of ammonium chloride and mix with the help of a glass rod. Touch the bottom of the test tube with your palm. What do you feel? Is this an exothermic or endothermic reaction? Q U ES TION S A solution of a substance X is used for whitewashing. (ij) Name the substance X and write its formula. (ii) Write the reaction of the substance X named in (i) above with water. Why is the amount of gas collected in one,of the test tubes in Activity 1.7 double of the amount collected in the other? Name.this gas. 1.2.3 Displacement Reaction = Take three iron nails and clean them by Test tube rubbing with sand paper. = Take two test tubes marked as (A) and (B). In each test tube, take about 10 mL copper sulphate solution. = Tie two iron nails with a thread and Thread Copper sulphate solution immerse them carefully in the copper sulphate solution in test tube B for Iron nail about 20 minutes [Fig. 1.8 (a)]. Keep one iron nail aside for comparison. = After 20 minutes, take out the iron nails from the copper sulphate solution. = Compare the intensity of the blue colour of copper sulphate solutions in test tubes (A) and (B) [Fig. 1.8 (b)]. (a) = Also, compare the colour of the iron nails Figure 1.8 dipped in the copper sulphate solution (a) Iron nails dipped in copper sulphate solution with the one kept aside [Fig. 1.8 (b)]. 10 Science Reprint 2025-26 ; Y Copper Test tube Iron nail y) Iron nail taken sulphate y out from copper solution Test tube y sulphate (test tube A) stand luti ; _mmen Reaction V mixture (test tube B) (b) Figure 1.8 (b) Iron nails and copper sulphate solutions compared before and after the experiment Why does the iron nail become brownish in colour and the blue colour of copper sulphate solution fades? The following chemical reaction takes place in this Activity Fe(s) + CuSO, (aq) > FeSO,(aq) + Cu(s) (1.24) (Copper sulphate) (Iron sulphate) In this reaction, iron has displaced or removed another element, copper, from copper sulphate solution. This reaction is known as displacement reaction. Other examples of displacement reactions are Zn(s) + CuSO,(aq) ZnSO, (aq),+ | Cu(s) (1.25) (Copper sulphate) (Zinc sulphate) Pb(s) + CuCl,(aq) PbCl,(aq) +, Cu(s) (1.26) (Copper chloride) (Lead chloride) Zinc and lead are more reactive elements than copper. They displace copper from its compounds. 1.2.4 Double Displacement Reaction = Take about 3 mL of sodium sulphate solution in a test tube. = In another test tube, take about 3 mL of barium chloride solution. = Mix the two solutions (Fig. 1.9). = What do you