chloride (iii) Sodium + Water Sodium hydroxide + Hydrogen Write a balanced chemical equation with state symbols for the following reactions. (i) Solutions of barium chloride and sodium sulphate in water react to give insoluble barium sulphate and the solution of sodium chloride. (ii) Sodium hydroxide solution (in water) reacts with hydrochloric acid solution (in water) to produce sodium chloride solution and water. Figure 1.3 Formation of slaked lime by the reaction of calcium oxide with water 1.2 TYPES OF CHEMICAL REACTIONS We have learnt in Class [X that during a chemical reaction atoms of one element do not change into those of another element. Nor do atoms disappear from the mixture or appear from elsewhere. Actually, chemical reactions involve the breaking and making of bonds between atoms to produce new substances. You will study about types of bonds formed between atoms in Chapters 3 and 4. 1.2.1 Combination Reaction Beaker Activity 1.4 = Take a small amount of calcium oxide or quick lime in a beaker. Water = Slowly add water to this. = Touch the beaker as shown in Fig. 1.3. i @ Calcium oxide Do you feel any change in temperature Calcium oxide reacts vigorously with water to produce slaked lime (calcium hydroxide) releasing a large amount of heat. CaO(s) + H,O(1) Ca(OH),(aq) + Heat (1.13) (Quick lime) (Slaked lime) In this reaction, calcium oxide and water combine to form a single product, calcium hydroxide. Such a reaction in which a single product is formed from two or more reactants is known as a combination reaction. Science Reprint 2025-26 OOOO GOOOQO GO OOOO ODO ODO GOOD OO GOP OOO O O O O O O Do You Know? Let us discuss some more examples of combination reactions. (i) Burning of coal C(s) + O,(g) CO,{(g) (1.15) (ii) Formation of water from H,(g) and O,(g) 2H,(g) + O,(g) > 2H,O() (1.16) In simple language we can say that when two or more substances (elements or compounds) combine to form a single product, the reactions are called combination reactions. In Activity 1.4, we also observed that a large amount of heat is evolved. This makes the reaction mixture warm. Reactions in which heat is released along with the formation of products are called exothermic chemical reactions. Other examples of exothermic reactions are (i) Burning of natural gas CH,(g) + 20, (g) CO; (g) + 2H,O (g) (1.17) (ii) Do you know that respiration is an exothermic process? We all know that we need energy to stay alive. We get this energy from the food we eat. During digestion, food is broken down into simpler substances. For example, rice, potatoes and bread contain carbohydrates. These carbohydrates are broken down to form glucose. This glucose combines with oxygen in the cells of our body and provides energy. The special name of this reaction is respiration, the process of which you will study in Chapter 6. C,H,,0,(aqg),+ 60,(aq) > 6CO, (aq) + 6H,O()) + energy (1.18) (Glucose) (iii) The decomposition of vegetable