balance 8 2x4 4 (in Fe,O,) The equation would be (1.7) + 4 > + alH, | (partly balanced equation) Science Reprint 2025-26 Step V: Examine the above equation and pick up the third element which is not balanced. You find that only one element is left to be balanced, that is, iron. Atoms of iron (i) Initial 1 (in Fe) 3 (in Fe,O,) (ii) To balance 1x3 3 To equalise Fe, we take three atoms of Fe on the LHS. Step VI: Finally, to check the correctness of the balanced equation, we count atoms of each element on both sides of the equation. (1.9) 3Fe + 4H,O Fe,O, + 4H, (balanced equation) The numbers of atoms of elements on both sides of Eq. (1.9) are equal. This equation is now balanced. This method of balancing chemical equations is called hit-and-trial method as we make trials to balance the equation by using the smallest whole number coefficient. Step VII: Writing Symbols of Physical States Carefully examine the above balanced Eq. (1.9). Does this equation tell us anything about the physical state of each reactant and product? No information has been given in this equation about their physical states. To make a chemical equation more informative, the physical states of the reactants and products are mentioned along with their chemical formulae. The gaseous, liquid, aqueous and solid states of reactants and products are represented by the notations (g), (I), (aq) and (s), respectively. The word aqueous (aq) is written if the reactant or product is present as a solution in water. The balanced Eq. (1.9) becomes 3Fe(s) + 4H,O(g) Fe,O,(s) + 4H,(g) (1.10) Note that the symbol (g) is used with H,O to indicate that in this reaction water is used in the form of steam. Usually physical states are not included in a chemical equation unless it is necessary to specify them. Sometimes the reaction conditions, such as temperature, pressure, catalyst, etc., for the reaction are indicated above and/or below the arrow in the equation. For example CO(g) + 2H, (g) 2402 _, cH OH) (1.11) Sunlight 6CO, (aq) +12H,0l) pprersspe > Col iOc aq) +60, (aq) +6H,00) (1.12) (Glucose) Using these steps, can you balance Eq. (1.2) given in the text earlier? Chemical Reactions and Equations Reprint 2025-26 Q U ES TION S Why should a magnesium ribbon be cleaned before burning in air? Write the balanced equation for the following chemical reactions. (i) Hydrogen + Chlorine Hydrogen chloride (ii) Barium chloride + Aluminium sulphate Barium sulphate + Aluminium chloride (iii) Sodium + Water Sodium hydroxide + Hydrogen Write a balanced chemical equation with state symbols for the following reactions. (i) Solutions of barium chloride and sodium sulphate in water react to give insoluble barium sulphate and the solution of sodium chloride. (ii) Sodium hydroxide solution (in water) reacts with hydrochloric acid solution (in water) to produce sodium chloride solution and water. Figure 1.3 Formation of slaked lime by the reaction of calcium oxide with water 1.2 TYPES OF