that there is a large variety of chemical reactions taking place around us. We will study about the various types of chemical reactions and their symbolic representation Dilute sulphuric acid jn this Chapter. Zinc granules igure 1.2 1.1 CHEMICAL EQUATIONS Formation ofhydrogen Activity 1.1 can be described as when a magnesium ribbon is burnt in gas by the action of dilute sulphuricacidon XY8eN, it gets converted to magnesium oxide. This description of a zinc chemical reaction in a sentence form is quite long. It can be written ina shorter form. The simplest way to do this is to write it in the form of a word-equation. The word-equation for the above reaction would be - Magnesium + Oxygen Magnesium oxide (1.1) (Reactants) (Product) The substances that undergo chemical change in the reaction (1.1), magnesium and oxygen, are the reactants. The new substance is magnesium oxide, formed during the reaction, as a product. A word-equation shows change of reactants to products through an arrow placed between them. The reactants are written on the left-hand side (LHS) with a plus sign (+) between them. Similarly, products are written on the right-hand side (RHS) with a plus sign (+) between them. The arrowhead points towards the products, and shows the direction of the reaction. 7 Science Reprint 2025-26 1.1.1 Writing a Chemical Equation Is there any other shorter way for representing chemical equations? Chemical equations can be made more concise and useful if we use chemical formulae instead of words. A chemical equation represents a chemical reaction. If you recall formulae of magnesium, oxygen and magnesium oxide, the above word-equation can be written as Mg+0O, ~ MgO (1.2) Count and compare the number of atoms of each element on the LHS and RHS of the arrow. Is the number of atoms of each element the same on both the sides? If yes, then the equation is balanced. If not, then the equation is unbalanced because the mass is not the same on both sides of the equation. Such a chemical equation is a skeletal chemical equation for a reaction. Equation (1.2) is a skeletal chemical equation for the burning of magnesium in air. 1.1.2 Balanced Chemical Equations Recall the law of conservation of mass that you studied in Class [X; mass can neither be created nor destroyed in a chemical reaction. That is, the total mass of the elements present in the products of a chemical reaction has to be equal to the total mass of the elements present in the reactants. In other words, the number of atoms of each element remains the same, before and after a chemical reaction. Hence, we need to balance a skeletal chemical equation. Is the chemical Eq. (1.2) balanced? Let us learn about balancing a chemical equation step by step. The word-equation for Activity 1.3 may be represented as Zinc + Sulphuric acid Zinc sulphate + Hydrogen The above word-equation may be represented by the following chemical equation Zn + H,SO, > ZnSO, +H, (1.3) Let