Facts are not science as the dictionary is not literature. CHAPTER 1 Chemical Reactions and Equations Martin H. Fischer 1064CHO1 onsider the following situations of daily life and think what happens when milk is left at room temperature during summers. an iron tawa/pan/nail is left exposed to humid atmosphere. grapes get fermented. food is cooked. food gets digested in our body. we respire. In all the above situations, the nature and the identity of the initial substance have somewhat changed. We have already learnt about physical and chemical changes of matter in our previous classes. Whenever a chemical change occurs, we can say that a chemical reaction has taken place. You may perhaps be wondering as to what is actually meant by a chemical reaction. How do we come to know that a chemical reaction has taken place? Let us perform some activities to find the answer to these questions. CAUTION: This Activity needs the teacher s assistance. It would be better if students wear suitable eyeglasses. Clean a magnesium ribbon about 3-4 cm long by rubbing it with sandpaper. Hold it with a pair of tongs. Burn it using a spirit lamp or burner and collect the ash so formed in a watch-glass as shown in Fig. 1.1. Burn the magnesium ribbon keeping it away as far as possible from your eyes. What do you observe? Magnesium ribbon Watch-glass Magnesium oxide Figure 1.1 Burning of amagnesium ribbon in air and collection of magnesium oxide in a watch-glass Reprint 2025-26 You must have observed that magnesium ribbon burns with a dazzling white flame and changes into a white powder. This powder is magnesium oxide. It is formed due to the reaction between magnesium and oxygen present in the air. = Take lead nitrate = Take a few zinc granules in a conical flask or a test tube. solution in a test = Add dilute hydrochloric acid or sulphuric acid to this tube. (Fig. 1.2). = Add potassium CAUTION: Handle the acid with care. iodide solution = Do you observe anything happening around the zinc to this. granules? = What do you = Touch the conical flask or test tube. Is there any change in observe? its temperature? From the above three activities, we can say that any of the following observations helps us to determine whether Cork a chemical reaction has taken place change in state change in colour evolution of a gas change in temperature. Glass tube As we observe the changes around us, we can see Conical flask that there is a large variety of chemical reactions taking place around us. We will study about the various types of chemical reactions and their symbolic representation Dilute sulphuric acid jn this Chapter. Zinc granules igure 1.2 1.1 CHEMICAL EQUATIONS Formation ofhydrogen Activity 1.1 can be described as when a magnesium ribbon is burnt in gas by the action of dilute sulphuricacidon XY8eN, it gets converted to magnesium oxide. This description of a zinc chemical reaction in a sentence form