The word regular refers to the fact that these shapes have equal-length sides and also equal angles (i.e., the sides look the same and the corners also look the same). We will discuss angles in more depth in the next chapter. The other shape sequences in Table 3 also have beautiful relationships with number sequences. % Figure it Out 1. Count the number of sides in each shape in the sequence of Regular Polygons. Which number sequence do you get? Fy. 5 What about the number of corners in each shape in the | sequence of Regular Polygons? Doyougetthesamenumber | sequence? Can you explain why this happens? 2. Count the number of lines in each shape in the sequence of Complete Graphs. Which number sequence do you get? Can you explain why? Reprint 2025-26 (1) Chapter 1_Patterns in Mathematics.indd 11 13-08-2024 16:10:53 Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 3. How many little squares are there in each shape of the sequence of Stacked Squares? Which number sequence does this give? Can you explain why? 4. How many little triangles are there in each shape of the ! sequence of Stacked Triangles? Which number sequence / does this give? Can you explain why? (Hint: In each shape in Gy the sequence, how many triangles are there in each row?) 5. To get from one shape to the next shape in the Koch Snowflake sequence, one replaces each line segment by a speed bump __/\_. As one does this more and more times, the changes become tinier and tinier with very very small line segments. How many total line segments are there in each shape of the Koch Snowflake? What is the corresponding number sequence? (The answer is 3, 12, 48, ..., ie., 3 times Powers of 4; this sequence is not shown in Table 1.) 7. 2 os = Mathematics may be viewed as the search for patterns and for the explanations as to why those patterns exist. = Among the most basic patterns that occur in mathematics are number sequences. = Some important examples of number sequences include the counting numbers, odd numbers, even numbers, square numbers, triangular numbers, cube numbers, Virahanka numbers, and powers of 2. = Sometimes number sequences can be related to each other in beautiful and remarkable ways. For example, adding up the sequence of odd numbers starting with 1 gives square numbers. = Visualising number sequences using pictures can help to understand sequences and the relationships between them. = Shape sequences are another basic type of pattern in mathematics. Some important examples of shape sequences include regular polygons, complete graphs, stacked triangles and squares, and Koch snowflake iterations. Shape sequences also exhibit many interesting relationships with number sequences. (22) Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 1_Patterns in Mathematics.indd 12 13-08-2024 16:10:54 CHAPTER 1 SOLUTIONS Patterns in Mathematics Page No. 2. Section 1.1 Os Figure it Out Q1. Can you think of other examples where mathematics helps us in our everyday lives? Ans. Some examples are paying for fruits, vegetables,