Can you name some metals that are used for making cooking vessels? Do you know why these metals are used for making vessels? Let us do the following Activity to find out the answer. Stand NL yy = Take an aluminium or copper Clamp wire. Clamp this wire on a . ar" end of wire stand, as shown in Fig. 3.1. i = Fix a pin to the free end of the wire using wax. = Heat the wire with a spirit lamp, Burner candle or a burner near the place where it is clamped. = What do you observe after some time? = Note your observations. Does the metal wire melt? Figure 3.1 Metal d conductors of heat The above activity shows that metals are good conductors of heat and have high melting points. The best conductors of heat are silver and copper. Lead and mercury are comparatively poor conductors of heat. Do metals also conduct electricity? Let us find out. 38 Science Reprint 2025-26 = Set up an electric circuit as shown in Fig. 3.2. = Place the metal to be tested in the circuit between terminals A and B as shown. = Does the bulb glow? What does this indicate? Insert sample to be tested You must have seen that the wires that carry current in your homes have a coating of polyvinylchloride (PVC) or a rubber-like material. Why are electric wires coated Figure 3.2 with such substances? Metals are good What happens when metals strike a hard surface? Do they produce conductors of electricity. a sound? The metals that produce a sound on striking a hard surface are said to be sonorous. Can you now say why school bells are made of metals? 3.1.2 Non-metals In the previous Class you have learnt that there are very few non-metals as compared to metals. Some of the examples of non-metals are carbon, sulphur, iodine, oxygen, hydrogen, etc. The non-metals are either solids or gases except bromine which is a liquid. Do non-metals also have physical properties similar to that of metals? Let us find out. = Collect samples of carbon (coal or graphite), sulphur and iodine. = Carry out the Activities 3.1 to 3.4 and 3.6 with these non-metals and record your observations. Compile your observations regarding metals and non-metals in Table 3.1. Table 3.1 Element |Symbol | Type of Malleability | Ductility Conducts Sonority surface Electricity On the bases of the observations recorded in Table 3.1, discuss the general physical properties of metals and non-metals in the class. You must have concluded that we cannot group elements according to their physical properties alone, as there are many exceptions. For example (i) All metals except mercury exist as solids at room temperature. In Activity 3.5, you have observed that metals have high melting Metals and Non-metals 39 Reprint 2025-26 points but gallium and caesium have very low melting points. These two metals will melt if you keep them on your palm. (ii) Iodine is a non-metal but it