class. You must have concluded that we cannot group elements according to their physical properties alone, as there are many exceptions. For example (i) All metals except mercury exist as solids at room temperature. In Activity 3.5, you have observed that metals have high melting Metals and Non-metals 39 Reprint 2025-26 points but gallium and caesium have very low melting points. These two metals will melt if you keep them on your palm. (ii) Iodine is a non-metal but it is lustrous. (iii) Carbon is a non-metal that can exist in different forms. Each form is called an allotrope. Diamond, an allotrope of carbon, is the hardest natural substance known and has a very high melting and boiling point. Graphite, another allotrope of carbon, is a conductor of electricity. (iv) Alkali metals (lithium, sodium, potassium) are so soft that they can be cut with a knife. They have low densities and low melting points. Elements can be more clearly classified as metals and non-metals on the basis of their chemical properties. = Take a magnesium ribbon and some sulphur powder. = Burn the magnesium ribbon. Collect the ashes formed and dissolve them in water. = Test the resultant solution with both red and blue litmus paper. Is the product formed on burning magnesium acidic or basic? Now burn sulphur powder. Place a test tube over the burning sulphur to collect the fumes produced. Add some water to the above test tube and shake. Test this solution with blue and red litmus paper. Is the product formed on burning sulphur acidic or basic? Can you write equations for these reactions? Most non-metals produce acidic oxides when dissolve in water. On the other hand, most metals, give rise to basic oxides. You will be learning more about these metal oxides in the next section. Q U ES TION S Give an example of a metal which (i) is a liquid at room temperature. (ii) can be easily cut with a knife. (iii) is the best conductor of heat. (iv) is a poor.conductor of heat. Explain the meanings of malleable and ductile. 3.2 CHEMICAL PROPERTIES OF METALS We will learn about the chemical properties of metals in the following Sections 3.2.1 to 3.2.4. For this, collect the samples of following metals aluminium, copper, iron, lead, magnesium, zinc and sodium. 40 Science Reprint 2025-26 3.2.1 What happens when Metals are burnt in Air? You have seen in Activity 3.8 that magnesium burns in air with a dazzling white flame. Do all metals react in the same manner? Let us check by performing the following Activity. CAUTION: The following activity needs the teacher s assistance. It would be better if students wear eye protection. = Hold any of the samples taken above with a pair of tongs and try burning over a flame. Repeat with the other metal samples. Collect the product if formed. Let the products and the metal surface cool down. Which metals burn easily? What flame colour did you observe when the