reacting with metals. Non-metals form oxides which are either acidic or neutral. Non-metals do not displace hydrogen from dilute acids. They react with hydrogen to form hydrides. Which of the following pairs will give displacement reactions? (a) NaCl solution and copper metal (b) MgCl, solution and aluminium metal (c) FeSO, solution and silver metal (d) AgNO, solution and copper metal. . Which of the following methods is suitable for preventing an iron frying pan from rusting? (a) Applying grease (b) Applying paint (c) Applying a coating of zinc (d) Allofthe above. . Anelement reacts with oxygen to give a compound with a high melting point. This compound is also soluble in water. The element is likely to be (a) calcium (b) carbon (c) silicon (d) iron. Food cans are coated with tin and not with zinc because (a) zinc is costlier than tin. (b) zinc has a higher melting point than tin. (c) zinc is more reactive than tin. (d) zincis less reactive than tin. . You are given a hammer, a battery, a bulb, wires and a switch. (a) How could you use them to distinguish between samples of metals and non-metals? (b) Assess the usefulness of these tests in distinguishing between metals and non-metals. . What are amphoteric oxides? Give two examples of amphoteric oxides. Name two metals which will displace hydrogen from dilute acids, and two metals which will not. 56 Science Reprint 2025-26 In the electrolytic refining of a metal M, what would you take as the anode, the cathode and the electrolyte? Pratyush took sulphur powder on a spatula and heated it. He collected the gas evolved by inverting a test tube over it, as shown in figure below. (a) What will be the action of gas on (i) dry litmus paper? (ii) moist litmus paper? (b) Write a balanced chemical a Pai of tongs equation for the reaction a taking place. SY | State two ways to prevent the ho rusting of iron. Test tube . What type of oxides are formed when non-metals combine with oxygen? 9 4 Spatula containing Give reasons bi 7 sulpftagpoweer (a) Platinum, gold and silver are used to make jewellery. (b) Sodium, potassium and lithium are stored under oil. Aluminium is a highly reactive metal, yet it is used to make utensils for cooking. Carbonate and sulphide ores are usually converted into Pp lecton'of gas oxides during the process of extraction. . You must have seen tarnished copper vessels being cleaned with lemon or tamarind juice. Explain why these sour substances are effective in cleaning the vessels. Differentiate between metal and non-metal on the basis of their chemical properties. . Aman went door to door posing as a goldsmith. He promised to bring back the glitter of old and dull gold ornaments. An unsuspecting lady gave a set of gold bangles to him which he dipped in a particular solution. The bangles sparkled like new but their weight was reduced drastically. The lady was upset but after a