Formation of sodium chloride Sodium and chloride ions, being oppositely charged, attract each other and are held by strong electrostatic forces of attraction to exist as sodium chloride (NaCl). It should be noted that sodium chloride does not exist as molecules but aggregates of oppositely charged ions. Let us see the formation of one more ionic compound, magnesium chloride (Fig. 3.6). Metals and Non-metals Reprint 2025-26 AT Mg > Mg + 2e7 2,8, 2 2,8 (Magnesium cation) Cl te > Cl 2,8,7 2,8,8 (Chloride anion) x xX xCl x ; xX xX x xX Mg: + (Mg ) Kei | x x Figure 3.6 Formation of magnesium chloride The compounds formed in this manner by the transfer of electrons from a metal to a non-metal are known as ionic compounds or electrovalent compounds. Can you name the cation and anion present in MgCl,? 3.3.1 Properties of lonic Compounds To learn about the properties of ionic compounds, let us perform the following Activity: Spatula containing sample S Activity 3.13 = Take samples of sodium chloride, potassium iodide, barium chloride or any other salt from the science laboratory. = What is the physical state of these salts? = Take a small amount of a sample on a metal spatula and heat directly on the flame (Fig. 3.7). Repeat with other samples. = What did you observe? Did the samples impart any colour to the flame? Do these compounds melt? = Try to dissolve the samples in water, petrol and kerosene. Figure 3.7 Are they soluble? Heating a salt sample on a = Make a circuit as shown in Fig. 3.8 and insert the electrodes spatula into a solution of one salt. What did you observe? Test the other salt samples too in this manner. Battery | IP aae h = What is your inference about the nature of these H ; wee compounds? Table 3.4 Melting and boiling points of some ionic compounds Beaker Ionic Melting point Boiling point Graphite rod compound (K) (K) Salt solution under test Figure 3.8 Testing the conductivity of asalt solution 48 Science Reprint 2025-26 You may have observed the following general properties for ionic compounds (i) Physical nature: Ionic compounds are solids and are somewhat hard because of the strong force of attraction between the positive and negative ions. These compounds are generally brittle and break into pieces when pressure is applied. (ii) Melting and Boiling points: lonic compounds have high melting and boiling points (see Table 3.4). This is because a considerable amount of energy is required to break the strong inter-ionic attraction. (iii) Solubility: Electrovalent compounds are generally soluble in water and insoluble in solvents such as kerosene, petrol, etc. (iv) Conduction of Electricity: The conduction of electricity through a solution involves the movement of charged particles. A solution of an ionic compound in water contains ions, which move to the opposite electrodes when electricity is passed through the solution. Ionic compounds in the solid state do not conduct electricity because movement of ions