A and cork it. = Pour boiled distilled water in test tube B, add about 1 mL of oil and cork it. The oil will float on water and prevent the air from dissolving in the water. = Put some anhydrous calcium chloride in test tube C and cork it. Anhydrous calcium chloride will absorb the moisture, if any, from the air. Leave these test tubes for a few days and then observe (Fig. 3.13). Air Layer of oil (prevents air dissolving in the water) y Boiled distilled Anhydrous calcium water (boiled to chloride You will observe that iron nails rust in test tube A, dinolned oa) (drying agent) but they do not rust in test tubes B and C. In the test tube A, the nails are exposed to both air and water. In the test tube B, the nails are exposed to only water, and rusts. In tube A, both air and water are the nails in test tube C are exposed to dry air. What _ present. In tube B, there is no air dissolved does this tell us about the conditions under which iron in the water. In tube C, the air is dry. articles rust? Figure 3.13 Investigating the conditions under which iron Metals and Non-metals 53 Reprint 2025-26 3.5.1 Prevention of Corrosion The rusting of iron can be prevented by painting, oiling, greasing, galvanising, chrome plating, anodising or making alloys. Galvanisation is a method of protecting steel and iron from rusting by coating them with a thin layer of zinc. The galvanised article is protected against rusting even if the zinc coating is broken. Can you reason this out? Alloying is a very good method of improving the properties of a metal. We can get the desired properties by this method. For example, iron is the most widely used metal. But it is never used in its pure state. This is because pure iron is very soft and stretches easily when hot. But, ifit is mixed with a small amount of carbon (about 0.05 %), it becomes hard and strong. When iron is mixed with nickel and chromium, we get stainless steel, which is hard and does not rust. Thus, if iron is mixed with some other substance, its properties change. In fact, the properties of any metal can be changed if it is mixed with some other substance. The substance added may be a metal or a non-metal. An alloy is a homogeneous mixture of two or more metals, or a metal and a nonmetal. It is prepared by first melting the primary metal, and then, dissolving the other elements in it in definite proportions. It is then cooled to room temperature. @ ()) ()) Do You Know? If one of the metals is mercury, then the alloy is known as an amalgam. The electrical conductivity and melting point of an alloy is less than that of pure metals. For example, brass, an alloy of copper and zinc (Cu and Zn), and bronze,