moderately reactive. They are found in the earth s crust mainly as oxides, sulphides or carbonates. You will find that the ores of many metals are oxides. This is because oxygen is a very reactive element and is very abundant on the earth. Thus on the basis of reactivity, we can group the metals into the following three categories (Fig. 3.9) (i) Metals of low reactivity; (ii) Metals of medium reactivity; (iii) Metals of high reactivity. Different techniques are to be used for obtaining the metals falling in each category. Several steps are involved in the extraction of pure metal from ores. A summary of these steps is given in Fig.3.10. Each step is explained in detail in the following sections. Ore Concentration of ore Metals Metals of Metals of of high medium low reactivity reactivity reactivity Electrolysis of | | Sulphide molten ore ores Carbonate Sulphide ore ore Pure metal | | Roasting Calcination Roasting Metal Oxide of metal | Refining Reduction to metal Purification of metal Figure 3.10 Steps involved in the extraction of metals from ores 3.4.2 Enrichment of Ores Ores mined from the earth are usually contaminated with large amounts of impurities such as soil, sand, etc., called gangue. The impurities must be removed from the ore prior to the extraction of the metal. The processes Science Reprint 2025-26 used for removing the gangue from the ore are based on the differences between the physical or chemical properties of the gangue and the ore. Different separation techniques are accordingly employed. 3.4.3 Extracting Metals Low in the Activity Series Metals low in the activity series are very unreactive. The oxides of these metals can be reduced to metals by heating alone. For example, cinnabar (HgS) is an ore of mercury. When it is heated in air, it is first converted into mercuric oxide (HgO). Mercuric oxide is then reduced to mercury on further heating. 2HgS\(s) + 30,(g) Heat, 2Hg0(s) + 2S0,(g) 2HgO(s) BS" 2Hgl) + 0, (9) Similarly, copper which is found as Cu,S in nature can be obtained from its ore by just heating in air. 2Cu,S + 30, (g) Het_, 2Cu, O(s) + 280, (g) 2Cu,O + Cu,S Heat_,6cu(s) + SO, (g) 3.4.4 Extracting Metals in the Middle of the Activity Series The metals in the middle of the activity series such as iron, zinc, lead, copper, are moderately reactive. These are usually present as sulphides or carbonates in nature. It is easier to obtain a metal from its oxide, as compared to its sulphides and carbonates. Therefore, prior to reduction, the metal sulphides and carbonates must be converted into metal oxides. The sulphide ores are converted into oxides by heating strongly in the presence of excess air. This process is known as roasting. The carbonate ores are changed into oxides by heating strongly in limited air. This process is known as calcination. The chemical reaction that takes place during roasting and calcination of zinc ores can be shown as follows Roasting 27nS(s) + 30,