nail. = Put the copper wire in a solution of iron sulphate and the iron nail in a solution of copper sulphate taken in test tubes (Fig. 3.4). = Record your observations after 20 minutes. 44 Science Reprint 2025-26 = In which test tube did you find that a reaction has occurred? = On what basis can you say that a reaction has actually taken place? = Can you correlate your observations for the Activities 3.9, 3.10 and 3.11? = Write a balanced chemical equation for the reaction that has taken place. = Name the type of reaction. Reactive metals can displace less reactive metals from their compounds in con solution or molten form. Thread Test tube We have seen in the previous sections stand that all metals are not equally reactive. We Test tube checked the reactivity of various metals on nail Copper wire with oxygen, water and acids. But all Copper Iron sulphate metals do not react with these reagents. sulphate solution So we were not able to put all the metal solution samples we had collected in decreasing order of their reactivity. Displacement reactions studied in Chapter 1 give better nail evidence about the reactivity of metals. It is simple and easy if metal A displaces Figure 3.4 metal B from its solution, it is more reactive than B. Reaction of metals with salt solutions Metal A + Salt solution of B > Salt solution of A + Metal B Which metal, copper or iron, is more reactive according to your observations in Activity 3.12? 3.2.5 The Reactivity Series The reactivity series is a list of metals arranged in the order of their decreasing activities. After performing displacement experiments (Activities 1.9 and 3.12), the following series, (Table 3.2) known as the reactivity or activity series has been developed. Table 3.2 Activity series : Relative reactivities of metals K Potassium Most reactive Na Sodium Ca Calcium Mg Magnesium Al Aluminium Zn Zinc Reactivity decreases Fe Iron Pb Lead [H] [Hydrogen] Cu Copper Hg Mercury Ag Silver Au Gold Least reactive Metals and Non-metals Reprint 2025-26 Q U ES TION S Why is sodium kept immersed in kerosene oil? Write equations for the reactions of (i) iron with steam (ii) calcium and potassium with water Samples of four metals A, B, C and D were taken and added to the following solution one by one. The results obtained have been tabulated as follows. Iron(II) sulphate Copper(II) sulphate Zinc sulphate Silver nitrate No reaction Displacement Displacement No reaction Cc No reaction No reaction No reaction Displacement D No reaction No reaction No reaction No reaction Use the Table above to answer the following questions about metals A, B, C and D. (ij) Which is the most reactive metal? (ii) What would you observe if B is added. to a solution of,Copper{(II) sulphate? (iii) Arrange the metals A, B, Cyand D in the order of decreasing reactivity. Which gas is produced when dilute hydrochloric acid is added to a reactive metal?