CHAPTER 4 | Metals and Non-metals n Class IX you have learnt about various elements. You have seen that elements can be classified as metals or non-metals on the basis of their properties. = Think of some uses of metals and non-metals in your daily life. = What properties did you think of while categorising elements as metals or non-metals? = Howare these properties related to the uses of these elements? Let us look at some of these properties in detail. 3.1 PHYSICAL PROPERTIES 3.1.1 Metals The easiest way to start grouping substances is by comparing their physical properties. Let us study this with the help of the following activities. For performing Activities 3.1 to 3.6, collect the samples of following metals iron, copper, aluminium, magnesium, sodium, lead, zinc and any other metal that is easily available. = Take samples of iron, copper, aluminium and magnesium. Note the appearance of each sample. Clean the surface of each sample by rubbing them with sand paper and note their appearance again. Metals, in their pure state, have a shining surface. This property is called metallic lustre. = Take small pieces of iron, copper, aluminium, and magnesium. Try to cut these metals with a sharp knife and note your observations. Hold a piece of sodium metal with a pair of tongs. CAUTION: Always handle sodium metal with care. Dry it by pressing between the folds of a filter paper. Put it on a watch-glass and try to cut it with a knife. What do you observe? Reprint 2025-26 1064CHO3 You will find that metals are generally hard. The hardness varies from metal to metal. = Take pieces of iron, zinc, lead and copper. = Place any one metal on a block of iron and strike it four or five times with a hammer. What do you observe? = Repeat with other metals. = Record the change in the shape of these metals. You will find that some metals can be beaten into thin sheets. This property is called malleability. Did you know that gold and silver are the most malleable metals? = List the metals whose wires you have seen in daily life. The ability of metals to be drawn into thin wires is called ductility. Gold is the most ductile metal. You will be surprised to know that a wire of about 2 km length can be drawn from one gram of gold. It is because of their malleability and ductility that metals can be given different shapes according to our needs. Can you name some metals that are used for making cooking vessels? Do you know why these metals are used for making vessels? Let us do the following Activity to find out the answer. Stand NL yy = Take an aluminium or copper Clamp wire. Clamp this wire on a . ar" end of wire stand, as shown in Fig. 3.1. i = Fix a pin to the free end of the wire using wax. = Heat the wire with