cathode Nat+e- + Na At anode 2Cln > Cl, + 2e7 Similarly, aluminium is obtained by the electrolytic reduction of aluminium oxide. a = _ = 3.4.6 Refining of Metals Cathode < Anode The metals produced by various reduction processes Acidified | described above are not very pure. They contain copper impurities, which must be removed to obtain pure metals. ae su Paste The most widely used method for refining impure metals u is electrolytic refining. Tank impuriti Electrolytic Refining: Many metals, such as copper, zinc, mpurities . . . . (anode mud) tin, nickel, silver, gold, etc., are refined electrolytically. In Figure 3.12 this process, the impure metal is made the anode anda Electrolytic refining of copper. The thin strip of pure metal is made the cathode. A solution of electrolyte is a solution of acidified copper the metal salt is used as an electrolyte. The apparatus is sulphate. The anode is impure copper, t h in Fis. 3.12. O . th t whereas, the cathode is a strip of pure St UP as Shown in Fig. 3.12. On passing the curren copper. On passing electric current, pure through the electrolyte, the pure metal from the anode copper is deposited on the cathode. dissolves into the electrolyte. An equivalent amount of pure 52 Science Reprint 2025-26 metal from the electrolyte is deposited on the cathode. The soluble impurities go into the solution, whereas, the insoluble impurities settle down at the bottom of the anode and are known as anode mud. Q U ES TION S Define the following terms. (J) Mineral (ii) Ore (iii) Gangue Name two metals which are found in nature in the free state. What chemical process is used for obtaining a metal from its oxide? 3.5 CORROSION You have learnt the following about corrosion in Chapter 1 = Silver articles become black after some time when exposed to air. This is because it reacts with sulphur in the air to form a coating of silver sulphide. = Copper reacts with moist carbon dioxide in the air and slowly loses its shiny brown surface and gains a green coat. This green substance is basic copper carbonate. = Iron when exposed to moist air for a long time acquires a coating of a brown flaky substance called rust. Let us find out the conditions under which iron rusts. = Take three test tubes and place clean iron nails in each of them. = Label these test tubes A, B and C. Pour some water in test tube A and cork it. = Pour boiled distilled water in test tube B, add about 1 mL of oil and cork it. The oil will float on water and prevent the air from dissolving in the water. = Put some anhydrous calcium chloride in test tube C and cork it. Anhydrous calcium chloride will absorb the moisture, if any, from the air. Leave these test tubes for a few days and then observe (Fig. 3.13). Air Layer of oil (prevents