and carbonates. Therefore, prior to reduction, the metal sulphides and carbonates must be converted into metal oxides. The sulphide ores are converted into oxides by heating strongly in the presence of excess air. This process is known as roasting. The carbonate ores are changed into oxides by heating strongly in limited air. This process is known as calcination. The chemical reaction that takes place during roasting and calcination of zinc ores can be shown as follows Roasting 27nS(s) + 30, (g) He2t 5 27n0(s) +280, (g) Calcination ZnCO, (s) Heat_, ZnO(s) + CO, (g) The metal oxides are then reduced to the corresponding metals by using suitable reducing agents such as carbon. For example, when zinc oxide is heated with carbon, it is reduced to metallic zinc. ZnO(s) + G(s) > Zn(s) + CO(g) You are already familiar with the process of oxidation and reduction explained in the first Chapter. Obtaining metals from their compounds is also a reduction process. Besides using carbon (coke) to reduce metal oxides to metals, sometimes displacement reactions can also be used. The highly reactive metals such as sodium, calcium, aluminium, etc., are used as reducing Metals and Non-metals Reprint 2025-26 agents because they can displace metals of lower reactivity from their compounds. For example, when manganese dioxide is heated with aluminium powder, the following reaction takes place 3MnO,(s) + 4Al(s) > 3Mni(I) + 2Al,0,(s) + Heat Can you identify the substances that are getting oxidised and reduced? These displacement reactions are highly exothermic. The amount of heat evolved is so large that the metals are produced in the molten state. In fact, the reaction of iron(II) oxide (Fe,O,) with aluminium is used to join railway tracks or cracked machine parts. This reaction is known as the thermit reaction. Fe,O,(s) + 2Al(s) > 2Fe(l) + Al,O,(s) + Heat 3.4.5 Extracting Metals towards the Top of the Activity Series Figure 3.11 Thermit process for The metals high up in the reactivity series are very reactive. They cannot Joining railway tracks be obtained from their compounds by heating with carbon. For example, carbon cannot reduce the oxides of sodium, magnesium, calcium, aluminium, etc., to the respective metals. This is because these metals have more affinity for oxygen than carbon. These metals are obtained by electrolytic reduction. For example, sodium, magnesium and calcium are obtained by the electrolysis of their molten chlorides. The metals are deposited at the cathode (the negatively charged electrode), whereas, chlorine is liberated at the anode (the positively charged electrode). The reactions are At cathode Nat+e- + Na At anode 2Cln > Cl, + 2e7 Similarly, aluminium is obtained by the electrolytic reduction of aluminium oxide. a = _ = 3.4.6 Refining of Metals Cathode < Anode The metals produced by various reduction processes Acidified | described above are not very pure. They contain copper impurities, which must be removed to obtain pure metals. ae su Paste The most widely used method for refining impure metals u is electrolytic refining. Tank impuriti Electrolytic Refining: