a nonmetal. It is prepared by first melting the primary metal, and then, dissolving the other elements in it in definite proportions. It is then cooled to room temperature. @ ()) ()) Do You Know? If one of the metals is mercury, then the alloy is known as an amalgam. The electrical conductivity and melting point of an alloy is less than that of pure metals. For example, brass, an alloy of copper and zinc (Cu and Zn), and bronze, an alloy of copper and tin (Cu and Sn), are not good conductors of electricity whereas copper is used for making electrical circuits. Solder, an alloy of lead and tin (Pb and Sn), has a low melting point and is used for welding electrical wires together. 54 Science Reprint 2025-26 Q U ES TION S Metallic oxides of zinc, magnesium and copper were heated with the following metals. ot fd In which cases will you find displacement reactions taking place? Which metals do not corrode easily? What are alloys? What you have learnt Elements can be classified as metals and non-metals. Metals are lustrous, malleable, ductile and are good conductors of heat and electricity. They are solids at room temperature, except mercury which is a liquid. Metals can form positive ions by losing electrons to non-metals. Metals combine with oxygen to form basic oxides. Aluminium oxide and zinc oxide show the properties of both basic as well as acidic oxides. These oxides are known as amphoteric oxides. Different metals have different reactivities with water and dilute acids. A list of common metals arranged in order of their decreasing reactivity is known as an activity series. Metals above hydrogen in the Activity series can displace hydrogen from dilute acids. Amore reactive metal displaces a less reactive metal from its salt solution. Metals occur in nature as free elements or in the form of their compounds. The extraction of metals from their ores and then refining them for use is known as metallurgy. An alloy is a homogeneous mixture of two or more metals, or a metal and a non-metal. The surface of some metals, such as iron, is corroded when they are exposed to moist air for a long period of time. This phenomenon is known as corrosion. Non-metals have properties opposite to that of metals. They are neither malleable nor ductile. They are bad conductors of heat and electricity, except for graphite, which conducts electricity. Metals and Non-metals 55 Reprint 2025-26 Non-metals form negatively charged ions by gaining electrons when reacting with metals. Non-metals form oxides which are either acidic or neutral. Non-metals do not displace hydrogen from dilute acids. They react with hydrogen to form hydrides. Which of the following pairs will give displacement reactions? (a) NaCl solution and copper metal (b) MgCl, solution and aluminium metal (c) FeSO, solution and silver metal (d) AgNO, solution and copper metal. . Which of the following methods is suitable for preventing an iron frying pan from rusting? (a) Applying grease (b)