If the non-parallel sides of a trapezium are equal, prove that it is cyclic. Reprint 2025-26 CIRCLES 129 9. Two circles intersect at two points B and C. P Through B, two line segments ABD and PBQ B D are drawn to intersect the circles at A, D and P, Q respectively (see Fig. 9.27). Prove that 4 ZACP= Z QCD. Q Cc Fig. 9.27 10. Ifcircles are drawn taking two sides of a triangle as diameters, prove that the point of intersection of these circles lie on the third side. 11. ABC and ADC are two right triangles with common hypotenuse AC. Prove that ZCAD=ZCBD. 12. Prove that a cyclic parallelogram is a rectangle. 9.6 Summary In this chapter, you have studied the following points: 1. 10. 11. A circle is the collection ofall points in a plane, which are equidistant from a fixed point in the plane. Equal chords of a circle (or of congruent circles) subtend equal angles at the centre. If the angles subtended by two chords of a circle (or of congruent circles) at the centre (corresponding centres) are equal, the chords are equal. The perpendicular from the centre of a circle to a chord bisects the chord. The line drawn through the centre of a circle to bisect a chord is perpendicular to the chord. Equal chords of a circle (or of congruent circles) are equidistant from the centre (or corresponding centres). Chords equidistant from the centre (or corresponding centres) of a circle (or of congruent circles) are equal. If two arcs of a circle are congruent, then their corresponding chords are equal and conversely if two chords of a circle are equal, then their corresponding arcs (minor, major) are congruent. Congruent arcs of a circle subtend equal angles at the centre. The angle subtended by an arc at the centre is double the angle subtended by it at any point on the remaining part of the circle. Angles in the same segment of a circle are equal. Reprint 2025-26 12. 13. 14. 15. MATHEMATICS Angle in a semicircle is a right angle. If a line segment joining two points subtends equal angles at two other points lying on the same side of the line containing the line segment, the four points lie on a circle. The sum of either pair of opposite angles of a cyclic quadrilateral is 180 . Ifsum of a pair of opposite angles of a quadrilateral is 180 , the quadrilateral is cyclic. Reprint 2025-26