superimpose A C the arc AB completely (see Fig. 9.13). This shows that equal chords make congruent arcs and 7 conversely congruent arcs make equal chords of a circle. You can state it as follows: Fig. 9.13 If two chords of a circle are equal, then their corresponding arcs are congruent and conversely, if two arcs are congruent, then their corresponding chords are equal. Reprint 2025-26 CIRCLES 123 Also the angle subtended by an arc at the centre is defined to be angle subtended by the corresponding chord at the centre in the sense that the minor arc subtends the angle and the major arc subtends the reflex angle. Therefore, in Fig 9.14, the angle subtended by the minor arc PQ at O is ZPOQ and the angle subtended by the major arc PQ at O is reflex angle POQ. P Q In view of the property above and Theorem 9.1, the following result is true: Fig. 9.14 Congruent arcs (or equal arcs) of a circle subtend equal angles at the centre. Therefore, the angle subtended by a chord of a circle at its centre is equal to the angle subtended by the corresponding (minor) arc at the centre. The following theorem gives the relationship between the angles subtended by an arc at the centre and at a point on the circle. Theorem 9.7 : The angle subtended by an arc at the centre is double the angle subtended by it at any point on the remaining part of the circle. Proof : Given an arc PQ of a circle subtending angles POQ at the centre O and PAQ at a point A on the remaining part of the circle. We need to prove that Z POQ =2 Z PAQ. A A A (a) (ii) (iii) Fig. 9.15 Consider the three different cases as given in Fig. 9.15. In (i), are PQ is minor; in (ii), arc PQ is a semicircle and in (iii), arc PQ is major. Let us begin by joining AO and extending it to a point B. In all the cases, Z BOQ = Z OAQ + Z AQO because an exterior angle ofa triangle is equal to the sum of the two interior opposite angles. Reprint 2025-26 124 MATHEMATICS Also in A OAQ, OA = OQ (Radii of a circle) Therefore, Z OAQ = ZOQA (Theorem 7.5) This gives Z BOQ = 2 Z OAQ (1) Similarly, Z BOP = 2 Z OAP (2) From (1) and(2), 2 BOP + 4 BOQ = 2(4 OAP + Z OAQ) This is the same as Z POQ = 2 Z PAQ (3) For the case (111), where PQ is the major arc, (3) is replaced by reflex angle POQ = 2 Z PAQ Remark : Suppose we join points P and Q and form a chord PQ in the above figures. Then Z PAQ is also called the angle formed in the segment PAQP. In Theorem 9.7, A can be any point on the remaining part of