+ Z OAQ) This is the same as Z POQ = 2 Z PAQ (3) For the case (111), where PQ is the major arc, (3) is replaced by reflex angle POQ = 2 Z PAQ Remark : Suppose we join points P and Q and form a chord PQ in the above figures. Then Z PAQ is also called the angle formed in the segment PAQP. In Theorem 9.7, A can be any point on the remaining part of the circle. So if you take any other point C on the remaining part of the circle (see Fig. 9.16), you have Z POQ = 2 Z PCQ =2 Z PAQ Therefore, ZPCQ= Z PAQ. This proves the following: Fig. 9.16 Theorem 9.8 : Angles in the same segment of a circle are equal. Again let us discuss the case (ii) of Theorem 10.8 separately. Here ZPAQ is an angle 1 1 in the segment, which is a semicircle. Also, Z PAQ = 5 Z POQ= > x 180 = 90 . If you take any other point C on the semicircle, again you get that Z PCQ = 90 Therefore, you find another property of the circle as: Angle in a semicircle is a right angle. The converse of Theorem 9.8 is also true. It can be stated as: Theorem 9.9 : [fa line segment joining two points subtends equal angles at two other points lying on the same side of the line containing the line segment, the four points lie on a circle (i.e. they are concyclic). Reprint 2025-26 CIRCLES 125 You can see the truth of this result as follows: In Fig. 9.17, AB is a line segment, which subtends equal angles at two points C and D. That is ZACB= ZADB To show that the points A, B, C and D lie on a circle let us draw a circle through the points A, C and B. Suppose it does not pass through the point D. Then it will intersect AD (or extended AD) at a point, say E (or E ). If points A, C, E and B lie on a circle, Z ACB= 2 AEB (Why?) But it is given that Z ACB = Z ADB. Therefore, Z AEB= Z ADB. This is not possible unless E coincides with D. (Why?) Similarly, E should also coincide with D. 9.5 Cyclic Quadrilaterals A A quadrilateral ABCD is called cyclic if all the four vertices of it lie on a circle (see Fig 9.18). You will find a peculiar property in such quadrilaterals. Draw several cyclic quadrilaterals of different sides and name each of these B C as ABCD. (This can be done by drawing several circles of different radii and taking four points on each of them.) Measure the opposite angles and write your observations in the following table. S.No. of Quadrilateral ZC ZA+t+ZC}]ZB+ZD What do you infer from the table? Reprint 2025-26 126 MATHEMATICS You find that ZA + ZC = 180 and 7B