disc. At its centre O, draw an angle AOB where A, B are points on the circle. Make another angle POQ at the centre equal to ZAOB. Cut the disc along AB and PQ (see Fig. 9.5). You will get two segments ACB and BP PRQ of the circle. If you put one on the other, what ~AS >7B PQ do you observe? They cover each other, i.e., they E7 RO are congruent. So AB = PQ. Fig. 9.5 Reprint 2025-26 118 MATHEMATICS Though you have seen it for this particular case, try it out for other equal angles too. The chords will all turn out to be equal because of the following theorem: Theorem 9.2 : If the angles subtended by the chords of a circle at the centre are equal, then the chords are equal. The above theorem is the converse of the Theorem 9.1. Note that in Fig. 9.4, if you take Z AOB = Z COD, then A AOB = A COD (Why?) Can you now see that AB = CD? EXERCISE 9.1 1. Recall that two circles are congruent if they have the same radii. Prove that equal chords of congruent circles subtend equal angles at their centres. 2. Prove that if chords of congruent circles subtend equal angles at their centres, then the chords are equal. I 9.2 Perpendicular from the Centre toa Chord Activity : Draw a circle on a tracing paper. Let O be its centre. Draw a chord AB. Fold the paper along a line through O so that a portion of the chord falls on the other. Let the crease cut AB at the point M. Then, A NMS B Z OMA = 4 OMB = 90 or OM is perpendicular to AB. Does the point B coincide with A (see Fig.9.6)? ! Yes it will. SoMA= MB. Fig. 9.6 Give a proof yourself by joining OA and OB and proving the right triangles OMA and OMB to be congruent. This example is a particular instance of the following result: Theorem 9.3 : The perpendicular from the centre of a circle to a chord bisects the chord. What is the converse of this theorem? To write this, first let us be clear what is assumed in Theorem 9.3 and what is proved. Given that the perpendicular from the centre of a circle to a chord is drawn and to prove that it bisects the chord. Thus in the converse, what the hypothesis is if a line from the centre bisects a chord of a circle and what is to be proved is the line is perpendicular to the chord . So the converse is: Reprint 2025-26 CIRCLES 119 Theorem 9.4 : The line drawn through the centre of a circle to bisect a chord is perpendicular to the chord. Is this true? Try it for few cases and see. You will see that it is true for these cases. See if it is true, in general, by doing the following