a chord of a circle and what is to be proved is the line is perpendicular to the chord . So the converse is: Reprint 2025-26 CIRCLES 119 Theorem 9.4 : The line drawn through the centre of a circle to bisect a chord is perpendicular to the chord. Is this true? Try it for few cases and see. You will see that it is true for these cases. See if it is true, in general, by doing the following exercise. We will write the stages and you give the reasons. Let AB be a chord of a circle with centre O and O is joined to the mid-point M of AB. You have to prove that OM 1 AB. Join OA and OB (see Fig. 9.7). In triangles OAM and OBM, A B OA=OB (Why?) = NU AM = BM (Why 2) ae 6 OM = OM (Common) Therefore, AOAM = AOBM (How ?) This gives ZOMA= ZOMB =90 (Why ?) 9.3 Equal Chords and their Distances from the Centre Let AB be a line and P be a point. Since there are P infinite numbers of points on a line, if you join these points to P, you will get infinitely many line segments PL,, PL,, PM, PL,, PL,, etc. Which of these is the distance of AB from P? You may think a while and get the answer. Out of these line segments, the perpendicular from P to AB, namely PM in Fig. 9.8, will be the least. In Mathematics, we define thisleatt Alil. M Ll, lL, LB length PM to be the distance of AB from P. So you Fig. 9.8 may say that: The length of the perpendicular from a point to a line is the distance of the line from the point. Note that if the point lies on the line, the distance of the line from the point is zero. A circle can have infinitely many chords. You may observe by drawing chords of a circle that longer chord is nearer to the centre than the smaller chord. You may observe it by drawing several chords of a circle of different lengths and measuring their distances from the centre. What is the distance of the diameter, which is the Reprint 2025-26 120 MATHEMATICS longest chord from the centre? Since the centre lies on it, the distance is zero. Do you think that there is some relationship between the length of chords and their distances from the centre? Let us see if this is so. A CU) RS D B (ii) Fig..9.9 Activity : Draw a circle of any radius on a tracing paper. Draw two equal chords AB and CD of it and also the perpendiculars OM and ON on them from the centre O. Fold the figure so that D falls on B and C falls on A [see Fig.9.9 (i)]. You may observe that O lies on the crease and N falls on M. Therefore, OM = ON. Repeat the activity