so. A CU) RS D B (ii) Fig..9.9 Activity : Draw a circle of any radius on a tracing paper. Draw two equal chords AB and CD of it and also the perpendiculars OM and ON on them from the centre O. Fold the figure so that D falls on B and C falls on A [see Fig.9.9 (i)]. You may observe that O lies on the crease and N falls on M. Therefore, OM = ON. Repeat the activity by drawing congruent circles with centres O and O and taking equal chords AB and CD one on each. Draw perpendiculars OM and O 'N on them [see Fig. 9.9(i1)]. Cut one circular disc and put it on the other so that AB coincides with CD. Then you will find that O coincides with O' and M coincides with N. In this way you verified the following: Theorem 9.5 : Equal chords of a circle (or of congruent circles) are equidistant from the centre (or centres). Next, it will be seen whether the converse of this theorem is true or not. For this, draw a circle with centre O. From the centre O, draw two line segments OL and OM of equal length and lying inside the circle [see Fig. 9.10(i)]. Then draw chords PQ and RS of the circle perpendicular to OL and OM respectively [see Fig 9.10(ii)]. Measure the lengths of PQ and RS. Are these different? No, both are equal. Repeat the activity for more equal line segments and drawing the chords perpendicular to them. This verifies the converse of the Theorem 9.5 which is stated as follows: Reprint 2025-26 CIRCLES 121 R a, Qy Ss P i) (ii) (i Fig. 9.10 Theorem 9.6 : Chords equidistant from the centre of a circle are equal in length. We now take an example to illustrate the use of the above results: Example 1 : Iftwo intersecting chords of a circle make equal angles with the diameter passing through their point of intersection, prove that the chords are equal. Solution : Given that AB and CD are two chords of a circle, with centre O intersecting at a point E. PQ is a diameter through E, such that Z AEQ = 7 DEQ (see Fig.9.11). You have to prove that AB = CD. Draw perpendiculars OL and OM on chords AB and CD, respectively. Now Z LOE = 180 90 Z LEO = 90 Z LEO (Angle sum property of a triangle) = 90 Z AEQ = 90 Z DEQ = 90 Z MEO = Z MOE Fig. 9.11 In triangles OLE and OME, Z LEO = Z MEO (Why ?) ZLOE= Z MOE (Proved above) EO = EO (Common) Therefore, A OLE = A OME (Why ?) This gives OL = OM (CPCT) So, AB = CD (Why ?) Reprint 2025-26 122 MATHEMATICS EXERCISE 9.2 1. Two circles of radii 5 cm and 3 cm intersect at two points and the distance between their centres is 4 cm.