sir; who is it? And the man replied, "Go to Sakyamuni, the Buddha. Kisa Gotami repaired to the Buddha and cried, Lord and Master, give me the medicine that will cure my boy. The Buddha answered, I want a handful of mustardseed. And when the girl in her joy promised to procure it, the Buddha added, The mustard-seed must be taken from a house where no one has lost a child, husband, parent or friend. Poor Kisa Gotami now went from house to house, and the people pitied her and said, Here is mustardseed; take it! But when she asked, Did a son or daughter, a father or mother, die in your family? they answered her, Alas! the living are few, but the dead are many. Do not remind us of our deepest grief. And there was no house but some beloved one had died in it. Kisa Gotami became weary and hopeless, and sat down at the wayside watching the lights of the city, as they flickered up and were extinguished again. At last the darkness of the night reigned everywhere. And she considered the fate of men, that their lives flicker up and are extinguished again. And she thought to herself, How selfish am I in my grief! Death is common to all; yet in this valley of desolation there is a path that leads him to immortality who has surrendered all selfishness. The Buddha said, The life of mortals in this world is troubled and brief and combined with pain. For there Reprint 2025-26 sermon religious or moral talk dipping places bathing inscrutable something which cannot be understood repaired (a stylistic use) went to valley of desolation an area which is filled with deep sorrow mortals those bound to die F is not any means by which those that have been born can avoid dying; after reaching old age there is death; of such a nature are living beings. As ripe fruits are early in danger of falling, so mortals when born are always in danger of death. As all earthen vessels made by the potter end in being broken, so is the life of mortals. Both young and adult, both those who are fools and those who are wise, all fall into the power of death; all are subject to death. Of those who, overcome by death, depart from life, a father cannot save his son, nor kinsmen their relations. Mark! while relatives are looking on and lamenting deeply, one by one mortals are carried off, like an ox that is led to the slaughter. So the world is afflicted with afflicted with death and decay, therefore the wise do not grieve, affected by suffering, knowing the terms of the world. disease or pain Not from weeping nor from grieving will anyone obtain peace of mind; on the contrary, his pain will be the greater and his body will suffer. He will make himself sick and pale, yet the dead are not saved by his lamentation.