like an ox that is led to the slaughter. So the world is afflicted with afflicted with death and decay, therefore the wise do not grieve, affected by suffering, knowing the terms of the world. disease or pain Not from weeping nor from grieving will anyone obtain peace of mind; on the contrary, his pain will be the greater and his body will suffer. He will make himself sick and pale, yet the dead are not saved by his lamentation. He who seeks peace should draw out the arrow of lamentation, and complaint, and grief. He who lamentation has drawn out the arrow and has become composed_ expression of sorrow will obtain peace of mind; he who has overcome all sorrow will become free from sorrow, and be blessed. [Source: Betty Renshaw Values and Voices: A College Reader (1975)] Thinking about the Text 1. 2. When her son dies, Kisa Gotami goes from house to house. What does she ask for? Does she get it? Why not? Kisa Gotami again goes from house to house after she speaks with the Buddha. What does she ask for, the second time around? Does she get it? Why not? What does Kisa Gotami understand the second time that she failed to understand the first time? Was this what the Buddha wanted her to understand? Why do you think Kisa Gotami understood this only the second time? In what way did the Buddha change her understanding? How do you usually understand the idea of selfishness ? Do you agree with Kisa Gotami that she was being selfish in her grief ? Reprint 2025-26 = = o nN ic) = B 2 Eo em ic) =] Lt Oo a First Flight Thinking about I. This text is written in an old-fashioned style, for it reports an incident more than two millennia old. Look for the following words and phrases in the text, and try to rephrase them in more current language, based on how you understand them. e give thee medicine for thy child e Pray tell me e Kisa repaired to the Buddha e there was no house but someone had died in it e kinsmen e Mark! II. You know that we can combine sentences using words like and, or, but, yet and then. But sometimes no such word seems appropriate. In such a case we can use a semicolon (;) or a dash ( ) to combine two clauses. She has no interest in music; I doubt she will become a singer like her mother. The second clause here gives the speaker s opinion on the first clause. Here is a sentence from the text that uses,semicolons to combine clauses. Break up the sentence into three simple sentences. Can you then say which has a better rhythm when you read it, the single sentence using semicolons, or the three simple sentences? For there is not any means by which those who have been born can avoid dying; after reaching old age there