a sudden death. Helping Others Who Are Experiencing Grief When a friend, loved one, or co-worker is experiencing grief how can we help? It helps to understand that grief is expressed through a variety of behaviours. Reach out to others in their grief, but understand that some may not want to accept help and will not share their grief. Others will want to talk about their thoughts and feelings or reminisce. Be patient and let the grieving person know that you care and are there to support him or her. II..Good Grief AMITAI ETZIONI Soon after my wife died her car slid off an icy road in 1985 a school psychologist warned me that my children and I were not mourning in the right way. We felt angry; the proper first stage, he said, is denial. In late August this year, my 38-year-old son, Michael, died suddenly in his sleep, leaving behind a 2-year-old son and a wife expecting their next child. There is no set form for grief, and no right way to express it. There seems to be an expectation that, after a great loss, we will progress systematically through the well-known stages of grief. It is wrong, we are told, to jump to anger or to wallow too long in this stage before moving towards acceptance. = = o nN ic) = B 2 Eo em ic) =] Lt Oo a Reprint 2025-26 First Flight But I was, and am, angry. To make parents bury their children is wrong; to have both my wife and son taken from me, for forever and a day, is cruel beyond words. A relative from Jerusalem, who is a psychiatrist, brought some solace by citing the maxim: We are not to ask why, but what. The what is that which survivors in grief are bound to do for one another. Following that advice, my family, close friends and I keep busy, calling each other and giving long answers to simple questions like, How did your day go today? We try to avoid thinking about either the immediate past or the bereft future. We take turns playing with Max, Michael s two-year-old son. Friends spend nights with the young widow, and will be among those holding her hand when the baby is born. Focusing on what we do for one another is the only consolation we can find. Writing 4 Write a page (about three paragraphs) on one of the following topics. You can think about the ideas in the text that are relevant to these topics, and add your own ideas and experiences to them. 1. 2. 3. Teaching someone to understand a new or difficult idea Helping each other to get over difficult times Thinking about oneself as unique, or as one among billions of others In This Lesson Wuat WE Have Done Narrated the story of the Buddha, and the advice he gave to the grief-stricken woman. Wuat You Can Do 1. Read and discuss the following extract from