are relevant to these topics, and add your own ideas and experiences to them. 1. 2. 3. Teaching someone to understand a new or difficult idea Helping each other to get over difficult times Thinking about oneself as unique, or as one among billions of others In This Lesson Wuat WE Have Done Narrated the story of the Buddha, and the advice he gave to the grief-stricken woman. Wuat You Can Do 1. Read and discuss the following extract from Kahlil Gibran s The Prophet with the students. Joy and Sorrow Then a woman said, Speak to us of Joy and Sorrow. And he answered: Your joy is your sorrow unmasked. And the selfsame well from which your laughter rises was oftentimes filled with your tears. And how else can it be? The deeper that sorrow carves into your being, the more joy you can contain. Is not the cup that holds your wine the very cup that was burned in the potter s oven? Reprint 2025-26 And is not the lute that soothes your spirit, the very wood that was hollowed out with knives? When you are joyous, look deep into your heart and you shall find it is only that which has given you sorrow that is giving you joy. When you are sorrowful look again in your heart, and you shall see that in truth you are weeping for that which has been your delight. Some of you say, Joy is greater than sorrow, and others say, Nay, sorrow is the greater. But | say unto you, they are inseparable. Together they come, and when one sits alone with you at your board, remember that the other is asleep upon your bed. 2. Help students to read and memorise the following extract from Tagore. Say not in grief that she is no more but say in thankfulness that she was. A death is not the extinguishing of a light, but the putting out of the lamp because the dawn has come. = = o nN ic) = B 2 Eo em ic) =] Lt Oo a Reprint 2025-26 For Anne Gregory This poem is a conversation between a young man and a young woman. What are they arguing about? Never shall a young man, Thrown into despair By those great honey-coloured Ramparts at your ear, Love you for yourself alone And not your yellow hair. But I can get a hair-dye And set such colour there, Brown, or black, or carrot, That young men in despair May love me for myself alone And not my yellow hair. IT heard an old religious man But yesternight declare That he had found a text to prove That only God, my dear, Could love you for yourself alone And not your yellow hair. WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS William Butler Yeats (1865-1939) was an Irish nationalist. He was educated in London and Dublin, and was interested in folklore and mythology. He won the Nobel Prize for Literature in 1923. Reprint 2025-26 F