like her mother. The second clause here gives the speaker s opinion on the first clause. Here is a sentence from the text that uses,semicolons to combine clauses. Break up the sentence into three simple sentences. Can you then say which has a better rhythm when you read it, the single sentence using semicolons, or the three simple sentences? For there is not any means by which those who have been born can avoid dying; after reaching old age there is death; of such a nature are living beings. F Speaking _ The Buddha s sermon is over 2500 years old. Given below are two recent texts on the topic of grief. Read the texts, comparing them with each other and with the Buddha s sermon. Do you think the Buddha s ideas and way of teaching continue to hold meaning for us? Or have we found better ways to deal with grief? Discuss this in groups or in class. 1A Guide to Coping with the Death of a Loved One Martha is having difficulty sleeping lately and no longer enjoys doing things with her friends. Martha lost her husband of 26 years to cancer a month ago. Anya, age 17, doesn t feel like eating and spends the days in her room crying. Her grandmother recently died. Both of these individuals are experiencing grief. Grief is an emotion natural to all types of loss or significant change. Reprint 2025-26 Feelings of Grief Although grief is unique and personal, a broad range of feelings and behaviours are commonly experienced after the death of a loved one. e Sadness. This is the most common, and it is not necessarily manifested by crying. e Anger. This is one of the most confusing feelings for a survivor. There may be frustration at not being able to prevent the death, and a sense of not being able to exist without the loved one. e Guilt and Self-reproach. People may believe that they were not kind enough or caring enough to the person who died, or that the person should have seen the doctor sooner. e Anxiety. An individual may fear that she/he won't be able to care for herself/himself. e Loneliness. There are reminders throughout the day that a partner, family member or friend is gone. For example, meals are no longer prepared the same way, phone calls to share a special moment don t happen. e Fatigue. There is an overall sense of feeling tired. e Disbelief. This occurs particularly if it was a sudden death. Helping Others Who Are Experiencing Grief When a friend, loved one, or co-worker is experiencing grief how can we help? It helps to understand that grief is expressed through a variety of behaviours. Reach out to others in their grief, but understand that some may not want to accept help and will not share their grief. Others will want to talk about their thoughts and feelings or reminisce. Be patient and let the grieving person know that