s special ability make you feel? 3. What qualities do you think were important for Pranav to become successful? 4. What message does Pranav s story give us? II Look at the picture of Kathiawar embroidery. Discuss in pairs. 1. List the steps you think are needed to create this embroidery. 2. Discuss if these steps can be done with feet, instead of hands. 3. What efforts would be needed if someone has to embroider with their feet? Do you think it is possible? Kathiawar embroidery Reprint 2025-26 Unit 5.indd 151 09-Dec-24 3:56:55 PM Poorvi GRabDE 6 ~% Let us read 1. When you enter a tiny room in Moti Vavdi village, Bhavnagar, Gujarat, you will see lots of bright colours. There are many lovely things like cushions, bedcovers, pillows, and more, with beautiful designs. Ila Sachani, a wonderful lady with a big smile, makes all these using a shiny needle to create these designs. She is very good at Kathiawar embroidery a style that needs a lot of skill. 2. Ila Sachani s journey began in the quiet settings of Amreli, Gujarat, where she was born into a farmer s family. From the beginning, life presented its challenges, challenges: as Ila was born with her hands hanging difficulties loose by her sides. Unlike other children, she could not use her hands in the usual way. While other small hands drew figures in the sand or plucked wild flowers, she wondered why she could not join them. She too wanted to hold a chalk in her hands and draw figures on a slate. Ila Sachani 3. Ila s mother and grandmother encouraged the little girl and were single-minded to help her overcome her challenge. They were Skilled in the traditional art of Kathiawar embroidery and decided to share this art with Ila. They taught her to create many single-minded: focused Reprint 2025-26 Unit 5.indd 152 09-Dec-24 3:56:56 PM Unit 5.indd 153 beautiful patterns using her feet! It was certainly not an easy task, but Ila accepted the challenge with determination. Her parents also helped her learn to do things with her legs, like eating and combing her hair. . Threading a needle was hard, but Ila did not give up and became an expert at a young age. Her younger brother and sister helped her too. She learned many styles, even ones from outside Gujarat Kachhi, Kashmiri, Lucknawi and others. . ForIla, embroidery becamea way to express herself. At first, she crafted fine designs only for her family and friends, who were awestruck by her talent. They talked about those designs to others. Soon, the people in the village, too, discovered Ila s special skill and the admiration for her work began to spread. . Word reached the government office in Surat. They were moved by Ila s story and impressed by her work. They decided to display some samples of her embroidery at a state exhibition. This experience opened new doors for Ila. People observed the beauty woven by