or vegetable dyes and enamel paints to colour them. These toys are based on folk stories, animals, birds, bullock carts, rural life, etc. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 5.indd 135 CULTURE AND TRADITION stable: not able to move biodegradable: something that will not harm the environment tamarind: an edible sour fruit AS sawdust: dust of wood dyes: colours enamel: paints that forma protective layer a 09-Dec-24 3:56:42 PM | Poorvi GRabDE 6 Let us discuss On the basis of what the speakers said about the art forms, complete the table given below. Name of the child Art form clay, brass scrap, wax, fire Andhra Pradesh Let us think and reflect I Fill in the blanks to complete the following sentences. 1. The designs for Aipan are taken from and 2. Dhokra metal craft is very old because it is old. 3. A base is needed for coconut shell craft to make it 4. Soft wood, and colours are used to make Kondapalli toys. II Why does Akanksha s family make Aipan? Ill In Dhokra, why does wax come out of the small openings? IV What is common in the toys made in Balamurali s village and coconut shell craft in Kerala? Reprint 2025-26 Unit 5.indd 136 09-Dec-24 3:56:42 PM CULTURE AND TRADITION Unit 5.indd 137 I Priyaranjan, Chitra and Balamurali share how art works of their states are made. They use some words to show the order of making it. Those words are given in the box below. to begin first then after that next finally at last Now, use some of these words to complete the paragraph given below. Use one word only once. How I Get Ready for School 1. I get up and go to take a shower. 2. , | wear my school dress. 3. , leat my food. 4. , | wear my shoes. 5. , [pick up my bag and go out of my home. II The children from different states each speak about one art form from their state. When they speak, they use the first form of the verb. It shows something that happens regularly. It is called the present tense. With he, she and it, -s/-es is used with the verb to show the present tense. Make five sentences with the help of the words given in the table below. Use -s/-es wherever necessary. Two examples are given. Pronouns Part of a sentence Complete Sentences I NN how to dance. I know how to dance. You know questions to understand. | We He tell beautiful flowers. a story every day. He speaks very loudly. She draw very loudly. She It make paintings in free periods. | They We practise They speak spellings on Friday. It Reprint 2025-26 09-Dec-24 3:56:42 PM Poorvi GRabDE 6 you fe Let us listen I Listen to the description of gakkad bharta and complete the notes given below. (refer to page 162 for transcript) Gakkad Bharta 1. Name of the speaker 2. The town of the speaker 3. The