In Bharat s heartland, a grand sight to behold, The National War Memorial, honours brave stories retold. With respect and grace, it stands with pride, Each name etched, each stone, each story to confide. From battle fields to skies, and to oceans wide, They stand for Bharat, side by side. The eternal flame, in silence it glows, Paying homage to their courage that shows. Their sacrifice, always in our mind, In blessed memory, forever remind. With pride and respect, let s always remember, At the National War Memorial, their sacrifice forever. National War Memorial Amar Jawan Jyoti Reprint 2025-26 Unit 5.indd 160 09-Dec-24 3:57:00 PM CULTURE AND TRADITION Let us do these activities. 1. Read the poem aloud. 2. Recite the poem with your classmates and teacher. 3. Remember the poem. Let us explore 1. Visit the website of the National War Memorial and learn more about it. https://www.mygov.in 2. Plan a visit to the National War Memorial with your teacher/parents. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 5.indd 161 09-Dec-24 3:57:00 PM Transcript re) Let us listen (refer to page 138) KALAKRITIYON KA BHARAT Namaste! You must be tired and hungry after listening to so many people. Iam Sushil from Jabalpur in Madhya Pradesh. Let me tell you a unique dish of my district. Itis called gakkad bharta. First, we make gakkad from wheat dough. Then, we make balls with that dough and roast them on high heat. To make bharta, we roast brinjals and tomatoes. Then we garnish the bharta with chopped onions, coriander, green chillis and salt. This food item is made without frying. To eat it, you simply crumble the gakkad and drizzle it with some bharta and a spoonful of ghee. Come to Jabalpur and try it! You will listen to the audio or narration once again. As you listen, check your answers. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 5.indd 162 09-Dec-24 3:57:01 PM Transcript (refer to page 148) Q You will listen to the audio or narration once again. As you listen, check your answers. [Source: https://utsav.gov.in/view-event/kite-festival-2 (Ministry of Tourism)] Reprint 2025-26 y q Unit 5.indd 163 09-Dec-24 3:57:01 PM | Transcript re) fe Let us listen (refer to page 158) ILA SACHANI: EMBROIDERING DREAMS WITH HER FEET Hello everyone! I m here today to share some simple information about Kathiawar embroidery. This is a very old form of embroidery. Ituses many bright colours and also uses many types of stitches, like the chain stitch. The embroidery is commonly seen on clothes and home decoration items. On clothes, it is seen on children s caps, ghagra skirts and men s traditional shirts. In this embroidery, a lot of mirror work is done by fitting small mirrors along with the stitches. Most commonly, the designs used are geometric shapes like squares and triangles. The design of flowers is also used. There is much more to share but I'll do that some other time. Thank you! You will listen to the audio or narration once again. As you listen, check your answers. Reprint