GRabDE 6 ' wa De ~ 2 pS w? Let us learn I Lookat the picture of the kite and read what some of its parts are named. Nose Spine Cover +m@ Kite line Tail ~ Now, complete the given conversation by filling the blanks with some parts of a kite from above. Bina : I like the long t__ _ at the end of my kite. What is your kite like? is bright. Thes___ eis black. Saroj : My kite sc Bina : Ohwonderful! My kite s1]___ is attached to the r__ 1 that wraps it. I really like it. Saroj : Did you know that the tip of a kite is calleda__s_? Bina : Wonderful! Thanks for letting me know. Let's go and fly our pretty kites. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 5.indd 146 18-Mar-25 2:57:43 PM CULTURE AND TRADITION II Let us create a poem using words in a kite! The first line is the subject. Keep this to one kite word. Use a noun. The second line is two describing words for the noun pretty, colourful Line three includes three action words. flying, floating, soaring Line four uses two words that describe the action words. quickly, happily Line five is one word that has the same meaning as the subject/synonym. paper-bird Kite pretty, colourful flying, floating, soaring quickly, happily paper-bird This is called a cinquain poem. It is a five line poem that describes a person, a place or a thing. Now, create a cinquain poem yourself on anything you like. III The poet uses the word fly and drift to tell us about the kite s movement. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 5.indd 147 09-Dec-24 3:56:52 PM Poorvi GRabDE 6 1. Circle the words that match with the drift? movement. You can choose more than one word. slow fast quick upward downward round and round float 2. Study some other words about the kite s movement and share what type of movement they show. You can look at 1 for the type of movement. IV The poet has used expressions like up in the air; look right down; stay up there; stand and stare 1. Read how these expressions are used in the poem. 2. In pairs, make sentences using these expressions. Discuss with your teacher and then write in your notebooks. Let us listen Listen about the Kite Festival in India. As you listen, circle the words that are not correct. Then, listen again and write the correct words. (refer to page 163 for transcript) 1. Kite Festival is celebrated during the month of June. 2. The International Kite Festival is named Uttarayan in Eastern India. 3. Uttarayan is mainly celebrated in Gujarat, but also in Maharashtra and Telangana. 4. During the Kite Festival, we can see kites of different shapes, sizes and colours. 5.In Karnataka, the Tourism Department organises the Kite Festival every year. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 5.indd 148 18-Mar-25 3:06:01 PM CULTURE AND TRADITION 6. The Punjab region celebrates Basant Panchami and Baisakhi by flying kites.