is celebrated during the month of June. 2. The International Kite Festival is named Uttarayan in Eastern India. 3. Uttarayan is mainly celebrated in Gujarat, but also in Maharashtra and Telangana. 4. During the Kite Festival, we can see kites of different shapes, sizes and colours. 5.In Karnataka, the Tourism Department organises the Kite Festival every year. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 5.indd 148 18-Mar-25 3:06:01 PM CULTURE AND TRADITION 6. The Punjab region celebrates Basant Panchami and Baisakhi by flying kites. 7. People of India also enjoy flying kites on Earth Day. Let us speak Share a kite-flying experience with your classmates. If you have not flown a kite yet, share an experience of watching kites fly. Give details Where? When? Why? How? Speak in complete sentences. Let us write 1. Imagine yourself as a kite. In pairs, first discuss all the following hints. What shape of kite are you? What colours do you have? What other parts of yourself are you happy about? Where are you? Who do you belong to? What activities do you do? Who are your friends? * Do you have any message for humans? 2. Now, write a paragraph of about 100 words, with the title I am a Kite. , Let us explore I The mention of kites exists in ancient Indian texts. It can be found in the poetry of the thirteenth-century Marathi saint and poet, Namadeva. In his poems or gathas, he called a kite a gudi, and there is a mention that the kites were made from kaagad (paper). II Have a look at some of the different types of kites. Choose which one is commonly seen. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 5.indd 149 09-Dec-24 3:56:52 PM Poorvi GRabDE 6 ~ Rokkaku Parafoil \ ; Diamond-shaped kite Box kites 1. Find out the steps to make a kite. 2. Follow the steps and create your own kite. Bring it to school to show your teacher and classmates. 3. Write a message on the kite. For example: Happy Independence Day! Reprint 2025-26 Unit 5.indd 150 18-Mar-25 3:00:59 PM CULTURE AND TRADITION ILA SACHANI: EMBROIDERING DREAMS WITH HER FEET Let us do these activities before we read. I Look at the given picture and information. Discuss the questions with your teacher and classmates. Pranav M. Balasubramaniam is from Palakkad in Kerala. Though he was born without both hands, he has excelled as an artist, a singer, and a para-sportsperson. 1. Do you think Pranav s task is simple? Why or why not? 2. How does Pranav s special ability make you feel? 3. What qualities do you think were important for Pranav to become successful? 4. What message does Pranav s story give us? II Look at the picture of Kathiawar embroidery. Discuss in pairs. 1. List the steps you think are needed to create this embroidery. 2. Discuss if these steps can be done with feet, instead of hands. 3. What efforts would be needed if someone has to embroider with their feet? Do you