video has started! The big screen now had little windows each with a smiling child. Each child had something to share. Reprint 2025-26 ye Unit 5.indd 133 09-Dec-24 3:56:39 PM | Poorvi GRabDE 6 Pranam! I am Aakansha from Uttarakhand. I am going to tell you about Aipan, our folk art, that we draw on family functions and festivals. It is done H& with white rice flour Aipan Folk art paste on_ brick-red walls coloured with geru. It is made on floors and walls of puja rooms, and outside the main door of the home. It is an art form made by the women in the family. The designs are very beautiful and mathematical, and are based on our cultural traditions, and observations of nature. Suprabhat! I am Priyaranjan from Odisha. My tribe practises a 4000-year-old metal craft named Dhokra. To begin, we make a figure with clay, dry it, and cover it with a layer of wax. Dhokra Pare Torani Then, we carve the fine design with details on the wax. After that, we cover the figure _ sharp tool with clay, and put it in the fire. The wax melts and comes out of small openings. Next, brass scrap scrap: small is melted and poured into the empty space. The wanted pieces liquid metal takes the same shape as the wax. geru: red clay used as colour Reprint 2025-26 Unit 5.indd 134 09-Dec-24 3:56:41 PM Finally, we remove the outer layer of clay and finish the metal figure as we want. Suprabhaatam! I am Chitra from Kerala. I want to tell you about coconut shell craft. First, we clean the outside and inside of a brown coconut shell. After that, we make it smooth by using sandpaper or a machine. Then we give it the shape we want, and make it stable by fixing a base under it. At last, we polish it using wood polish to make it shine. We make household things like bowls and even jewellery from the coconut shells. It Coconut shell craft is a biodegradable craft. Subhodayam! I am _ Balamurali from Andhra Pradesh. I want to tell you about the 400-year-old art of making toys in my village, Kondapalli. To make the toys, we take soft wood from the nearby hills. After that, we carve each part of the toy separately. Then, we use makku- a paste of tamarind seed powder and sawdust to join the pieces together. Next, we add details and finish the toys. Finally, we use oil and water-colours or vegetable dyes and enamel paints to colour them. These toys are based on folk stories, animals, birds, bullock carts, rural life, etc. Reprint 2025-26 Unit 5.indd 135 CULTURE AND TRADITION stable: not able to move biodegradable: something that will not harm the environment tamarind: an edible sour fruit AS sawdust: dust of wood dyes: colours enamel: paints that forma protective layer a 09-Dec-24 3:56:42 PM | Poorvi GRabDE 6 Let us discuss On the basis of what the speakers