who were awestruck by her talent. They talked about those designs to others. Soon, the people in the village, too, discovered Ila s special skill and the admiration for her work began to spread. . Word reached the government office in Surat. They were moved by Ila s story and impressed by her work. They decided to display some samples of her embroidery at a state exhibition. This experience opened new doors for Ila. People observed the beauty woven by her feet and readily purchased the creations. Ila was no more a hidden talent, but famous! Reprint 2025-26 CULTURE AND TRADITION a 09-Dec-24 3:56:56 PM | Poorvi GRabDE 6 7. Encouraged by this popularity, Ila popularity: participated in more exhibitions, not just fame within the state but at the national level. She received many awards and honours, not just for her art but also the willpower and creativity that her work showed. Ila Sachani, once a farmer s daughter facing a tough challenge, worked hard and became a celebrated artist and receiver of the President s Medal. 8. The most important change for Ila was the new independence. Through her skill, she not only earned a regular income but also found joy in doing what she loved. She proved, through her creations, that challenges can be turned into victories with focus, hard work, positivity and never giving up. 9. Her embroidery, created with her feet, reminds us that art has the power to rise above physical boundaries and touch the soul. Kachhi embroidery Reprint 2025-26 Unit 5.indd 154 09-Dec-24 3:56:57 PM CULTURE AND TRADITION Let us discuss Read the paragraphs and write the main idea for each. Then, match the main idea with two supporting details. Main idea (i) Examples of embroidered things (ii) Ila s use of shiny needle (i) (ii) (i) (ii) @) (ii) (i) (ii) (i) (ii) (i) (ii) (i) Financial independence and joy 8-9 (ii) Challenges can be turned into victories Reprint 2025-26 Unit 5.indd 155 18-Mar-25 3:01:44 PM Poorvi GRabDE 6 Let us think and reflect I Read the following lines and answer the questions that follow. Unlike other children, she could not use her hands in the usual way. While other small hands drew figures in the sand or plucked wild flowers, she wondered why she could not join them. She too wanted to hold a chalk in her hands and draw figures ona slate. 1. Choose the correct option to fill in the blank. Unlike other children means that Ila was . (unaware/ different/simple) 2. What could Ila have felt when she could not join others in things they did? 3. Complete the following with a suitable reason. Ila could not draw figures on the slate because II What creative ways did Ila and her family use to overcome the challenges she faced? III How did new independence help Ila? IV Why was the first state exhibition an important event in Ila s life? V What does the sentence, art has the power