the difference between consumer protection council and Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission? 4. The Consumer Protection Act 1986 ensures the following as rights which every consumer in India should possess (i) Right to choice. (iv) Right to representation. (ii) Right to information. (v) Right to safety. (iii) Right to redressal. (vi) Right to consumer education. Categorise the following cases under different heads and mark against each in brackets. (a) Lata got an electric shock from a newly purchased iron. She complained to the shopkeeper immediately. ( ) (b) John is dissatisfied with the services provided by MTNL/BSNL/TATA INDICOM for the past few months. He files a case in the District Level Consumer Commission. ( ) (c) Your friend has been sold a medicine that has crossed the expiry date and you are advising her to lodge a complaint ( ). (d) Iqbal makes it a point to scan through all the particulars given on the pack of any item that he buys. ( ) (e) You are not satisfied with the services of the cable operator catering to your locality but you are unable to switch over to anybody else. ( ) (f) You realise that you have received a defective camera from a dealer. You are complaining to the head office persistently ( ). 5. If the standardisation ensures the quality of a commodity, why are many goods available in the market without ISI or Agmark certification? 6. Find out the details of who provides Hallmark and ISO certification. TAKING THE CONSUMER MOVEMENT FORWARD India has been observing 24 _ their activities. There are today more December as the National Consumers Day. It was on this day that the Indian Parliament enacted the Consumer Protection Act in 1986. India is one of the countries that have exclusive authority for consumer redressal. The consumer movement in India has made some progress in terms of numbers of organised groups and than 2000 consumer groups in the country of which only about 50-60 are well organised and recognised for their work. However, the consumer redressal process is becoming cumbersome, expensive and time consuming. Many a time, consumers are required to engage lawyers. These cases require time for filing and attending the commission proceedings etc. In most purchases cash memos are not issued hence evidence is not easy to gather. Moreover most purchases in the market are small retail sales. The COPRA was amended in the year 2019 to further strengthen consumers in India. Buying through internet is now included. If there is any service deficiency or defective product, service provider or manufacturer is also held responsible and would be penalized or even imprisoned. Settlement of disputes with the help of a neutral intermediary outside the Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, called mediator, is now encouraged at all the three tiers Consumer Commissions. After more than 30 years of the enactment of COPRA, consumer awareness in India is spreading but slowly. Besides this the enforcement of laws that protect workers, especially in the unorganised sectors