collect material as part of their activities. For example, case histories were taken from newspaper clippings and consumers who fought in Consumer Disputes Redressal Commissions. Let learners collect and read such material from different sources: consumer protection councils, Consumer Disputes Redressal Commissions and internet. UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Reprint 2025-26 CHAPTER 5 CONSUMER RIGHTS eseeeses8eseesse The collage you see below contains some news clippings of Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission verdicts. Why did the people go to these organisations in these cases? These verdicts came about because some people persisted and struggled to get justice. In what ways were they denied justice? More importantly, a ananlVetedeseienedaptaveriasnnenonenseey) DU tea Rahul Chhabra | TNN New Delhi: A Delhi University and held: Tata cher gets Rs 45,000 for flawed phone bill The forum has now asked Pillai to pay only Rs 400 to the company what are the ways in which they can exercise their rights as consumers to get a fair deal from the sellers when they felt they had been denied a just treatment? vil Consumer panel cracks veers? A ywn on cell sp ers TAKING A CALL Chhabra | tan : Now those teleservice providers ou the unnerving will pay teacher who dra; a telecom firm Rs 40,000 to the complainant for caus- | to Spent ra esau acom- ing mental agony and ap rot t O pensation of Rs 45,000 over adisput- It will pay Rs 5,000 tow CO m e S _| ed bill of Rs 400. Jayashree Pillai litigation. Nn a e ; ry re Mee iia eller to cone bileapaie Pillai s complaint e somplaints to the State rons basco Lith ee eee eeensoned. rons the forum's criticism. The ar T] e d or SMS from telemar=" shown. its typical Own er Insurance firm to fizseses | ms rtceni _Bouinremenseto.| tan chasra tothecomplaint in | Delhi: Manoj Gupta , | SUPta s complaints _ | | sms, hard copy of bill i a 7,000 fe th ft warm Pta s | of poor c t Onstru P y , ~ c tc yon ignored wie ee ee ee cent judgment and said: Th Ociety. A consumer commission held that the court has upheld his lew Delhi: Non-payment of phrase cannot take away the complaint of iving details of stolen cellphone s insurance _benefitof insurance from i ters giving de : laim has landed an insurance consumer. the eae in service svices as the contract... mm in trouble. A consumer In view of the judgment, ji ed iettas ocaarenit to pay Rs we hold the insurance com- : ed bill. A De 20 000. to pay Rs 0a complainant from pany guilty of deficiency in : ulled u "UU Com i as relief. service in repudiating the : COT eres 2 was forced to un. pensation, Rajbir Singh s handset al- claim of the complainant, : y Pairs at his own ex- agreed tn H.- ha nalle chaum ave navn \gedly went missing from proclaimed the forum. i ters