only if the damages incurred are of high value. Hallmark is the certification maintained for standardisation of jewellry. The consumer redressal process is very simple and quick. A consumer has the right to get compensation depending on the degree of the damage. ADDITIONAL PROJECTS / ACTIVITIES 1. Your school organises a consumer awareness week. As the Secretary of the Consumer Awareness Forum, draft a poster covering all the consumer rights. You may use the clues and ideas given in the poster on page 84 and 85. This activity can be done with the help of your English teacher. . Mrs. Krishna bought a colour television (CTV) against six months warranty. The CTV stopped working after three months. When she complained to the dealer / shop where it was purchased, they sent an engineer to set it right. The CTV continues to give trouble and Mrs Krishna no longer gets any reply to the complaint she made to the dealer / shop. She decides to write to the Consumer Commission in her area. Write a letter on her behalf. You may discuss with your partner / group members before you write it. . Establish a consumer club in your school. Organise mock consumer awareness workshops like monitoring bookshops, canteen, and shops in your school area. . Prepare posters with catchy slogans like: An alert consumer is a safe consumer Buyers, Beware Consumers be cautious Be aware of your rights As consumers, assert your right Arise, awake and stop not till (Complete it) . Interview 4-5 persons in your neighbourhood and collect varied experiences regarding how they have been victims of such exploitation and their responses. . Conduct a survey in your locality by supplying the following questionnaire to get an idea as to how alert they are as consumers. UNDERSTANDING ECONOmic DEVELOPMENT Reprint 2025-26 For each question, tick one. Always Sometimes Never A B Cc . When you buy some item, do you insist on a bill? oO oO oO 2. Do you keep the bill carefully? O O O oO oO oO 3. If you realise that you have been tricked by the shopkeeper, have you bothered to complain to him or her? . Have you been able to convince him or her that you ve been cheated? . Do you simply grumble to yourself reconciling that it is your fate that you are often being victimised so and it is nothing new? . Do you look for ISI mark, expiry date etc.? . If the expiry date mentioned is just a month or so away, do you insist on a fresh packet? . Do you weigh the new gas cylinder/old newspapers yourself before buying/selling? . Do you raise an objection if a vegetable seller uses stones in place of the exact weight? . Do excessively bright coloured vegetables arouse your suspicion? . Are you brand-conscious? . Do you associate high price with good quality (to reassure yourself that after all you have not paid a higher price just like