to pay Rs we hold the insurance com- : ed bill. A De 20 000. to pay Rs 0a complainant from pany guilty of deficiency in : ulled u "UU Com i as relief. service in repudiating the : COT eres 2 was forced to un. pensation, Rajbir Singh s handset al- claim of the complainant, : y Pairs at his own ex- agreed tn H.- ha nalle chaum ave navn \gedly went missing from proclaimed the forum. i ters to enter ome but the insuran~ om. Sineh had boughta mobile / zeral and biased uner ct | any refused to hon comp. { Insurance firm made cmcrenns Bank fined Rs 15K | om , the loss i a ee > ~ | for denying medical clause as use of i tereeaasie s LOY SLOPPY SETVICE sven aa | < - fs It to find that ; New : GledtheNationalns _theaccountof acustomer who (officials of) a public under. j'a, hascome down heavily on an 3 Wifor det i "renee eanosited a cheque for Rs 4,371, taking bank instead of realis- msurance company for re- ce idharass / omer with a ing their mistake... denied (it) afe: fusing to bear the medical ex- | aba | Uu S e ip Cre of i penditure of a 11-year-old oe as | ESS institute ft eae nis rand; i for ute fi ? insurance claim, the compa- | a dg H el Vin M4 i disclosed at the time of tak- repudiatethesame, saidthe was ve ad 7 TIMES Newe . oO Cty =e a +: ino the nolicv president of north district inh S| \e e ell e @eeseerete THE CONSUMER IN THE MARKETPLACE We participate in the market both as producers and consumers. As producers of goods and services we could be working in any of the sectors discussed earlier such as agriculture, industry, or services. Consumers participate in the market when they purchase goods and services that they need. These are the final goods that people as consumers use. In the preceding chapters we discussed the need for rules and regulations or steps that would promote development. These could be for the protection of workers in the unorganised sector or to protect people from high interest rates charged by moneylenders in the informal sector. Similarly, rules and regulations are also required for protecting the environment. For example, moneylenders in the informal sector that you read about in Chapter 3 adopt various tricks to bind the borrower: they could make the producer sell the produce to them at a low rate in return for a timely loan; they could force a small farmer like Swapna to sell her land to pay back the loan. Similarly, many people who work in the unorganised sector have to work at a low wage and accept conditions that are not fair and are also often harmful to their health. To prevent such exploitation, we have talked of rules and regulations for their protection. There are organisations