sell the produce to them at a low rate in return for a timely loan; they could force a small farmer like Swapna to sell her land to pay back the loan. Similarly, many people who work in the unorganised sector have to work at a low wage and accept conditions that are not fair and are also often harmful to their health. To prevent such exploitation, we have talked of rules and regulations for their protection. There are organisations that have struggled for long to ensure that these rules are followed. THEY PURFOSELY MADE IT SO IT WOULD FALL AFART AFTER A FEW MONTHS SO THAT | WILL BUY A NEW ONE! UG Reprint 2025-26 Likewise, rules and regulations are required for the protection of the consumers in the marketplace. Individual consumers often find themselves in a weak position. Whenever there is a complaint regarding a good or service that had been bought, the seller tries to shift all the responsibility on to the buyer. Their position usually is - If you didn t like what you bought, please go elsewhere . As if the seller has no responsibility once a sale is completed! The consumer movement, as we shall discuss later, is an effort to change this situation. Exploitation in the marketplace happens in various ways. For example, sometimes traders indulge in unfair trade practices such as when shopkeepers weigh less than what they should or when traders add charges that were not mentioned before, or when adulterated /defective goods are sold. Markets do not work in a fair manner when producers are few and powerful whereas consumers purchase in small amounts and are scattered. This happens especially when large companies are producing these goods. These companies with huge wealth, power and reach can manipulate the market in various ways. At times false information is passed on through the media, and other sources to attract consumers. For example, a company for years sold powder milk for babies all over the world as the most scientific product claiming this to be better than mother s milk. It took years of struggle before the company was forced to accept that it had been making false claims. Similarly, a long battle had to be fought with court cases to make cigarettemanufacturing companies accept that their product could cause cancer. Hence, there is a need for rules and regulations to ensure protection for consumers. LET S WORK THESE OUT 1. What are the various ways by which people may be exploited in the market? EVERYONE KNOWS TOBACCO KILLS PEOPLE, BUT WHO CAN SAY THAT TOBACCO COMFANIES SHOULD NOT BE FREE TO SELL TOBACCO? 2. Think of one example from your experience where you thought that there was some cheating in the market. Discuss in the classroom. 3. What do you think should be the role of government to protect consumers? CONSUMER MOVEMENT The consumer movement arose out of dissatisfaction of the consumers as many unfair practices were being indulged in by the