service deficiency or defective product, service provider or manufacturer is also held responsible and would be penalized or even imprisoned. Settlement of disputes with the help of a neutral intermediary outside the Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, called mediator, is now encouraged at all the three tiers Consumer Commissions. After more than 30 years of the enactment of COPRA, consumer awareness in India is spreading but slowly. Besides this the enforcement of laws that protect workers, especially in the unorganised sectors is weak. Similarly, rules and regulations for working of markets are often not followed. Nevertheless, there is scope for consumers to realise their role and importance. It is often said that consumer movements can be effective only with the consumers active involvement. It requires a voluntary effort and struggle involving the participation of one and all. EXERCISES . Why are rules and regulations required in the marketplace? Illustrate with a few examples. . What factors gave birth to the consumer movement in India? Trace its evolution. . Explain the need for consumer consciousness by giving two examples. . Mention a few factors which cause exploitation of consumers. . What is the rationale behind the enactment of Consumer Protection Act 1986? . Describe some of your duties as consumers if you visit a shopping complex in your locality. . Suppose you buy a bottle of honey and a biscuit packet. Which logo or mark you will have to look for and why? . What legal measures were taken by the government to empower the consumers in India? . Mention some of the rights of consumers and write a few sentences on each. . By what means can the consumers express their solidarity? . Critically examine the progress of consumer movement in India. . Match the following. Availing details of ingredients of a product Agmark Accident due to faulty engine in a scooter District Consumer Commission Food fortification Consumers International Bureau of Indian Standards Reprint 2025-26 Right to safety Dealing with consumer cases Certification of edible oil and cereals Agency that develop standards for goods and services Right to information Global level institution of consumer welfare organisations Addition of key nutrients to staple foods 13. Say True or False. (i) COPRA applies only to goods. (ii) India is one of the many countries in the world which has exclusive authorities established for consumer disputes redressal. When a consumer feels that he has been exploited, he must file a case in the District Consumer Commission. It is worthwhile to move to consumer commissions only if the damages incurred are of high value. Hallmark is the certification maintained for standardisation of jewellry. The consumer redressal process is very simple and quick. A consumer has the right to get compensation depending on the degree of the damage. ADDITIONAL PROJECTS / ACTIVITIES 1. Your school organises a consumer awareness week. As the Secretary of the Consumer Awareness Forum, draft a poster covering all the consumer rights. You may use the clues and ideas given in the