up a few packaged goods that you want to buy and examine the information given. In what ways are they useful? Is there some information that you think should be given on those packaged goods but is not? Discuss. 3. People make complaints about the lack of civic amenities such as bad roads or poor water and health facilities but no one listens. Now the RTI Act gives you the power to question. Do you agree? Discuss. When choice is denied Abirami, a student of Ansari Nagar, joined a two-year course at a local coaching institute for professional courses in New Delhi. At the time of joining the course, she paid the fees Rs 61,020 as lumpsum for the entire course of two years. However, she decided to opt Institute again appealed in the State Consumer Com-mission. The State Commission upheld the District Commission s direction and further fined the institute Rs 25,000 for a frivolous appeal. It also directed the institute to pay out of the course at the end of one year as she found that the quality of teaching was not up to the mark. When she asked for a refund of the fee for one year, it was denied to her. When she filed the case in the District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, the Commission directed the Institute to refund Rs 28,000 saying that she had the right to choose. The Rs 7000 as compensation and litigation cost. The State Commission also restrained all the educational and professional institutions in the state from charging fees from students for the entire duration of the course in advance and that too at one go. Any violation of this order may invite penalties and imprisonment, the commission said. What do we understand from this incident? Any consumer who receives a service in whatever capacity, regardless of age, gender and nature of service, has the right to choose whether to continue to receive the service. Suppose you want to buy toothpaste, and the shop owner says that she can sell the toothpaste only if you buy a toothbrush. If you are not interested in buying the brush, your right to choice is denied. Similarly, sometimes gas supply dealers insist that you have to buy the stove from them when you take a new connection. In this way many a times you are forced to buy things that you may not wish to and you are left with no choice. CoNSUMER RIGHTS HE 5 Reprint 2025-26 LET S WORK THIS OUT The following are some of the catchy advertisements of products that we purchase from the market. Which of the following offers would really benefit consumers? Discuss. 15 gm more in every 500 gm pack. Subscribe for a newspaper with a gift at the end of a year. Scratch and win gifts worth Rs 10 lakhs. A milk chocolate inside a 500 gram glucose box. Win a gold coin inside a pack. Buy shoes worth Rs 2000 and get one pair