with a brand wind energy -Consumer group -Prevent waste of water new one at no extra cost. -Pollution Control Board -Harvest rain water -Use unleaded petrol veveeowsemccorameers LEARNING TO BECOME WELL-INFORMED CONSUMERS When we as consumers become conscious of our rights, while purchasing various goods and services, we will ASSERT RIGHTS. PURSUE REMEDIES be able to distinguish and make informed choices. This es -Y See UNDERSTANDING Economic DEVELOPMENT Reprint 2025-26 calls for acquiring the knowledge and skill to become a well-informed consumer. How do we become conscious of our rights? Look at the posters on the right and in the previous page. What do you think? The enactment of COPRA has led to the setting up of separate Departments of Consumer Affairs in central and state governments. The posters that you have seen are one example through which government GRAY . . Acustomer is the most important visitor on our premises. He is not dependant i) . spread information about legal On us. We are dependant on him. He is not an outsider on our business. He is ra process which people can use. part of it. We are not doing him a tavour by serving him. He is doing us a favour a . . by giving us an opportunity to do so." nya | You might also be seeing such Manama Gandy ores etn Krete eew Onine-110 O01 advertisements on television channels. Lon nt abate cap 08888 MADE Wt NOLA While buying many commodities, on the cover, you might have seen a logo with the letters ISI, Agmark, Hallmark or +F. These logos and certification help consumers get assured of quality while purchasing the goods and services. The organisations that monitor and issue these certificates allow producers to use their logos provided they follow certain quality standards. Though these organisations develop quality standards for many products, it is not FORTIFIED compulsory for all the producers to follow SAMPOORNA POSHAN standards. However, for some products that SWASTH JEEVAN affect the health and safety of consumers or of products of mass consumption like LPG cylinders, food colours and additives, cement, packaged drinking water, it is mandatory on the part of the producers to get certified by these organisations. Reprint 2025-26 LET S WORK THESE OUT 1. Look at the posters and cartoons in this chapter. Think of any particular commodity and the aspects that need to be looked at as a consumer. Design a poster for this. Find out the nearest Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission for your area. What is the difference between consumer protection council and Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission? 4. The Consumer Protection Act 1986 ensures the following as rights which every consumer in India should possess (i) Right to choice. (iv) Right to representation. (ii) Right to information. (v) Right to safety. (iii) Right to redressal. (vi) Right to consumer education. Categorise the following cases under different heads and mark against each in brackets. (a) Lata got an electric shock from a newly purchased iron. She complained