the steps taken by consumer groups? 2. There may be rules and regulations but they are often not followed. Why? Discuss. Saale : DELHI HEAD-OFFicE: W272 D. TODAPLR MAW R PH 5546-4837 NO CONSUMER oe CENTRE ICONSUN Reji'y Suffering Reji Mathew, a healthy boy studying in Class IX, was admitted in a private clinic in Kerala for removal of tonsils. An ENT surgeon performed the tonsillectomy operation under general anaesthesia. As a result of improper anaesthesia Reji showed symptoms of some brain abnormalities because of which he was crippled for life. His father filed a complaint in the State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission claiming compensation of Rs 5,00,000 for medical negligence and deficiency, in service. The State Commission, saying that the evidence was not sufficient, dismissed it. Reji s father appealed again in the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission located in New Delhi. The National Commission after looking into the complaint, held the hospital responsible for medical negligence and directed it to pay the compensation. CONSUMER RIGHTS SAFETY IS EVERYONE S RIGHT Reji s suffering shows how a hospital, due to negligence by the doctors and staff in giving anaesthesia, crippled a student for life. While using many goods and services, we as consumers, have the right to be protected against the marketing of goods and delivery of services that are hazardous to life and property. Producers need to strictly follow the required safety rules and regulations. There are many goods and services that we purchase that require special attention to safety. For example, pressure cookers have a safety valve which, if it is defective, can cause a serious accident. The manufacturers of the safety valve have to ensure high quality. You also need public or government action to see that this quality is maintained. However, we do find bad quality products in the market because the supervision of these rules is weak and the consumer movement is also not strong enough. LET S WORK THESE OUT 1. For the following (you can add to the list) products/services discuss what safety rules should be observed by the producer? (a) LPG cylinder (b) cinema theatre (c) circus (d) medicines (e) edible oil (f) marriage pandal (g) a high-rise building. 2. Find out any case of accident or negligence from people around you, where you think that the responsibility lay with the producer. Discuss. ConsuMER RIGHTS YX: Reprint 2025-26 Information about goods and services When you buy any commodity, you will find certain details given on the packing. These details are about ingredients used, price, batch number, date of manufacture, expiry date and the address of the manufacturer. When we buy medicines, on the packets, you might find directions for proper use and information relating to side effects and risks associated with usage of that medicine. When you buy garments, you will find information on instructions for washing . Why is it that rules have been made so that the manufacturer displays this information? It is because consumers have the right to