(ALT oe samplers =6 __ HE HIMSELF PLEADS THE CASE IN THE COMMISSION OFFICE JUDGE VERIFIES THE brece ON DOCUMENTS AND HEARS THE ARGUMENTS OF BOTH @ rue syocse ANNOUNCES THE AGGRIEVED PARTY AND THE OTHER PARTY - Qe the piePutte EDEESGAL COMMISSION VERDICT. Reprint 2025-26 The consumer movementin India and national levels was set up for has led to the formation of various __ redressal of consumer disputes. The organisations, locally known as district-level authority called District consumer forums or consumer Consumer Disputes Redressal protection councils. They guide Commission deals with the cases consumers on how to file cases in the involving claims up to Rs 1 crore, the Consumer Disputes Redressal state-level Consumer Disputes Commissions. On many occasions, _Redressal Commissions called State they also represent individual Commission between Rs 1 crore and consumers in these commissions. Rs 10 crore and the national-level These voluntary organisations also as ; ocd commission National Commission receive financial support from the , . . . : deals with cases involving claims government for creating awareness . ; exceeding Rs 10 crore. If a case is among people. . . . ; : & peop dismissed in district-level If you are living in a residential commission, a consumer can also colony, you might have noticed appeal in the state and then in boards of Residents Welfare national-level commissions. Associations. If there is any unfair trade practice meted out to their Thus, the Act has enabled us as members, they take up the case on consumers to have the right to their behalf. represent in the Consumer Disputes Redressal Commissions. Under COPRA, a three-tier quasi judicial machinery at the district, state LET S WORK THIS OUT Arrange the following in the correct order. (a) Arita files a case in the District Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission. (b) She engages a professional person. (c) She realises that the dealer has given her defective material. (d) She starts attending the commission proceedings. (e) She goes and complains to the dealer and the Branch office, to no effect. Ensure consumer rights to healthy environment as against (f) She is asked to produce the bill and warranty before air pollution- water pollution- noise pollution the commission. (g) She purchases a wall clock from a retail outlet. Look for products/brands which satisfy What you can do os eR errr pny wn ok pomeranian (h) Within a few months, the dealer was ordered by the omplain to Use renewable energy such as solar and commission to replace her old wall clock with a brand wind energy -Consumer group -Prevent waste of water new one at no extra cost. -Pollution Control Board -Harvest rain water -Use unleaded petrol veveeowsemccorameers LEARNING TO BECOME WELL-INFORMED CONSUMERS When we as consumers become conscious of our rights, while purchasing various goods and services, we will ASSERT RIGHTS. PURSUE REMEDIES be able to distinguish and make informed choices. This es -Y See UNDERSTANDING Economic DEVELOPMENT Reprint 2025-26 calls for acquiring the knowledge and skill to become a