NOTES FOR THE TEACHER CHAPTER 5 : CONSUMER RIGHTS This chapter proposes to discuss the issue of consumer rights within the context of the ways markets operate in our country. There are many aspects of unequal situations in a market and poor enforcement of rules and regulations. Hence, there is a need to sensitise learners and encourage them to participate in the consumer movement. This chapter provides case histories how some consumers were exploited in real life situation and how legal institutions helped in getting compensated and in upholding their rights. The case histories would enable the students to link these narratives to their life experiences. We have to enable students to understand that the awareness of being a well-informed consumer arose out of consumer movement and active participation of people through their struggles over a long period. This chapter also provides details of a few organisations helping consumers in different ways. Finally, it ends with some critical issues of the consumer movement in India. consumers Aspects of Teaching / Sources of Information This chapter has questions, case studies and activities. It would be preferred that students discuss these in groups orally. Some of these could be answered in writing individually. While carrying out each activity you could start with a brainstorming session about the activity. Similarly, there are many opportunities for roleplay in this chapter and this could be a useful way to share their experiences and understand the issues at a deeper level. Making posters collectively is another way to think about these issues. This lesson contains activities, which require visits visit to consumer protection councils, consumer organisations, District/State/National level Consumer Disputes Redressal Commissions, retail shops, marketplaces, etc. Organise the visits to maximise learners experience. Have a discussion with them about the purpose of the visit, things they need to do beforehand and things that need to be collected and the task (report/ project / article, etc.) they would carry out after the visit. As part of this chapter, the learners may do letter-writing and speaking activities. We may have to be sensitive to the language aspect of exercises. This chapter contains material collected from authenticated websites, books, newspapers and magazines. For example, https://consumer affairs.nic.inis a website of Central Government Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public Distribution. Another website www.cutsinternational.org is the website of a consumer organisation working in India for 40 years. It publishes a variety of material to create consumer awareness in India. They need to be shared among learners so that they can also collect material as part of their activities. For example, case histories were taken from newspaper clippings and consumers who fought in Consumer Disputes Redressal Commissions. Let learners collect and read such material from different sources: consumer protection councils, Consumer Disputes Redressal Commissions and internet. UNDERSTANDING ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT Reprint 2025-26 CHAPTER 5 CONSUMER RIGHTS eseeeses8eseesse The collage you see below contains some news clippings of Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission verdicts. Why did the people go to these organisations in these cases?