the market? EVERYONE KNOWS TOBACCO KILLS PEOPLE, BUT WHO CAN SAY THAT TOBACCO COMFANIES SHOULD NOT BE FREE TO SELL TOBACCO? 2. Think of one example from your experience where you thought that there was some cheating in the market. Discuss in the classroom. 3. What do you think should be the role of government to protect consumers? CONSUMER MOVEMENT The consumer movement arose out of dissatisfaction of the consumers as many unfair practices were being indulged in by the sellers. There was no legal system available to consumers to protect them from exploitation in the marketplace. For a long time, when a consumer was not happy with a particular brand product or shop, he or she generally avoided buying that brand product, or would stop purchasing from that shop. It was presumed that it was the responsibility of consumers to be careful while buying a commodity or service. It took many years for organisations in India, and around the world, to create awareness amongst people. This has also shifted the responsibility of ensuring quality of goods and services on the sellers. In India, the consumer movement as a social force originated with the necessity of protecting and promoting the interests of consumers against unethical and unfair trade practices. Rampant food shortages, hoarding, black marketing, adulteration of food and edible oil gave birth to the consumer movement in an organised form in the 1960s. Till the 1970s, consumer organisations were largely engaged in writing articles and holding exhibitions. They formed consumer groups to look into the malpractices in ration shops and overcrowding in the road passenger transport. More recently, India witnessed an upsurge in the number of consumer groups. ConsuMER RIGHTS iy 2 Reprint 2025-26 Consumers InternationaLl In 1985 United Nations adopted the UN Guidelines for Consumer Protection. This was a tool for nations to adopt measures to protect consumers and for consumer advocacy groups to press their governments to do so. At the international level, this has become the foundation for consumer movement. Today, Consumers International has become an umbrella body to over 200 member organisations from over 100 countries. Because of all these efforts, the movement succeeded in bringing pressure on business firms as well as government to correct business conduct which may be unfair and against the interests of consumers at large. A major step taken in 1986 by the Indian government was the enactment of the Consumer Protection Act 1986, popularly known as COPRA. You will learn more about COPRA later. 1. What could have been the steps taken by consumer groups? 2. There may be rules and regulations but they are often not followed. Why? Discuss. Saale : DELHI HEAD-OFFicE: W272 D. TODAPLR MAW R PH 5546-4837 NO CONSUMER oe CENTRE ICONSUN Reji'y Suffering Reji Mathew, a healthy boy studying in Class IX, was admitted in a private clinic in Kerala for removal of tonsils. An ENT surgeon performed the tonsillectomy operation under general anaesthesia. As a result of improper anaesthesia Reji showed symptoms of