of the code: i. There are rules that the party in government must follow; this ensures that the resources available to the government are not used for the purpose of the elections. For example, no new schemes and projects are to be announced that may | influence voters. | li. All candidates are expected to exercise discretion and restraint to ensure that the elections take place peacefully. iii. Influencing voters through gifts in return for votes is punishable. LET'S EXPLORE > Here area few types of complaints that the ECI handles. Fig. 5.17. A candidate distributed Fig. 5.18. Abusive language used by sarees and household appliances the candidate of one party against the to women voters. candidate from an opposing party. 1 wae Fig. 5.19. Officials of the Fig. 5.20. Bundles of 500/- notes government campaigning for found in the car of a candidate the ruling party. during inspections. > Why do you think these might be violations of the code of conduct? cy, DON T MISS OUT The Model Code of Conduct was adopted in Kerala in 1960, voluntarily approved by representatives of the major political parties of the time. The ECI circulated it to political parties during the 1962 general elections, and from 1991, the ECI became proactive in ensuring the observance of the MCC. 5 - Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System Governance and Democracy @ Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 |-, DON'T MISS OUT T.N. Seshan became the Chief Election Commissioner in 1990. He brought in reforms to ensure free and fair elections, among them: campaigning to follow precise rules, voter IDs to eliminate proxy | voting, and strict vigilance on spending . by candidates. T.N. Seshan worked hard to protect the rights of voters and is often S remembered as the officer who made Indian ee 3 elections fairer, transparent and fearless! _Fig. 5.21. TN. Seshan LET'S EXPLORE When is the next election in the region where you are located? Is it to the state, urban local body or panchayat? UNDERSTANDING ELECTIONS IN INDIA A VERY BRIEF OVERVIEW Election to the Lok Sabha and State Legislative Assemblies Elections in India are often referred to as the Festival of Democracy a time when citizens exercise their right to choose representatives freely, fairly, and responsibly. We know that India follows a parliamentary system of government where citizens participate in various levels of elections Lok Sabha (national level), state legislative assemblies (state level) and local bodies (city and village level). The country is divided into 543 constituencies for the Lok Sabha elections. The elected candidates to the Lok Sabha are known as Members of Parliament (MPs), whereas candidates elected to state assemblies are known as Members of Legislative Assembly (MLAs). India uses the First-Past-the-Post electoral system, wherein the candidate receiving the most votes in a constituency wins. This means that a candidate can win without securing even 50 per cent of the total votes (like Gurmat won despite getting only 12 out