Lok Sabha, the legislative assembly of every state and union territory, and all the local elections in villages and cities are based on universal franchise (Article 326 of the Constitution). Remember that no one can vote on another s behalf. / > Can you calculate how long you have to wait before you can vote? To be able to exercise your right, you need to be registered as a voter in your constituency. However, one is barred from voting if found guilty of committing certain serious crimes. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Do you remember India had a general election in the summer of 2024? About 980 million voters were eligible to exercise their franchise for the 543 constituencies of the Lok Sabha. -%, DON'T MISS OUT India has 3.1 million elected representatives (1.3 million of them women) in more than 250,000 local government bodies across India. All these are democratically elected through universal adult franchise. We need an elaborate and well-organised system to manage this massive exercise and ensure that the elections take place fairly and freely. In this chapter, we will briefly explore who can vote, a few of the types of elections we have, the electoral system, and how it is organised. =) DON T MISS OUT > Before Independence, only 13 per cent of Indians were allowed to vote, and franchise was not universal. We will delve more into this in another part of the textbook. > India was among the early nations to grant women the right to vote, ahead of many others around the world. For example, women were given the a right to vote in Fig. 5.3. Women s suffrage parade, USA, 1913 Switzerland only in 1971. Women fought long and hard in many countries to win this fundamental democratic right. In India, on the other hand, a progressive constitutional vision and deep democratic values rooted in India s ancient traditions ensured women had voting rights from the very beginning. Constituency: An area whose voters elect a representative to a legislative body. System: A group of interconnected or interdependent elements that work together to achieve a common purpose or function. 5 - Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System Governance and Democracy Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 SS _ In 1947, our literacy rate was about 14 per cent, only about 8 per cent among women. Some argued that the right to vote should be given only to literate people. Discuss in your group why the Constitution makers may have decided on universal franchise from the time of Independence itself. There are several reasons why universal franchise is so important. A few are illustrated in the mindmap below. Can you add some more? No discrimination based on caste, creed, sex, education, wealth etc. People ( participate in solving problems in their area Everyone is WN Fosters civic engagement All can Everyone's participate < voice matters in deciding Power to universal the nation s