ABOUT IT Why do you think the above group of people is not involved in electing the President of India? Why are the common people not involved in the election of the president? It is because this ensures that only directly elected representatives vote to elect the President. This maintains democratic legitimacy, as the President is meant to represent the will of the people, indirectly but meaningfully. Election of the Vice President of India The Vice President of India is elected by an electoral college consisting of the elected and nominated members of both Houses of Parliament; again, the system of single transferable vote is used. The vice president is the chairperson of the Rajya Sabha. If there are situations when the president is not able to discharge their function, the vice president steps in to play the role. CHALLENGES AND THE ROAD AHEAD India s electoral system is celebrated as the world s largest democratic exercise. However, like all systems, it faces its share of challenges. Issues such as the growing influence of money in elections, a significant proportion of candidates with criminal records, and voter apathy, (particularly in urban areas), raise important questions about the health and future of our democracy. The way forward lies in empowering voters with the information they need to make thoughtful and responsible choices. Media, education, and awareness campaigns must work together to help people, especially the youth, understand the importance of voting wisely. An aware and vigilant voter is the strongest safeguard of a democratic system. It starts with asking the right questions and ends with casting a responsible vote. Before we move on... +> Universal adult franchise is the cornerstone of Indian democracy. > The right to vote is a responsibility, too. It needs to be taken seriously by every voter. Voter awareness is an important aspect of the right to vote. > Itis important to facilitate the participation of all eligible voters. > The Election Commission of India is the Constitutional body that conducts elections in the country. 5 - Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System Governance and Democracy Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Chapter 5.indd 138 The ECI oversees all the elections in the country, including those of the president and vice president. Indian democracy faces challenges that call for the voters vigilance and awareness. Questions and activities 1. Why is universal adult franchise important for a healthy democracy? What is the meaning of secret ballot ? Why is this important in a democracy? 3. Give examples of direct and indirect elections. How is the election of members to the Lok Sabha different from that to the Rajya Sabha? What, in your view, are the advantages of the EVM over paper ballots? Voter turnout has been declining in some urban areas of India. What could be the reasons for this trend, and what steps can be taken to encourage more people to vote? Why do you think a proportion of seats in the