is divided into 543 constituencies for the Lok Sabha elections. The elected candidates to the Lok Sabha are known as Members of Parliament (MPs), whereas candidates elected to state assemblies are known as Members of Legislative Assembly (MLAs). India uses the First-Past-the-Post electoral system, wherein the candidate receiving the most votes in a constituency wins. This means that a candidate can win without securing even 50 per cent of the total votes (like Gurmat won despite getting only 12 out of the 33 votes). J, DON'T MISS OUT The legislative assembly is called by several names in regional languages, for example, Vidhan Sabha and Niyama Sabha. What is it called in your state? After the voting process is completed, the process of government haroup formation begins. The political party or coalition winning of two a majority of the seats in the Lok Sabha forms the national ial ly government. The leader of this majority typically becomes the working prime minister. Similarly, at the state level, the leader of the | together majority party becomes the chief minister. | Vo \ Fig. 5.22 As we saw in Fig. 5.11, the State Election Commission is a part of the election apparatus. It plays an important role not only in general and state elections but also in conducting elections to 5 - Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System Governance and Democracy Dissolution: Expiry or termination due to the end of its term or other Constitutional reason Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 local bodies at the grassroots level. It works in consultation with the ECI in these matters, and universal adult franchise, and all other Constitutional provisions applicable in the case of direct elections by the people are pertinent here too. ) > Whoare the MP and MLA/ MLAs of the constituency you L > Which party does each of them belong to? > Whatare the concerns of the MP and MLA, respectively? are located in? (A Lok Sabha constituency may have two or more assembly constituencies.) Election to the Rajya Sabha The candidates elected to the Rajya Sabha are also known as Members of Parliament (MPs), but they are chosen through indirect elections. Let us revisit the example of Suryodaya School. Imagine that the school is setting up a special council at the school level. If the members of this council are elected by the class representatives, it would be an indirect election. Of the 245 members of the Rajya Sabha, 233 are elected by the elected members of the state legislative assemblies (MLAs), while the President of India nominates 12. Each state is allotted a different number of Rajya Sabha seats based on population. For example, more populous states like Uttar Pradesh have more seats than less populous states like Arunachal Pradesh. The Rajya Sabha is also called the Permanent House it is never dissolved. A member of the Rajya Sabha has a six-year term. Onethird of its members retire every two years, and new members