members of the state legislative assemblies (MLAs), while the President of India nominates 12. Each state is allotted a different number of Rajya Sabha seats based on population. For example, more populous states like Uttar Pradesh have more seats than less populous states like Arunachal Pradesh. The Rajya Sabha is also called the Permanent House it is never dissolved. A member of the Rajya Sabha has a six-year term. Onethird of its members retire every two years, and new members are elected. There is a difference, however, in the voting process. It uses what is called a single transferable vote system . This is a special way of ensuring that smaller states also get fair representation in the Rajya Sabha. You will learn more about the exact mechanism of how this works in higher classes. MLAs President of India Vote in indirect Nominates elections 12 members Elect 233 Rajya Sabha members Rajya Sabha members are elected by MLAs through indirect elections, while the President nominates 12 distinguished individuals. Rajya Sabha is a permanent body; one-third of its members retire every two years, ensuring continuity. Seat allocation is based on state populations; more populous states like Uttar Pradesh have more seats. MLAs vote using a single transferable vote system, ranking candidates by preference. Bicameral legislatures: A bicameral legislature is asystem where the legislative body is divided into two separate chambers or houses. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Election of the President of India The President of India is not directly elected by the common people. Instead, an electoral college is formed to carry out the election. This Electoral College consists of: Members of Parliament (MPs) from both the houses of the Parliament Lok Sabha (Lower House) and the Rajya Sabha (Upper House) Members of the Legislative Assemblies (MLAs) from each of India s states and the union territories of Delhi and Puducherry The single transferable vote system is followed in this election. Since the president represents the whole country, this method ensures the support of both the central and state governments. The rules for voting and counting are very elaborate; the more populous states have a greater say. (We need not go into the details at this stage.) The following group of people is not involved in electing the President of India: Nominated members of Rajya Sabha (12) Nominated members of State Legislative Assemblies Members of Legislative Councils (both elected and nominated) in bicameral legislatures Nominated members of union territories of Delhi and Puducherry Y THINK ABOUT IT Why do you think the above group of people is not involved in electing the President of India? Why are the common people not involved in the election of the president? It is because this ensures that only directly elected representatives vote to elect the President. This maintains democratic legitimacy, as the President is meant to represent the will of the people, indirectly but meaningfully. Election of the Vice President of India The Vice President of India is