but with some periodicity; so every year, several polls are conducted in various parts of the country based on when they are due. Be Be Be Be BS BE Gp Gp. Gp Op Gp Gp. Oi i i iB BS BB About 543 Over 3B BS BE BS 980 million parliamentary 1 million voters constituencies polling stations Fig. 5.12. A few numbers showing the scale of the 2024 Lok Sabha elections. As you can see, the numbers are very large. Many people are deployed to assist the whole process, including teachers. LET'S EXPLORE Identify teachers in your school or vicinity who may have performed election duty. Invite them to your class to share their experiences. DON'T MISS OUT 84 of the Lok Sabha constituencies are reserved for persons from the scheduled castes, while 47 are reserved for scheduled ; general tribes. Process of voting for the Lok Sabha and State assemblies Ry 4 . 7 Fig. 5.14. Managing the elections extensive use of technology 1 * polling officer: Checks name on voter list and ID proof. 2 polling officer: Inks finger, gives chit and takes your signature. 34 polling officer: Takes chit and checks your finger. NOTA (None Of The Above) option is also available. 4th Press button to vote on the electronic voting machine (EVM); you hear a beep Fig. 5.15. Shyam Saran Negi, a school sound. Also check the teacher in Himachal Pradesh, was the printed slip in VVPAT. first voter in India s general elections of 1951. Here, in 2017, he cast his vote at Fig. 5.13. the age of 100. 5 - Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System Governance and Democracy Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 LET'S EXPLORE > India s electronic voting machines (EVMs) and_ Voter Verifiable Paper Audit Trail (VVPAT) systems have been used in countries like Namibia and Bhutan with support from _ the ECI. Other countries a have also studied this Fig. 5.16. Electronic voting machines technology and have received training from India to adopt it in their countries. > VVPAT isa system that produces a physical paper record, allowing voters to verify that their electronic votes were cast correctly. This paper trail provides a backup for verification and recounting purposes in case of disputes or failures of the electronic system. Model Code of Conduct (MCC) The code is followed to ensure free and fair elections, listing the dos and don ts for leaders, political parties, and candidates that must be adhered to. A few elements of the code: i. There are rules that the party in government must follow; this ensures that the resources available to the government are not used for the purpose of the elections. For example, no new schemes and projects are to be announced that may | influence voters. | li. All candidates are expected to exercise discretion and restraint to ensure that the elections take place peacefully. iii. Influencing voters through gifts in return for votes is punishable. LET'S EXPLORE