Governance and Democracy Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Fig. 5.6. India s electoral system endeavours to enable every citizen to exercise their franchise. This includes measures such as organising a polling station for a single woman voter, postal voting and providing wheelchair assistance. Chapter 5.indd 122 05-07-2025 17:42:14 LET'S EXPLORE | About 34 per cent of eligible voters did not exercise their | right to vote in the 2024 elections. Why do you think this is so? What are some challenges people face in exercising their rights? Design and conduct a short survey among adults in your family and neighbourhood to answer these questions. Analyse the data and write a report with suggestions on how it may be possible to ensure everyone votes. ~ DON T MISS OUT The Uttaramerur inscriptions from the 10" century describe a transparent process for the selection of representatives. Eligible candidates names were written on fragments of palm leaves and placed in a pot, which was then sealed. On the selection day, _ | it was opened publicly and a young boy drew the palm leaves randomly one by one; a respected individual, after showing his empty hands to the public, would read out each name of the selected candidates. Election for class representative Grade 8, Suryodaya School It was time for the annual election of the Class Representative (Class Rep). The Class Rep would represent the class in meetings with teachers, organise events, and act as a bridge between the students and school authorities. Three students Ahmed, Gurmat, and Ravi decided to contest for the position. The class teacher, Ms. Usha, was appointed as the Election Officer to ensure the election process was fair, transparent, and followed all the necessary rules. Fig. 5.7. 5 - Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System Governance and Democracy Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 S| Here s a brief introduction of each of the candidates: Ahmed promised to improve the cleanliness of the classrooms and the playground. Gurmat was interested in helping all her classmates learn better. She proposed creating a system of peer coaching and mutual support. Ravi wanted to make more space in their class timetable for the arts curriculum music, theatre, and visual art in line with the new curriculum. Campaigning: Ahmed put up posters, Gurmat used the noticeboard and spoke to classmates, while Ravi held a lunchtime music performance to promote his idea. As the Election Officer, Ms. Usha had to organise the elections and ensure it was conducted fairly. She explained the rules to the class, ensuring everyone understood how the secret ballot voting process would work; no one would know who voted for whom, ensuring the process was private and fair. She set up the voting booths in the corner of the classroom. Voting day: On election day, each student was given a ballot paper with the names of the three candidates. The students were asked to mark an X next to