and ensure it was conducted fairly. She explained the rules to the class, ensuring everyone understood how the secret ballot voting process would work; no one would know who voted for whom, ensuring the process was private and fair. She set up the voting booths in the corner of the classroom. Voting day: On election day, each student was given a ballot paper with the names of the three candidates. The students were asked to mark an X next to the name of the candidate they wished to vote for. Ms. Usha also ensured that there was a ballot paper in braille for Neha. After all the students voted, Ms. Usha collected the ballots in a box and sealed it until the counting session. The results: After all the 33 votes were cast, Ms. Usha called Ms Sheeba from the next class to witness the counting process. One of the ballot papers was not marked, so it was declared invalid. The results were announced: Ahmed received 8 votes, Gurmat 12 and Ravi 10. Gurmat, with the most votes, was declared the new Class Representative. She thanked her classmates and promised to fulfil her commitments. Ahmed and Ravi congratulated her and offered to support her. LET'S EXPLORE > What are the most important aspects of the election process in this caselet? Why was it important to have a secret ballot? What considerations might the students have had while exercising their choice? Do you think the students have any responsibility after Gurmat was elected as the class rep? If yes, what are they? What was the role that Ms. Usha played? Why was it important? Why was it important for Ms. Usha to organise a braille ballot paper for Neha? What would happen if many students in the class chose not to mark a preference? ciQ,, DON'T MISS OUT Imagine if a student did not want to vote for any of the candidates Ahmed, Gurmat, or Ravi. What option would they have? Some countries, including India, offer an additional option, NOTA None Of The Above. This option allows voters to reject all candidates if they are not satisfied with any of them. It doesn t change the result but sends a message voters want better choices. NOTA is a quiet but powerful tool in a democracy. 5 - Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System Governance and Democracy Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 S| THE ROLE OF THE ELECTION COMMISSION OF INDIA (ECD We have seen the size and diversity that needs to be kept in mind in the organisation of the election process in India. In this section, we will look at the different types of elections that the ECI organises and oversees. f LET'S REMEMBER India is a parliamentary democracy where, at the national level, citizens choose representatives for the Lok Sabha (the lower house of the Parliament). They focus on issues affecting the entire country. In addition, voters elect representatives from their constituencies to