size and diversity that needs to be kept in mind in the organisation of the election process in India. In this section, we will look at the different types of elections that the ECI organises and oversees. f LET'S REMEMBER India is a parliamentary democracy where, at the national level, citizens choose representatives for the Lok Sabha (the lower house of the Parliament). They focus on issues affecting the entire country. In addition, voters elect representatives from their constituencies to the legislative assemblies in the state and union territories where they are registered. These members focus primarily on regional issues. These are just two of the elections that the ECI manages; we will see more in the later sections. However, before we get a glimpse of the election process, let us get introduced to the Election Commission of India, the institution that oversees it. LET'S REMEMBER In Grade 6, youread about direct elections to gram panchayats and urban local bodies. The State Election Commissions manage these. Election Commission of India A brief introduction The Election Commission of India (ECI) is an independent constitutional body responsible for conducting free and fair elections. It was established in 1950 and conducts elections to the Lok Sabha, Rajya Sabha, State Legislative Assemblies in India, and the offices of the President and Vice President. The first general elections in independent India were held in 19511952. The ECI performs crucial tasks like: SA, Setting Registering election dates political parties Enforcing the Overseeing the Model Code entire electoral of Conduct process Fig. 5.9. Tasks performed by the Election Fig. 5.10. Office of the the Election Commission of India Commission of India in Delhi Election Commission of India At national At State/UT level At District level level Chief Election Chief Electoral District Election Commissioner Officer Officer Two Election Commissioners Electoral Registration Officer (ERO) (manages voter list) Returning Officer (RO) (conducts elections) Fig. 5.11. Structure of the Election Commission of India 5 - Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System Governance and Democracy Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 SS Managing the electoral process Managing elections in India is a mammoth task. The ECI has been upgrading its capacities to keep pace with the needs of modern India in conducting free and fair elections. The electoral system is massive and needs to work efficiently. We take the example of the Lok Sabha elections to illustrate this. Note that the elections to the state assemblies follow a similar process. All elections take place at different times but with some periodicity; so every year, several polls are conducted in various parts of the country based on when they are due. Be Be Be Be BS BE Gp Gp. Gp Op Gp Gp. Oi i i iB BS BB About 543 Over 3B BS BE BS 980 million parliamentary 1 million voters constituencies polling stations Fig. 5.12. A few numbers showing the scale of the 2024 Lok Sabha elections. As you can see, the numbers are very large.