Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System [India] adopted the principle of adult franchise with an abundant faith in the common man and the ultimate success of democratic rule...never before in the history of the world has such an experiment been so boldly undertaken. Alladi Krishnaswami Ayyar November 1949, Constituent Assembly Debates From Gir forest for lone voter to village on IndoBangla border: How EC conducts polls at remotest, 66% wom en electo; "i the Ors Voted in thi inaccessible places iia Sender gap in Voting Gouse 's election. How dig eanwhile, the representative <p . e 5 * 18 Share of women in Senne Kumite & incaspeng Syncpals Videos Politics has barely grown & rz - a, \ it Travelling through jungles and snow J oP sin urb - nm priaging gaps : =) (an) (remo eer > ECT tocus sore) (QS capped mountains, wading through we : jon rivers, carrying EVMs on he ae participat 103 1ST rir. | WOW BIRT y i nisho " " ai a ol d 64 say orld - CEC Raj! | India meer Lok Sabha polls - Home V people vott sence of alle Kumar si nn oting for eligible vote ah : 024: ime te 2024 Genet ions 2 + tl pisabulties | of General Elect ia for che firs ens and persons with ition leaders t = ded an | di e voting for Seno Ses woting process ar in fing, he als0 asked Opes exten incites innroauees pe accessibility " gsing a press briefings commission Of TO entvance ine addre: process He this initiative a to influence { Elections. ypsared en av a QRickit Oreo 0881CHOS It s just cag oe voting! == S ~ Why is everyone so excited? 4 Just voting? It s the biggest celebration of our democracy the general elections! sg Fig. 5.2. UNIVERSAL ADULT FRANCHISE Franchise: The Constitution makers decided that universal adult franchise granted by one would be a feature of Indian democracy right from the outset. constitution or This means that every adult citizen gets one vote, and all votes government have equal value. Hence, every Indian citizen aged 18 and that is used above has the right to vote irrespective of caste, creed, race, + enone ct religion, gender, education, income, etc. The word universal franchise. connotes this. LET'S EXPLORE India changed the minimum age for voting from 21 to 18 in 1988. Discuss whether this was a good move. Universal franchise is a cornerstone of Indian democracy. Elections to the Lok Sabha, the legislative assembly of every state and union territory, and all the local elections in villages and cities are based on universal franchise (Article 326 of the Constitution). Remember that no one can vote on another s behalf. / > Can you calculate how long you have to wait before you can vote? To be able to exercise your right, you need to be registered as a voter in your constituency. However, one is barred from voting if