group why the Constitution makers may have decided on universal franchise from the time of Independence itself. There are several reasons why universal franchise is so important. A few are illustrated in the mindmap below. Can you add some more? No discrimination based on caste, creed, sex, education, wealth etc. People ( participate in solving problems in their area Everyone is WN Fosters civic engagement All can Everyone's participate < voice matters in deciding Power to universal the nation s determine adult future. People decide what type of future : franchise? Elected they want and fata : representatives who can best =_ answerable to represent electorate them People vote them out in elections Fig. 5.4. Importance of universal franchise in a democracy. Add two reasons of your own in the empty boxes. BRIDGING BARRIERS, ENABLING | PARTICIPATION: ENSURING UNIVERSAL | FRANCHISE Democracy thrives when every eligible citizen can freely and fairly participate in the electoral process. Voting in elections is a powerful way for people to express their will. How does this take place in India? India is a large, diverse, and complex country. To illustrate, the population of eligible voters in India is fifteen times the population of the United Kingdom, and in terms of area, India is six times larger than France. Geographic diversity is a challenge, too. Thus, elections in India need to be organised taking this complexity into account. The Election Commission of India organises elections in India. (We will learn more about ECI later in the chapter.) The ECI has taken several innovative accessibility measures to remove barriers to exercising the franchise and ensure no voter is left behind. Electoral officials travel to remote locations to ensure every citizen can exercise their democratic right. In 2024, for the first time, the elderly and people with disabilities could cast their votes from home, and the postal voting option was available for a specific category of voters. Assistive technologies like brailleenabled voter cards and app-based requests for assistance, including wheelchairs and ramps, were also made possible. LET S EXPLORE > Discuss in groups What role do such measures play in a democracy? Do you know of anyone who benefited from these improved accessibility measures? How might they increase voter participation in your neighbourhood? How can technology assist? > Ifyou have access to the internet, visit the ECI website (https://www. eci.gov.in/persons-withdisabilities). Read and identify the various interventions that the ECI has taken to facilitate voting by people with disabilities. 5 - Universal Franchise and India s Electoral System Governance and Democracy Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Fig. 5.6. India s electoral system endeavours to enable every citizen to exercise their franchise. This includes measures such as organising a polling station for a single woman voter, postal voting and providing wheelchair assistance. Chapter 5.indd 122 05-07-2025 17:42:14 LET'S EXPLORE | About 34 per cent of eligible voters did not exercise their | right to vote in the 2024 elections. Why do you think this