must be third fraction then, so that the three fractions add up to 1? This explains why there is only one solution to the above problem. What if we look for four different fractional units that add up to 1? 2. Can you find four different fractional units that add_ ,; up to 1? p It turns out that this problem has six solutions! Can you find at least one of them? Can you find them all? You can try using similar reasoning as in the cases of two and three fractional units or find your own method! Once you find one solution, try to divide a circle into parts like in the figure above to visualise it! Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 = Fraction as equal share: When a whole number of units is divided into equal parts and shared equally, a fraction results. = Fractional Units: When one whole basic unit is divided into equal parts, then each part is called a fractional unit. = Reading Fractions: Ina fraction such as 2, 5 is called the numerator and 6 is called the denominator. = Mixed fractions contain a whole number part and a fractional part. = Number line: Fractions can be shown on a number line. Every fraction has a point associated with it on the number line. = Equivalent Fractions: When two or more fractions represent the same share or number, they are called equivalent fractions. = Lowest terms: A fraction whose numerator and denominator have no common factor other than 1 is said to be in lowest terms or in its simplest form. = Brahmagupta s method for adding fractions: When adding fractions, convert them into equivalent fractions with the same fractional unit (i.e., the same denominator), and then add the number of fractional units in each fraction to obtain the sum. This is accomplished by adding the numerators while keeping the same denominator. = Brahmagupta s method for subtracting fractions: When subtracting fractions, convert them into equivalent fractions with the same fractional unit (.e., the same denominator), and then subtract the number of fractional units. This is accomplished by subtracting the numerators while keeping the same denominator. Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 7_Fractions.indd 186 13-08-2024 15:39:49 CHAPTER 7 SOLUTIONS Fractions :Os Section 7.1 Page no. 152 Figure it out Q1. Three guavas together weigh 1 kg. If they are roughly of the same size, each guava will roughly weigh kg. Ans. 3 Q2. A wholesale merchant packed 1 kg of rice in four packets of equal weight. The weight of each packet is kg. Ans. Q3. Four friends ordered 3 glasses of sugarcane juice and shared it equally among themselves. Each one drank glass of sugarcane juice Ans. 1 1 Q4. The big fish weighs 3 kg. The small one weighs ri kg. Together they weigh kg. Ans. Q5. Arrange these fraction words in order of size from the smallest to the biggest in the empty box below: One and a half, three quarters, one and a