distance to reach her school. How much does she walk daily to reach the school? b. Jeevika takes ey minutes to take a complete round of the park and her friend Namit takes re minutes to do the same. Who takes less time and by how much? 7.9 A Pinch of History Do you know what a fraction was called in ancient India? It was called bhinna in Sanskrit, which means broken . It was also called bhaga or ansha meaning part or piece . The way we write fractions today, globally, originated in India. In ancient Indian mathematical texts, such as the Bakshali manuscript (from around the year 300 CE), when they wanted to write 5 they wrote it as 6 which is indeed very similar to the way we write it today! This method of writing and working with fractions continued to be used in India for the next several centuries, including by Aryabhata (499 CE), Brahmagupta (628 CE), Sridharacharya (c. 750 CE), and Mahaviracharya (c. 850 CE), among others. The line segment between the numerator and denominator in rf and in other Reprint 2025-26 13-08-2024 15:39:48 Fractions fractions was later introduced by the Moroccan mathematician Al-Hassar (in the 12th century). Over the next few centuries the notation then spread to Europe and around the world. Fractions had also been used in other cultures such as the ancient Egyptian and Babylonian civilisations, but they primarily used only fractional units, that is, fractions with a 1 in the numerator. More general fractions were expressed as sums of fractional units, now called Egyptian fractions . Writing numbers as the sum of fractional units, e.g., 52 = 5 + % + @ can be quite an art and leads to beautiful puzzles. We will consider one such puzzle below. General fractions (where the numerator is not necessarily 1) were first introduced in India, along with their rules of arithmetic operations like addition, subtraction, multiplication, and even division of fractions. The ancient Indian treatises called the Sulbasutras shows that even during Vedic times, Indians had discovered the rules for operations with fractions. General rules and procedures for working with and computing with fractions were first codified formally and in a modern form by Brahmagupta. Brahmagupta s methods for working with and computing with fractions are still what we use today. For example, Brahmagupta described how to add and subtract fractions as follows: By the multiplication of the numerator and the denominator of each of the fractions by the other denominators, the fractions are reduced to a common denominator. Then, in case of addition, the numerators (obtained after the above reduction) are added. In case of subtraction, their difference is taken. (Brahmagupta, Brahmasphutasiddhanta, Verse 12.2, 628 CE) The Indian concepts and methods involving fractions were transmitted to Europe via the Arabs over the next few centuries and they came into general use in Europe in around the 17th century and then spread worldwide. Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 7_Fractions.indd 183 13-08-2024 15:39:48 Chapter 7_Fractions.indd 184