was then to be replanted so that it was ready to be cut again in some years. After the Forest Act was enacted in 1865, it was amended twice, once in 1878 and then in 1927. The 1878 Act divided forests into three categories: reserved, protected and village forests. The best forests were called reserved forests . Villagers could not take anything from these forests, even for their own use. For house building or fuel, they could take wood from protected or village forests. 2.1 How were the Lives of People Affected? EEE Foresters and villagers had very different ideas of what a good forest should look like. Villagers wanted forests with a mixture of species to satisfy different needs fuel, fodder, leaves. The forest department on the other hand wanted trees which were suitable for building 8 Reprint 2025-26 Fig.771 The Imperial Forest School, Dehra Dun, India. The first forestry school to be inaugurated in the British Empire. From: \|Indian Forester, Vol. XXX/ New words Scientific forestry A system of cutting trees controlled by the forest department, in which old trees are cut and new ones planted Fig. 72 Collecting mahua ( Madhuca indica) from the forests. Villagers wake up before dawn and go to the forest to collect the mahua flowers which have fallen on the forest floor. Mahua trees are precious. Mahua flowers can be eaten or used to make alcohol. The seeds can be used to make oil. ships or railways. They needed trees that could provide hard wood, and were tall and straight. So particular species like teak and sa/ were promoted and others were cut. In forest areas, people use forest products roots, leaves, fruits, and tubers for many things. Fruits and tubers are nutritious to eat, especially during the monsoons before the harvest has come in. Herbs are used for medicine, wood for agricultural implements like yokes and ploughs, bamboo makes excellent fences and is also used to make baskets and umbrellas. A dried scooped-out gourd can be used as a portable water bottle. Almost everything is available in the forest leaves can be stitched together to make disposable plates and cups, the siadi (Bauhinia vahblii) creeper can be used to make ropes, and the thorny bark of the se/ur (silk-cotton) tree is used to grate vegetables. Oil for cooking and to light lamps can be pressed from the fruit of the mahua tree. The Forest Act meant severe hardship for villagers across the country. After the Act, all their everyday practices cutting wood for their Reprint 2025-26 ae Fig.73 Drying tendu leaves. The sale of tendu leaves is a major source of income for many people living in forests. Each bundle contains approximately 50 leaves, and if a person works very hard they can perhaps collect as many as 100 bundles in a day. Women, children and old men are the main collectors. mo} = i] pos io) [oe = 7) ~ = fo) oO 7) Ss mo) = la] oe mo)