was once richly 9 Reprint 2025-26 4.4 War and Deforestation iT The First World War and the Second World War had a major impact on forests. In India, working plans were abandoned at this time, and the forest department cut trees freely to meet British war needs. In Java, just before the Japanese occupied the region, the Dutch followed a scorched earth policy, destroying sawmills, and burning huge piles of giant teak logs so that they would not fall into Japanese hands. The Japanese then exploited the forests recklessly for their own war industries, forcing forest villagers to cut down forests. Many villagers used this opportunity to expand cultivation in the forest. After the war, it was difficult for the Indonesian forest service to get this land back. As in India, people s need for agricultural land has brought them into conflict with the forest department s desire to control the land and exclude people from it. 4.5 New Developments in Forestry HRI Since the 1980s, governments across Asia and Africa have begun to see that scientific forestry and the policy of keeping forest communities away from forests has resulted in many conflicts. Conservation of forests rather than collecting timber has become a more important goal. The government has recognised that in order to meet this goal, the people who live near the forests must be involved. In many cases, across India, from Mizoram to Kerala, dense forests have survived only because villages protected them in sacred groves known as sarnas, devarakudu, kan, rai, etc. Some villages have been patrolling their own forests, with each household taking it in turns, instead of leaving it to the forest guards. Local forest communities and environmentalists today are thinking of different forms of forest management. Reprint 2025-26 Fig.23 Indian Munitions Board, War Timber Sleepers piled at Soolay pagoda ready for shipment, 19177. The Allies would not have been as successful in the First World War and the Second World War if they had not been able to exploit the resources and people of their colonies. Both the world wars had a devastating effect on the forests of India, Indonesia and elsewhere. The forest department cut freely to satisfy war needs. Fig.24 Log yard in Rembang under Dutch colonial rule. = a & c & jo} oO TS c = oa) no Y 7) ~ n vu x o uw 1. Have there been changes in forest areas where you live? Find out what these changes are and why they have happened. 2. Write a dialogue between a colonial forester and an adivasi discussing the issue of hunting in the forest. Questions 1. Discuss how the changes in forest management in the colonial period affected the following groups of people: > Shifting cultivators Nomadic and pastoralist communities Firms trading in timber/forest produce Plantation owners VV V V Kings/British officials engaged in shikar (hunting) 2. What are the similarities between colonial management of the forests in Bastar and in Java? 3. Between 1880 and 1920,