~ n vu x o uw mo} = = = ca lo} Qa = Vu ~ = oO cP) s mo) = oe mo) | = introduction of a forest service. In 1882, 280,000 sleepers were exported from Java alone. However, all this required labour to cut the trees, transport the logs and prepare the sleepers. The Dutch first imposed rents on land being cultivated in the forest and then exempted some villages from these rents if they worked collectively to provide free labour and buffaloes for cutting and transporting timber. This was known as the blandongdiensten system. Later, instead of rent exemption, forest villagers were given small wages, but their right to cultivate forest land was restricted. 4.3 Samin's Challenge iim Around 1890, Surontiko Samin of Randublatung village, a teak forest village, began questioning state ownership of the forest. He argued that the state had not created the wind, water, earth and wood, so it could not own it. Soon a widespread movement developed. Amongst those who helped organise it were Samin s sons-in-law. By 1907, 3,000 families were following his ideas. Some of the Saminists protested by lying down on their land when the Dutch came to survey it, while others refused to pay taxes or fines or perform labour. South China Sea British Colonial Rule Dutch Eastindes OWI] European population.in 1930; 240,000 (less than 1%); Chinese 1930: 1.2 million (2%). Rubber and sugar estates mostly Dutch owned, RAILWAY LINE Source G Dirk van Hogendorp, an official of the United East India Company in colonial Java said: Batavians! Be amazed! Hear with wonder what I have to communicate. Our fleets are destroyed, our trade languishes, our navigation is going to ruin we purchase with immense treasures, timber and other materials for ship-building from the northern powers, and on Java we leave warlike and mercantile squadrons with their roots in the ground. Yes, the forests of Java have timber enough to build a respectable navy in a short time, besides as many merchant ships as we require ... In spite of all (the cutting) the forests of Java grow as fast as they are cut, and would be inexhaustible under good care and management. Dirk van Hogendorp, cited in Peluso, Rich Forests, Poor People, 1992. SD) wong, DIES tn male covered with teak. Fig.22 Most of Indonesia s forests are located in islands like Sumatra, Kalimantan and West Irian. However, Java is where the Dutch began their scientific forestry . The island, which is now famous for rice production, was once richly 9 Reprint 2025-26 4.4 War and Deforestation iT The First World War and the Second World War had a major impact on forests. In India, working plans were abandoned at this time, and the forest department cut trees freely to meet British war needs. In Java, just before the Japanese occupied the region, the Dutch followed a scorched earth policy, destroying sawmills, and burning huge piles of giant teak logs so that they would not fall into