io) [oe = 7) ~ = fo) oO 7) Ss mo) = la] oe mo) c = Fig.2 When the valleys were full. Painting by John Dawson. Native Americans like the Lakota tribe who lived in the Great North American Plains had a diversified economy. They cultivated maize, foraged for wild plants and hunted bison. Keeping vast areas open for the bison to range in was seen by the English settlers as wasteful. After the 1860s the bisons were killed in large numbers. 8 Reprint 2025-26 the production of commercial crops like jute, sugar, wheat and SourceA cotton. The demand for these crops increased in nineteenth-century Europe where foodgrains were needed to feed the growing urban The idea that uncultivated land had to be taken over and improved was popular with colonisers everywhere in the world. It was an argument that justified In 1896 the American writer, Richard population and raw materials were required for industrial The absence of cultivation in a place does not mean the land was Harding, wrote on the Honduras in uninhabited. In Australia, when the white settlers landed, they Central America: claimed that the continent was empty or terra nullius. |In fact, they There is no more interesting question of were guided through the landscape by aboriginal tracks, and led the present day than that of what is to by aboriginal guides. The different aboriginal communities in Be Glee skin wine oserle s Jemel uml Us lying unimproved; whether it shall go to Australia had clearly demarcated territories. The Ngarrindjeri the great power that is willing to turn it people of Australia plotted their land along the symbolic body of to account, or remain with its original the first ancestor, Ngurunderi. This land included five different owner, who fails to understand its value. environments: salt water, riverine tracts, lakes, bush and desert The Central Americans arelikesasgang of . . _ ; . . semi-barbarians in a beautifully furnished plains, which satisfied different socio-economic needs. house, of which they can understand neither its possibilities of comfort nor its production. Second, in the early nineteenth century, the colonial | * Three years later the American-owned ; a United Fruit Company was founded, and the land could yield agricultural products and revenue, and enhance Central America. The company acquired such power over the governments of _ these countries that they came to be rose by 6.7 million hectares. known as Banana Republics. Quoted in David Spurr, The Rhetoric of Empire, (1993). state thought that forests were unproductive. They were considered the income of the state. So between 1880 and 1920, cultivated area We always see the expansion of cultivation as a sign of progress. But we should not forget that for land to be brought under the plough, forests have to be cleared. Sleepers Wooden planks laid across railway tracks; they hold the tracks in position Fig.3 Converting sal logs into sleepers in the Singhbhum forests, Chhotanagpur, May 1897. Adivasis were hired by the forest department to cut