industrial use continued. In the 1970s, the World Bank proposed that 4,600 hectares of natural sa/ forest should be replaced by tropical pine to provide pulp for the paper industry. It was only after protests by local environmentalists that mo} = S E ca lo} Qa = Vu ~ = oO cP) s mo) = a mo) c = the project was stopped. Let us now go to another part of Asia, Indonesia, and see what was happening there over the same period. 9 Reprint 2025-26 Forest Transformations in Java Java is now famous as a tice-producing island in Indonesia. But once upon a time it was covered mostly with forests. The colonial power in Indonesia were the Dutch, and as we will see, there were many similarities in the laws for forest control in Indonesia and India. Java in Indonesia is where the Dutch started forest management. Like the British, they wanted timber from Java to build ships. In 1600, the population of Java was an estimated 3.4 million. There were many villages in the fertile plains, but there were also many communities living in the mountains and practising shifting cultivation. 4.1 The Woodcutters Of JaVa HiRREEE The Kalangs of Java were a community of skilled forest cutters and shifting cultivators. They were so valuable that in 1755 when the Mataram kingdom of Java split, the 6,000 Kalang families were equally divided between the two kingdoms. Without their expertise, it would have been difficult to harvest teak and for the kings to build their palaces. When the Dutch began to gain control over the forests in the eighteenth century, they tried to make the Kalangs work under them. In 1770, the Kalangs resisted by attacking a Dutch fort at Joana, but the uprising was suppressed. 4.2 Dutch Scientific FOrCStry HIRI In the nineteenth century, when it became important to control territory and not just people, the Dutch enacted forest laws in Java, restricting villagers access to forests. Now wood could only be cut for specified purposes like making river boats or constructing houses, and only from specific forests under close supervision. Villagers were punished for grazing cattle in young stands, transporting wood without a permit, or travelling on forest roads with horse carts or cattle. As in India, the need to manage forests for shipbuilding and railways led to the | Fig.27 - Train transporting teak out of the forest late colonial period. Reprint 2025-26 = a & c & jo} oO TS c = oa) no Y 7) ~ n vu x o uw mo} = = = ca lo} Qa = Vu ~ = oO cP) s mo) = oe mo) | = introduction of a forest service. In 1882, 280,000 sleepers were exported from Java alone. However, all this required labour to cut the trees, transport the logs and prepare the sleepers. The Dutch first imposed rents on land being cultivated in the forest and then exempted some villages from these rents if they worked collectively