DATA HANDLING AND 2332
PRESENTATION

0674CHO4

If you ask your classmates about their favourite colours, you will
get a list of colours. This list is an example of data. Similarly, if you
measure the weight of each student in your class, you would get a
collection of measures of weight again data.

Any collection of facts, numbers, measures, observations or other
descriptions of things that convey information about those things is
called data.

We live in an age of information. We constantly see large amounts
of data presented to us in new and interesting ways. In this chapter,
we will explore some of the ways that data is presented, and how we
can use some of those ways to correctly display, interpret and make
inferences from such data!

4.1 Collecting and Organising Data

Navya and Naresh are discussing their favourite games.

L
(AO 4. Cricket is my I play cricket sometimes IN ;

favourite game! but hockey is the game I
L like the most.

S

D
I think cricket is the Iam not sure. How can we find IN
1 most popular game in the most popular game in our

our class. q class? J : 5

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4_Data Handling and Presentation.indd 74 13/08/2024 15:33:11

Data Handling and Presentation

/ WF) To figure out the most popular game in
ig *~ | their class, what should Navya and Naresh

do? Can you help them?

rt
Via)
aa.
Cu

4 Naresh and Navya decided to go to each student in the class and
ask what their favourite game is. Then they prepared a list.
Navya is showing the list:

Mehnoor - Kabaddi Pushkal - Satoliya (Pittu) | Anaya Kabaddi
Jubimon Hockey Densy Badminton Jivisha Satoliya (Pittu)
Simran Kabaddi Jivika Satoliya (Pittu) Rajesh Football

Nand - Satoliya (Pittu) Leela - Hockey Thara Football
Ankita Kabaddi Afshan Hockey Soumya Cricket

Imon Hockey Keerat Cricket Navjot Hockey

Yuvraj Cricket Gurpreet Hockey Hemal - Satoliya (Pittu)
Rehana Hockey Arsh Kabaddi Debabrata Football
Aarna - Badminton Bhavya Cricket Ananya Hockey
Kompal - Football Sarah Kabaddi Hardik Cricket

Tahira Cricket

She says (happily), I have collected the data. I can figure out the
most popular game now! .

A few other children are looking at the list and wondering, We
can t yet see the most popular game. How can we get it from this list? .

% Figure it Out

1. What would you do to find the most popular game among Naresh s
and Navya s classmates?

2. What is the most popular game in their class?
Try to find out the most popular game among your classmates.

4. Pari wants to respond to the questions given below. Put a tick (V)
for the questions where she needs to carry out data collection and

Reprint 2025-26 (75)

Chapter 4_ Data Handling and Presentation.indd 75 13/08/2024 15:33:11

Ganita Prakash | Grade 6

put a cross (X) for the questions where she doesn t need to collect
data. Discuss your answers in the classroom.

a. What isthe most popular TV show among her classmates? a

b. When did India get independence? a
c. How much water is getting wasted in her locality? a
d. What is the capital of India? a

Shri Nilesh is a teacher. He decided to bring sweets to the class
to celebrate the new year. The sweets shop nearby has jalebi, gulab
jamun, gujiya, barfi, and rasgulla. He wanted to know the choices of
the children. He wrote the names of the sweets on the board and
asked each child to tell him their preference. He put a tally mark
 |? for each student and when the count reached 5, he put a line
through the previous four and marked it as PN.

Tally Marks No. of Students

Jalebi MH SC 6
Gulab jamun MH LAT | 9
Gujiva HA HE II
Barf MI
Rasgulla MH Sd

% Figure it Out

1. Complete the table to help Shri Nilesh to purchase the correct
numbers of sweets:

a. How many students chose jalebi? (

b. Barfi was chosen by [ students?

c. How many students chose gujiya? (

d. Rasgulla was chosen by ( students?

e. How many students chose gulab jamun? (

Data Handling and Presentation

Shri Nilesh requested one of the staff members to bring the sweets as
given in the table. The above table helped him to purchase the correct
numbers of sweets.

2. Is the above table sufficient to distribute each type of sweet to
the correct student? Explain. If it is not sufficient, what is the
alternative?

To organise the data, we can write the name of each sweet in one
column and using tally signs, note the number of students who prefer
that sweet. The numbers 6, 9, ... are the frequencies of the sweet
preferences for jalebi, gulab jamun ... respectively.

Sushri Sandhya asked her students about the sizes of the shoes
they wear. She noted the data on the board.

4 5 4
5 4 6
4 6 4 R) R)

She then arranged the shoe sizes of the students in ascending order 
3, 3,3,4,4,4, 4, 4 4, 4 4, 4 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 5, 6, 6, 6, 6, 7

% Figure it Out

1. Help her to figure out the following:
a. The largest shoe size in the class is

b. The smallest shoe size in the class is

c. There are students who wear shoe size 5.

d. There are students who wear shoe sizes larger
than 4.

2. How did arranging the data in ascending order help to $9
answer these questions? Math

3. Are there other ways to arrange the data?

Ganita Prakash | Grade 6

4. Write the names of a few trees you see around you. When you
observe a tree on the way from your home to school (or while
walking from one place to another place), record the data and fill
in the following table:

Peepal
Neem

a. Which tree was found in the greatest number?
b. Which tree was found in the smallest number?

c. Were there any two trees found in the same numbers?

5. Take a blank piece of paper and paste any small news item from
a newspaper. Each student may use a different article. Now,
prepare a table on the piece of paper as given below. Count the
number of each of the letters c , e , i , r , and x in the words of
the news article, and fill in the table.

Any other letter
Letter Cc r|x :
of your choice

Number of times
found in the news item

The letter found the most number of times is

b. The letter found the least number of times is

c. List the five letters c , e , i , r , x in ascending order of
frequency. Now, compare the order of your list with that of
your classmates. Is your order the same or nearly the same
as theirs? (Almost everyone is likely to get the order x, c, 7,
i, e .) Why do you think this is the case?

Data Handling and Presentation

d. Write the process you followed to complete this task.
e. Discuss with your friends the processes they followed.

f. If you do this task with another news item, what process
would you follow?

Provide more opportunities to collect and organise data. Ask students

to guess what is the most popular colour, game, toy, school subject, etc.,

|

]

;

! amongst the students in their classroom and then collect the data for it,
| It can be a fun activity in which they also learn about their classmates,
' Discuss how they can organise the data in different ways, each way
' having its own advantages and limitations. For all these tasks and the
tasks under Figure it Out , discuss the tasks with the children and let
them understand the tasks, and then let them plan and present their
research processes and conclusions in the class.

4.2 Pictographs

Pictographs are one visual and suggestive way to represent data
without writing any numbers. Look at this picture you may be
familiar with it from previous classes.

Modes of Travelling Number of Students = 1 Student

Private car (S) 
Public bus CISISCTSNS)
School bus CHOISICI CT SCISISISTONS)
Cycle CASTS)
Walking CUEICTCTSTSNS)

This picture helps you understand at a glance the different
modes of travel used by students. Based on this picture, answer the
following questions:

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4_ Data Handling and Presentation.indd 79

13/08/2024 15:33:12

Ganita Prakash | Grade 6

e Which mode of travel is used by the most number of students?
e Which mode of travel is used by the least number of students?

A pictograph represents data through pictures of objects. It helps
answer questions about data with just a quick glance.

In the above pictograph, one unit or symbol ( ) is used to represent
one student. There are also other pictographs where one unit or
symbol stands for many people or objects.

4 Example: Nand Kishor collected responses from the children of
his middle school in Berasia regarding how often they slept at least
9 hours during the night. He prepared a pictograph from the data:

Number of Children ( = 10 Children)

Always A A y A
Sometimes A A A
Never A A A A

Answer the following questions using the pictograph:

1. What is the number of children who always slept at least 9
hours at night?

How many children sometimes slept at least 9 hours at night?
3. How many children always slept less than 9 hours each night?
Explain how you got your answer.
Solutions

1. Inthe table, there are 5 pictures A for Always . Each picture
represents 10 children. Therefore, 5 pictures indicate
5 x 10 = 50 children.

2. There are 2 complete pictures A (2 x 10 = 20) and a half
picture y (half of 10 = 5). Therefore, the number of children
who sleep at least 9 hours only sometimes is 20 + 5 = 25.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4_Data Handling and Presentation.indd 80 13/08/2024 15:33:12

Data Handling and Presentation

3. There are 4 complete pictures for Never . Hence, 4 x 10 =
40 children never sleep at least 9 hours in a night, i.e., they
always sleep less than 9 hours.

Drawing a Pictograph

One day, Lakhanpal collected data on how many students were
absent in each class:

Class I II Ill IV V VI Vil VIII
{Os 3 5 4 2 0 1 5 C7
students f>

He created a pictograph to present this data and decided to show
1 student as in the pictograph 

= 1 student

Classes

No. of students absent

Meanwhile, his friends Jarina and Sangita collected data on how
many students were present in each class:

Clas I mm Iv Vv VI Vi VI
iN

No. ofS

30 35 20 25 30 25 30 20
students

Ganita Prakash | Grade 6

4 If they want to show their data through a pictograph, where they
also use one symbol for each student, as Lakhanpal did, what are
the challenges they might face?

Jarina made a plan to address this since there were many

students, she decided to use to represent 5 students. She figured
that would save time and space too.

VIII
vil
VI

Classes
<

'|\O OOOOO

No. of students present

Sangita decided to use one to represent 10 students instead.

Since she used one to show 10 students, she had a problem in
showing 25 students and 35 students in the pictograph. Then, she
realised she could use to show 5 students.

 = 10 students

Vu
Vil
VI

Classes
<

IV
Tl
II

No. of students present

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4_Data Handling and Presentation.indd 82 13/08/2024 15:33:12

Data Handling and Presentation

%e What could be the problems faced in preparing sucha ! ae
pictograph, if the total number of students present in a
class is 33 or 27?

e Pictographs are a nice visual and suggestive way to represent
data. They represent data through pictures of objects.

e Pictographs can help answer questions and make inferences
about data with just a quick glance (in the examples above 
about favourite games, favourite colours, most common modes
of conveyance, number of students absent, etc.).

e By reading a pictograph, we can quickly understand the
frequencies of the different categories (for example, cricket,
hockey, etc.) and the comparisons of these frequencies.

e In a pictograph, the categories can be arranged horizontlly or
vertically. For each category, simple pictures and symbols are
then drawn in the designated columns or rows according to the
frequency of that category.

 A scale or key (for example, : 1 student or : 5 students)
is added to show what each symbol or picture represents. Each
symbol or picture can represent one unit or multiple units.

e It can be more challenging to prepare a pictograph when the
amount of data is large or when the frequencies are not exact
multiples of the scale or key.

% Figure it Out

1. The following pictograph shows the number of books borrowed
by students, in a week, from the library of Middle School,
Ginnori:

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4_Data Handling and Presentation.indd 83 14-08-2024 14:46:59

Ganita Prakash | Grade 6

Day Number of Books Borrowed
Monday
Tuesday

Wednesday

Thursday

Friday

Saturday

a. Onwhich day were the minimum number of books borrowed?

b. What was the total number of books borrowed during the
week?

c. Onwhich day were the maximum number of books borrowed?
What may be the possible reason?

2. Magan Bhai sells kites at Jamnagar. Six shopkeepers from nearby
villages come to purchase kites from him. The number of kites he
sold to these six shopkeepers are given below 

Shopkeeper Number of Kites Sold
Chaman a 250
NG
Rani 300
mma
Ru 100
x

asmeet 450

 y

etha Lal 250

aN
\ Poonam Ben 700

Data Handling and Presentation

Prepare a pictograph using the symbol to represent 100 kites.
Answer the following questions:

a. Howmany symbols represent the kites that Rani purchased?
b. Who purchased the maximum number of kites?
Who purchased more kites, Jasmeet or Chaman?

d. Rukhsana says Poonam Ben purchased more than double the
number of kites that Rani purchased. Is she correct? Why?

4.3 Bar Graphs

Have you seen graphs
like this on TV or in a | The Number of Endangered
newspaper? | Species is Rising

Like pictographs, such Number of animal species on the IUCN Red List, by class

@ Mammals @ Reptiles M@ Birds M@ Insects

bar graphs Can help us to @ Amphibians Molluscs (e.g. snails) Fish Others 
quickly understand and _ 20000
interpret information, 15,00
such as the highest value, i000
the comparison of values
of different categories, etc.
However, when the amount * other invertebrate (spineless) animals, such as crustaceans, corals and
of data is large, presenting .. 42;)/ts Geiger scorpions)
it by a pictograph is not ""***""
only time consuming but Source: https://www.statista.com/chart/17122/

: . number-of-threatened-species-red-list/
at times difficult too. Let us
see how data can be presented instead using a bar graph.

Let s take the data collected by Lakhanpal earlier, regarding the
number of students absent on one day in each class:

16,900

7,851
5,000
2007 2010 2013 2016 2019 2022"

Class I II III IV V VI VII VIII

No. of
students

5 4 2 0 1 5 7

Ganita Prakash | Grade 6

He presented the same data using a bar graph:

1 unit length = 1 student

No. of students absent in each class

i}
i=)
o
Ko)
=}
_ 
n
GH
fo}
wy
(3)
Q
=
D
Z

Poon nn YZ --- : Teacher s Note +----------------- ;

I I
' If the students have not noticed, please point out the equally spaced |
' horizontal lines. Explain that this means that each pair of consecutive |
' numbers on the left has the same gap.

% Answer the following questions using the bar graph:
1. InClass 2, students were absent that day.

2. In which class were the maximum number of students absent?

3. Which class had full attendance that day?

When making bar graphs, bars of uniform width can be drawn
horizontally or vertically with equal spacing between them; then the

Data Handling and Presentation

length or height of each bar represents the given number. As we saw in
pictographs, we can use a scale or key when the frequencies are larger.

Let us look at an example of vehicular traffic at a busy road crossing
in Delhi, which was studied by the traffic police on a particular day.
The number of vehicles passing through the crossing each hour from
6 a.m. to 12:00 noon is shown in the bar graph. One unit of length
stands for 100 vehicles.

11-12
10-11
 9-10
fy
@
g 89
oO
& 78
sal
6-7
oO oO oO oOo oO oO (=p) (=p) oO
oO oO oO (op) oO oOo Oo oO (an) So oO oO
 N ~O sH ide) oOo Em [oe) aD (op) N
 

Number of vehicles

We can see that the maximum traffic at the crossing is shown
by the longest bar, i.e., for the time interval 7-8 a.m. The bar graph
shows that 1200 vehicles passed through the crossing at that time.
The second longest bar is for 8-9 a.m. During that time, 1000 vehicles
passed through the crossing. Similarly, the minimum traffic is shown
by the smallest bar, i.e., the bar for the time interval 6-7 a.m. During
that time, only about 150 vehicles passed through the crossing. The
second smallest bar is that for the time interval 11 a.m. 12 noon,
when about 600 vehicles passed through the crossing.

The total number of cars passing through the crossing during the
two-hour interval 8.00-10.00 a.m. as shown by the bar graph is about
1000 + 800 = 1800 vehicles.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4_Data Handling and Presentation.indd 87 13/08/2024 15:33:14

Ganita Prakash | Grade 6

% Figure it Out

1. How many total cars passed through the crossing between 6 a.m.
and noon?

2. Why do you think so little traffic occurred during the hour of
6-7 a.m., as compared to the other hours from 7 a.m. noon?

3. Why do you think the traffic was the heaviest between 7-8 a.m.?

4. Why do you think the traffic was lesser and lesser each hour after
8 a.m. all the way until noon?

Example:
110 102
3 100
2 90 84
(>)
& 80
o
3 70 68
i 60 54
 
5 40 36
5,
2 30
A,
10
= <4 < =< < <4
fe) oO | [oe] fp) So
aD fo>) fo>) [o>) fo>) i)
= = = = = N
Years

Population of India in crores

This bar graph shows the population of India in each decade over a
period of 50 years. The numbers are expressed in crores. If you were
to take 1 unit length to represent one person, drawing the bars will

Data Handling and Presentation

be difficult! Therefore, we choose the scale so that 1 unit represents

10 crores. The bar graph for this choice is shown in the figure. So a

bar of length 5 units represents 50 crores and of 8 units represents

80 crores.

e On the basis of this bar graph, what may be a few questions you
may ask your friends?

 How much did the population of India increase over 50 years?
How much did the population increase in each decade?

4.4 Drawing a Bar Graph

In a previous example, Shri Nilesh prepared a frequency table
representing the sweet preferences of the students in his class. Let s
try to prepare a bar graph to present his data 

1. First, we draw a horizontal
| veal I No. of Students
line and a vertical line. On

the horizontal line, we will Jalebi 6
write the name of each of Gulab jamun 9
the sweets, equally spaced, Gujiya 13
from which the bars will Barfi 3
rise in accordance with

Rasgulla 7

their frequencies; and on
the vertical line we will write the frequencies representing the
number of students.

2. We must choose a scale. That means we must decide how many
students will be represented by a unit length of a bar so that
it fits nicely on our paper. Here, we will take 1 unit length to
represent 1 student.

3. For jalebi, we therefore need to draw a bar having a height of 6
units (which is the frequency of the sweet jalebi), and similarly
for the other sweets we have to draw bars as high as their
frequencies.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4_Data Handling and Presentation.indd 89 13/08/2024 15:33:14

Ganita Prakash | Grade 6

4. We, therefore, get a bar graph as shown below 

Sweet preferences of students
13
E 11
3 4
B 2 |
 So |
5 |
2 5 Se
5 4 |
Z 4 |
3 |
1 |
0 SY
Jalebi Gulabjamun Gujia Barfi Rasgulla
Sweets

When the frequencies are larger and we cannot use the scale of
1 unit length = 1 number (frequency), we need to choose a different
scale like we did in the case of pictographs.

Example: The number of runs scored by Smriti in each of the
8 matches are given in the table below:

Match |} Match | Match | Match | Match | Match | Match | Match | Match
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
80 50 10 100 90 0 90 50

Runs

In this example, the minimum score is 0 and the maximum score
is 100. Using a scale of 1 unit length = 1 run would mean that we
have to go all the way from 0 to 100 runs in steps of 1. This would
be unnecessarily tedious. Instead, let us use a scale where 1 unit
length = 10 runs. We mark this scale on the vertical line and draw
the bars according to the scores in each match. We get the following
bar graph representing the above data.

Data Handling and Presentation

e~ ~e_eoowaoaeaerene. OEOOOOO0 oO Ss ees 0 EO OE 00 OE errr 0000 OOO eee een a ee eer ee 0 OO OOO03030E sn eeaen :2: l_ 00 EO OOOO

Runs scored by Smriti

Match1 Match2 Match3 Match4 Match5 Match6 Match7 Match8
Matches

Example: The following table shows the monthly expenditure of
Imran s family on various items:

House rent 3000
 
od > 3400
CO 

Education = 800
Electricity ~Y 400
Transport 600
wr Mistelfaneous 1200

To represent this data in the form of a bar graph, here are the steps 
e Draw two perpendicular lines, one horizontal and one vertical.
e Along the horizontal line, mark the items with equal spacing

between them and mark the corresponding expenditures along
the vertical line.

Ganita Prakash | Grade 6

e Take bars of the same width, keeping a uniform gap between them.

e Choose a suitable scale along the vertical line. Let, 1 unit length =
= 200, and then mark and write the corresponding values ( 200,
= 400, etc.) representing each unit length.

Finally, calculate the heights of the bars for various items as
shown below 

House rent 3000 + 200 15 units

Food 3400 + 200 17 units >
Education 800 + 200 4 uni

Electricity 400 = 200 2 g
Transport 600 + 3 units
 G
Miscellaneous 1 200 = 20( WG units
Here is the bar graph that we obtain based on the above steps:
3400
3000
2600
2200
1800
1400
1000
600
200

Expenditure (in %)

Food
Electricity
Transport

House rent
Miscellaneous

Sc

&

iI

o

oO
ro}

jan
Item

Data Handling and Presentation

%ef Use the bar graph to answer the following questions:
1. On which item does Imran s family spend the most and the
second most?
2. Is the cost of electricity about one-half the cost of education?

3. Is the cost of education less than one-fourth the cost of food?

% Figure it Out

1. Samantha visited a tea garden, and collected data of the insects
and critters she saw there. Here is the data she collected:

Mites Caterpillars Beetles Butterflies Grasshoppers
6 10 rts 3 2

Help her prepare a bar graph representing this data.

2. Pooja collected data on the number of tickets sold at the Bhopal
railway station for a few different cities of Madhya Pradesh over a

two-hour period.

|__city | vigisha | Jabalpur | seoni_| indore | Sagar |

Number of 24
tickets 4 20 16 28 16

She used this data and prepared a bar graph on the board to discuss
the data with her students, but someone erased a portion of the graph.

Ganita Prakash | Grade 6

No. of Tickets

Vidisha Jabalpur Seoni Indore Sagar

City
a. Write the number of tickets sold for Vidisha above the bar.

b. Write the number of tickets sold for Jabalpur above the bar.

The bar for Vidisha is 6 unit lengths and the bar for Jabalpur
is 5 unit lengths. What is the scale for this graph?

d. Draw the correct bar for Sagar.
Add the scale of the bar graph by placing the correct numbers
on the vertical axis.
f. Are the bars for Seoni and Indore correct in this graph? If
not, draw the correct bar(s).
3. Chinu listed the various means of transport that passed across
the road in front of his house from 9 a.m. to 10 a.m.:

bike cars ike bus bike bike
bike auto rickshaw bicycle bullock bicycle auto
; oN cart rickshaw
car "scooter car auto bicycle bike
v4 rickshaw

car auto rickshaw bike scooter bike car

bicycle scooter bicycle scooter bike bus

auto rickshaw autorickshaw bike bicycle bus bike

bicycle scooter bus scooter auto bike
rickshaw

scooter bicycle bike bullock auto scooter

cart rickshaw

car scooter

Data Handling and Presentation

a. Prepare a frequency distribution table for the data.
Which means of transport was used the most?

c. If you were there to collect this data, how could you do it?
Write the steps or process.

Roll a die 30 times and record the number you obtain each time.
Prepare a frequency distribution table using tally marks. Find the
number that appeared:

a. The minimum number of times.
b. The maximum number of times.
c. Find numbers that appeared an equal number of times.

Faiz prepared a frequency distribution table of data on the number
of wickets taken by Jaspreet Bumrah in his last 30 matches:

CY
YS 
2 ~ (os
nee
4 CY 3

What information is this table giving?
What may be the title of this table?
What caught your attention in this table?

Bo op

In how many matches has Bumrah taken 4 wickets?

Ganita Prakash | Grade 6

e. Mayank says, If we want to know the total number of
wickets he has taken in his last 30 matches, we have to add
the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3 ..., up to 7. Can Mayank get the total
number of wickets taken in this way? Why?

f. How would you correctly figure out the total number of
wickets taken by Bumrah in his last 30 matches, using this
table?

6. The following pictograph shows the number of tractors in five
different villages.

Villages Number of Tractors (;*-. =1 Tractor )

Village A Ql Qi. dil. it. dit. di
Village Bill. G8. Gib. did, di

Village C diy #8 GH. Gib. Gi bib. did. dd
Village D ily eit diy

VillageE Qi. i Gi. di dio. dio.

Observe the pictograph and answer the following questions 

a. Which village has the smallest number of tractors?
b. Which village has the most tractors?

c. How many more tractors does Village C have than Village B?

d. Komal says, Village D has half the number of tractors as
Village E. Is she right?

Data Handling and Presentation

7. The number of girl students in each class of a school is depicted
by the pictograph:

Number of Girl Students & = 4 Girls )

Classes

1 RKHRKAHANK
2 RRNA

5 RKRHRKAK

1 RARE

5 AMSG

6 RKAHRNK

7 RAK

s KE

Observe this pictograph and answer the following questions:

a. Which class has the least number of girl students?

b. What is the difference between the number of girls in Classs
5 and 6?

c. If two more girls were admitted in Class 2, how would the
graph change?

d. How many girls are there in Class 7?

Ganita Prakash | Grade 6

8. Mudhol Hounds (a type of breed of Indian dogs) are largely found
in North Karnataka s Bagalkote and Vijaypura districts. The
government took an initiative to protect this breed by providing
support to those who adopted these dogs. Due to this initiative, the
number of these dogs increased. The number of Mudhol dogs in six
villages of Karnataka are as follows 

Village A: 18, Village B: 36, Village C: 12, Village D: 48, Village E: 18,
Village F : 24

Prepare a pictograph and answer the following questions:

a. What will be a useful scale or key to draw this pictograph?

b. How many symbols will you use to represent the dogs in
Village B?

c. Kamini said that the number of these dogs in Village B and
Village D together will be more than the number of these
dogs in the other 4 villages. Is she right? Give reasons for
your response.

9. Asurvey of 120 school students was conducted to find out which
activity they preferred to do in their free time:

Preferred Activity Number of Students

Playing 45
Reading story books 30
Watching TV 20
Listening to music 10
Painting 15

Draw a bar graph to illustrate the above data taking the scale of
1 unit length = 5 students. Which activity is preferred by most
students other than playing?

Se a a i i a a ee ~~ a ee a a a a a A a ee a a a a a a a aa

Data Handling and Presentation

10. Students and teachers of a primary school decided to plant tree
saplings in the school campus and in the surrounding village
during the first week of July. Details of the saplings they planted
are as follows 

11.

Number of saplings planted
60
40
20
0

Monday Tuesday Wednesday Thursday Friday Saturday Sunday
Day

The total number of saplings planted on Wednesday and
Thursday is

The total number of saplings planted during the whole week

The greatest number of saplings were planted on
and the least number of saplings were plantedon_
Why do you think that is the case? Why were more saplings
planted on certain days of the week and less on others? Can
you think of possible explanations or reasons? How could you
try and figure out whether your explanations are correct?

The number of tigers in India went down drastically between 1900
and 1970. Project Tiger was launched in 1973 to track and protect
the tigers in India. Starting in 2006, the exact number of tigers
in India was tracked. Shagufta and Divya looked up information
about the number of tigers in India between 2006 and 2022 in fouryear intervals. They prepared a frequency table for this data anda
bar graph to present this data, but there are a few mistakes in the
graph. Can you find those mistakes and fix them?

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4_ Data Handling and Presentation.indd 99

Ganita Prakash | Grade 6

Year | Number of Tigers Number of Tigers in India
(approx.) 22

2006 1400 7 2018
Oo
2014 2200 2010 ==
2006 ==
2018 3000 0 1000 2000 3000 4000
2022 3700 Number of Tigers

e Like pictographs, bar graphs give a nice visual way to represent
data. They represent data through equally-spaced bars, each of
equal width, where the lengths or heights give frequencies of the
different categories.

 Each category is represented by a bar where the length or height
depicts the corresponding frequency (for example, cost) or
quantity (for example, runs).

* The bars have uniform spaces between them to indicate that they
are free standing and represent equal categories.

 The bars help in interpreting data much faster than a frequency
table. By reading a bar graph, we can compare frequencies of
different categories at a glance.

* We must decide the scale (for example, 1 unit length = 1 student
or 1 unit length = = 200) for a bar graph on the basis of the data
including the minimum and maximum frequencies, so that the
resulting bar graph fits nicely and looks visually appealing on the
paper or poster we are preparing. The markings of the unit lengths
as per the scale must start from zero.

a a 1 Teacher s Note :------------------;
The main focus of this chapter is to learn how to handle data to find
answers to specific questions or inquiries, to test hypotheses or to
take specific decisions. This should be kept in mind when providing
practice opportunities to collect, organise and analyse data.

ee |

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4_Data Handling and Presentation.indd 100

13/08/2024 15:33:28

Data Handling and Presentation

4.5 Artistic and Aesthetic Considerations

In addition to the steps described in previous sections, there are
also some other more artistic and aesthetic aspects one can consider
when preparing visual presentations of data to make them more
interesting and effective. First, when making a visual presentation
of data such as a pictograph or bar graph, it is important to make
it fit in the intended space; this can be controlled, for example, by
choosing the scale appropriately, as we have seen earlier. It is also
desirable to make the data presentation visually appealing and
easy-to-understand, so that the intended audience appreciates the
information being conveyed.

Let us consider an example. Here is a table naming the tallest
mountain on each continent, along with the height of each mountain

in meters.
: 7 South North : 7 :
cman i America | America Africa |Europe}Antarctica| Australia
Tallest Kiliman- Vinson .
._ Everest Aconcagua Denali { Elbrus . Koscuiszko
Mountain jaro Massif

Height 8848m 6962m 6194m 5895m 5642m 4892m 2228m

How much taller is Mount Everest than Mount Koscuiszko? Are
Mount Denali and Mount Kilimanjaro very different in height? This
is not so easy to quickly discern from a large table of numbers.

As we have seen earlier, we can convert the table of numbers
into a bar graph, as shown on the right. Here, each value is drawn
as a horizontal box. These are longer or shorter depending on the
number they represent. This makes it easier to compare the heights
of all these mountains at a glance.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4_Data Handling and Presentation.indd 101 13/08/2024 15:33:28

Ganita Prakash | Grade 6

a a 4 A A A ~~ a A A nw a nw pw pw a a a a a ~~ a ~~ ~~ a a a nw a a a a a a aes

Asia Everest
South America Aconcagua Js
North America Denali SQ)
Africa Kilimanjaro (0 (55,55)
Europe Elbrus (i
Antarctica Vinson Massif Po
Australia Koscuiszko Po |

oe C
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000

However, since the boxes represent heights, it is better and more
visually appealing to rotate the picture, so that the boxes grow
upward, vertically from the ground like mountains. A bar graph
with vertical bars is also called a column graph. Columns are the
pillars you find in a building that hold up the roof.

Below is a column graph for our table of tallest mountains. From
this column graph, it becomes easier to compare and visualise the
heights of the mountains.

10000 aa"
8000
6000
4000 ~
2000
1000 a
Fs EF SS SS SS Sy
Ks Se ots Bh Ss" ph pts 
SS S RS we
yr 9 Re

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4_Data Handling and Presentation.indd 102 13/08/2024 15:33:28

Data Handling and Presentation
Se a a i i a a ee ~~ a ee a a a a a A a ee a a a a a a a aa

In general, it is more intuitive, suggestive and visually appealing
to represent heights, that are measured upwards from the ground,
using bar graphs that have vertical bars or columns. Similarly,
lengths that are parallel to the ground (for example, distances
between location on Earth) are usually best represented using bar
graphs with horizontal arcs.

% Figure it Out

1. If you wanted to visually represent the data of the heights of the
tallest persons in each class in your school, would you use a graph
with vertical bars or horizontal bars? Why?

2. Ifyou were making a table of the longest rivers on each continent
and their lengths, would you prefer to use a bar graph with
vertical bars or with horizontal bars? Why? Try finding out this
information, and then make the corresponding table and bar
graph! Which continents have the longest rivers?

Infographics

When data visualisations such as bar graphs are further beautified
with more extensive artistic and visual imagery, they are called
information graphics or infographics for short. The aim of
infographics is to make use of attention-attracting and engaging
visuals to communicate information even more clearly and quickly,
in a visually pleasing way.

As an example of how infographics can be used to communicate
data even more suggestively, let us go back to the table above listing
the tallest mountain on each continent. We drew a bar graph with
vertical bars (columns) rather than horizontal bars, to be more
indicative of mountains. But instead of rectangles, we could use
triangles, which look a bit more like mountains. And, we can add a
splash of colour as well. Here is the result.

Reprint 2025-26

Chapter 4_Data Handling and Presentation.indd 103 13/08/2024 15:33:28

Ganita Prakash | Grade 6

a a 4 A A A ~~ a a a a a a a a ~~ a a ~~ a A ~~ a a a a a a a en aH nes

8000m
7000m
6000m
5000m
4000m
3000m
2000m
1000m

Everest Aconcagua Denali Kilimanjaro Elbrus Vinson Massif Koscuiszko
8848m 6962m 6194m 5895m 5642m 4892m 2228m
Asia S America North Africa Europe Antarctica Australia

America

While this infographic might look more appealing and suggestive at
first glance, it does have some issues. The goal of our bar graph earlier
was to represent the heights of various mountains using bars of the
appropriate heights but the same widths. The purpose of using the
same widths was to make it clear that we are only comparing heights.
However, in this infographic, the taller triangles are also wider! Are
taller mountains always wider? The infographic is implying additional
information that may be misleading and may or may not be correct.
Sometimes going for more appealing pictures can also accidentally
mislead.

Taking this idea further, and to make the picture even more visually
stimulating and suggestive, we can further change the shapes of the
mountains to make them look even more like mountains, and add
other details, while attempting to preserve the heights. For example,
we can create an imaginary mountain range that contains all these
mountains.

Is the infographic below better than the column graph with
rectangular columns of equal width? The mountains look more
realistic, but is the picture accurate?

For example, Everest appears to be twice as tall as Elbrus.

Data Handling and Presentation

Aconcagua, South America
6962m

Denali, North America
6194m

Kilimanjaro, Africa

;--Elbrus, Europe
Vinson
Massif,
Antarctica
4892m

What is 5642 x 2?

While preparing visually-appealing presentations of data, we
also need to be careful that the pictures we draw do not mislead us
about the facts. In general, it is important to be careful when making
or reading infographics, so that we do not mislead our intended
audiences and we, ourselves, are not misled.

= Facts, numbers, measures, observations and other descriptions of
things that convey information about those things is called data.

= Data can be organised in a tabular form using tally marks for easy
analysis and interpretation.

= Frequencies are the counts of the occurrences of values, measures or
observations.

Ganita Prakash | Grade 6

Oe a i A i a a 4 a A A A a a a a a a a a a a a a a a ee a a a a a a ae

= Pictographs represent data in the form of pictures, or objects or parts
of objects. Each picture represents a frequency which can be 1 or more
than 1 this is called the scale and it must be specified.

= Bar graphs have bars of uniform width; the length or height that
indicates the total frequency of occurrence. The scale that is used to
convert length or height to frequency again, must be specified.

= Choosing the appropriate scale for a pictograph or bar graph is
important to accurately and effectively convey the desired information
or data and to also make it visually appealing.

= Other aspects of a graph also contribute to its effectiveness and visual
appeal such as how colours are used, what accompanying pictures
are drawn, and whether the bars are horizontal or vertical. These
aspects correspond to the artistic and aesthetic side of data handling
and presentation.

= However, making visual representations of data fancy can also
sometimes be misleading.

=m By reading pictographs and bar graphs accurately, we can quickly
understand and make inferences about the data presented.

CHAPTER 4 SOLUTIONS
Data Handling and Presentation
Section 4.1
Page No. 75
Figure it Out

Q.1. What would you do to find the most popular game among Naresh s and Navya s
classmates?

Ans. One of the ways could be to arrange and organize the given data in a table. Think of
some other ways.

Q.2. What is the most popular game in their class?
Ans. Hockey (frequency 8).

Q.4. Pari wants to respond to the questions given below. Put a tick ( v ) for the questions
where she needs to carry out data collection and put a cross (X) for the questions
where she doesn t need to collect data. Discuss your answers in the classroom.

a. What is the most popular TV show among her classmates?
b. When did India get independence?

c. How much water is getting wasted in her locality?

d. What is the capital of India?

Ans. a.

o

=

Page No. 76
Figure it Out

Q.1. Complete the table to help Shri Nilesh to purchase the correct numbers of sweets:
 How many students chose jalebi? [|
 Barfi was chosen by [| students?
 How many students chose gujiya? [|

 Rasgulla was chosen by || students?

 How many students chose gulab jamun? [|

Shri Nilesh requested one of the staff members to bring the sweets as given in the table.
The above table helped him to purchase the correct numbers of sweets.

Ans.

e 6
e 3
e 13
e 7
e 9

Q.2. Is the above table sufficient to distribute each type of sweet to the correct student?
Explain. If it is not sufficient, what is the alternative?

Ans. No.

It shows only the number of students who chose a particular sweet, and not about the
sweet chosen by a particular student.

One of the alternatives could be, students should be categorized according to their
choice of sweet.

Section 4.1

Page No. 77

Figure it Out

Q.1. Help her to figure out the following 
 The largest shoe size in the class is

 The smallest shoe size in the class is

 There are students who wear shoe size 5.
 There are students who wear shoe sizes larger than 4.
Ans.
e 7
e 3
e 10
e 15

Q.2. How did arranging the data in ascending order help to answer these questions?
Ans. Ordered data is helpful because in this form, frequency of any data is easy to count and
the given information can be used easily.

Q.3. Are there other ways to arrange the data?
Ans. Yes, the data can be arranged in a frequency table.

Section 4.2
Page No. 83

Q. What could be the problems faced in preparing such a pictograph, if the total number
of students present in a class is 33 or 27?

Ans. represents 10 students and q represent 5 students. But to represent 3 or 7 students
accurately by dividing these symbols is not possible.

Figure it Out

Q.1. The following pictograph shows the number of books borrowed by students, in a
week, from the library of Middle School, Ginnori 

a. On which day were the minimum number of books borrowed?
b. What was the total number of books borrowed during the week?

c. On which day were the maximum number of books borrowed? What may be the
possible reason?

Ans. a. Thursday
b. 24
c. Saturday. One of the reasons could be that Sunday being a holiday students can read
the borrowed books on Sunday.

Q.2. Magan Bhai sells kites at Jamnagar. Six shopkeepers from nearby villages come to
purchase kites from him. The number of kites he sold to these six shopkeepers are
given below 

Prepare a pictograph using the symbol >} to represent 100 kites.

Shopkeeper No. of Kites sold ( > =100
Kits)

Chaman <> } >
Rani <> > <>

Rukhsana <>

Jasmeet <> <> <> <> Db
Jetha Lal <> <> >
Poonam Ben od 3 02 Oo >

Answer the following questions:

a. How many symbols represent the kites that Rani purchased?
b. Who purchased the maximum number of kites?
c. Who purchased more kites, Jasmeet or Chaman?

d. Rukhsana says Poonam Ben purchased more than double the number of kites
that Rani purchased. Is she correct? Why?
Ans. a. 3 symbols
b. Poonam Ben
c. Jasmeet
d. Yes. Number. of kites purchased by Poonam Ben = 700 = 2 x 300 +100

Section 4.3
Page no. 86

Q1. In Class 2, students were absent that day.

Ans. 5

Q2. In which class were the maximum number of students absent?
Ans. Class 8

Q3. Which class had full attendance that day?

Ans. Class 5

Page no. 88
Figure it Out
Q.1. How many total cars passed through the crossing between 6 am and noon?

Ans. 4450 cars

Section 4.4

Page No. 93

Q. On which item does Imran s family spend the most and the second most?
Ans. Imran s family spends the most on food and the second most on house rent.
Q.2. Is the cost of electricity about one-half the cost of education?

Ans. Yes,

Q.3. Is the cost of education less than one-fourth the cost of food?

Ans. Yes. Cost of education = Rs. 800 and cost of food = Rs 3400 =4 x Rs 850

So, cost of education = less than one-fourth of cost of food.

Figure it Out

Q.1. Samantha visited a tea garden and collected data of the insects and critters she saw
there. Here is the data she collected 
Help her prepare a bar graph representing this data.

Ans.

fo)

NUMBER OF INSECTS

oN BO DW

Mites
Beetles

Caterpillars
Butterflies
Grasshoppers

NAME OF INSECTS

Q.2. Pooja collected data on the number of tickets sold at the Bhopal railway station for

Ans.

a few different cities of Madhya Pradesh over a 2-hour period.

She used this data and prepared a bar graph on the board to discuss the data with
her students, but someone erased a portion of the graph.

a. Write the number of tickets sold for Vidisha above the bar.
b. Write the number of tickets sold for Jabalpur above the bar.

c. The bar for Vidisha is 6 unit lengths and the bar for Jabalpur is 5 unit lengths.
What is the scale for this graph?

d. Draw the correct bar for Sagar.
e. Add the scale of the bar graph placing the correct numbers on the vertical axis.

f. Are the bars for Seoni and Indore correct in this graph? If not, draw the correct
bar(s).

a. 24
b. 20
c. lunit length = 4 tickets
d.
wn
ti
=
a ]
)
re NY
a
aii
a a fe) 7
sa"
ory
e.
One unit length =4 Tickets
WJ
=<
2 28
uw 24
20 .
rr 16 \
= 12 \
Zz 8 N
N

Vidisha

Jabalpur

Seoni
Indore
Sagar Z

CITY

f. The bar for Seoni is correct but for Indore is incorrect.

One unit length =4 Tickets
Ww

=<

2 28

S 50

[a <

16 \

= 12 \

2 8 N
a
0 S

CITY

Q.3. Chinu listed the various means of transport that passed across the road in front of

Ans.

his house from 9 am to 10 am:

a. Prepare a frequency distribution table for the data.

b. Which means of transport was used the most?

c. If you were there to collect this data, how could you do it? Write the steps or
process.

Means of Transport Number
Bike 13

Car

Bicycle
Auto Rickshaw

Scooter
Bus
Bullock Cart

Ny] Bl Ol, eC] wo] DN

b. Bike
c. To collect the data of various means of transport, one of the ways could be 
(i) Prepare a table with 2 columns. First for means of transport and second for
its frequency.
(ii) List the various means of transport as they pass across the road.
(iii) | Frequency should be presented using tally marks.

Q.5. Faiz prepared a frequency distribution table of data on the number of wickets taken

Ans.

by Jaspreet Bumrah in his last 30 matches:

a. What information is this table giving?

b. What may be the title of this table?

c. What caught your attention in this table?

d. In how many matches has Bumrah taken 4 wickets?

e. Mayank says If we want to know the total number of wickets he has taken in his

last 30 matches, we have to add the numbers 0, 1, 2,3 ..., up to 7. Can Mayank
get the total number of wickets taken in this way? Why?

f. How would you correctly figure out the total number of wickets taken by Bumrah

in his last 30 matches, using this table?

a. This table is giving the information about different number of wickets taken by
Jaspreet Bumrah in different number of matches.

b. The title of this table may be: Wickets Taken by Jaspreet Bumrah in Last 30
Matches.(think of more!)

c. In this table, attention seeking point is that in 1 match 7 wickets were taken by
Jaspreet Bumrah only.(think of more!)

d. In 3 matches Bumrah has taken 4 wickets.

e. No, Mayank can t get the total number of wickets taken in this way. For example, 3
wickets per match were taken in 8 matches, which means total 24 wickets were taken.

f. To know the total number of wickets, prepare a next column of total wickets .It will
have products of corresponding numbers of the two given columns. Then the sum of
the numbers in the 3 column, will be the total number of wickets. Total number of
wickets =90

Q.6. The following pictograph shows the number of tractors in five different villages.

Ans.

Observe the pictograph and answer the following questions 

a. Which village has the smallest number of tractors?

b. Which village has the most tractors?

c. How many more tractors does Village C have than Village B?

d. Komal says, Village D has half the number of tractors as Village E. Is she right?

a. Village D.
b. Village C.
c. 3.

d. Yes

Q.7. The number of girl students in each class of a school is depicted by a pictograph:

Ans.

Observe this pictograph and answer the following questions:

a. Which class has the least number of girl students?

b. What is the difference between the number of girls in Classs 5 and 6?
c. If 2 more girls were admitted in Class 2, how would the graph change?
d. How many girls are there in Class 7?

a. Class 8.

b. 6.

c. If 2 more girls were admitted in class 2, the last half symbol will be converted into
full symbol.
d. 12.

Q.8. Mudhol Hounds (a type of breed of Indian dogs) are largely found in North
Karnataka s Bagalkote and Vijaypura districts. The government took an initiative
to protect this breed by providing support to those who adopted these dogs. Due to
this initiative, the number of these dogs increased. The number of Mudhol dogs in
six villages of Karnataka are as follows 

Village A : 18, Village B : 36, Village C : 12, Village D : 48, Village E : 18, Village F : 24
Prepare a pictograph and answer the following questions:
a. What will be a useful scale or key to draw this pictograph?

b. How many symbols will you use to represent the dogs in Village B?

c. Kamini said that the number of dogs in Village B and Village D together will be
more than the number of dogs in the other 4 villages. Is she right? Give reasons
for your response.

Ans.

Village Number of Mudhol Hounds (i = 6 dogs)
Village A a) ae ) aa 1

Village B a) ae 1 ae ) ae] oe 1 a 1

Village C a

Village D AE VE TE AR AE FR UF FF
Village E Ae AE VF

Village F Ae AR WR VR

a. Scale is AR =6 dogs, as numbers of dogs are multiples of 6.

b. 6 "symbols.

c. Yes, Kamini is right as the number of dogs in village B and village D together is
84 which is more than the number of dogs in the other 4 villages (72).

Q.9 A survey of 120 school students was conducted to find out which activity they

Ans.

preferred to do in their free time.
Draw a bar graph to illustrate the above data taking the scale of 1 unit length =5
students. Which activity is preferred by most students other than playing?
20
10
0

Playing Reading Watching Listeningto Painting
Story Books TV music

Number of Students
N
wm

Preferred Activity

Other than playing, reading story books is preferred by most students.

Q.10 Students and teachers of a primary school decided to plant tree saplings in the school

Ans.

campus and in the surrounding village during the first week of July. Details of the
saplings they planted are as follows 

a. The total number of saplings planted on Wednesday and Thursday is

b. The total number of saplings planted during the whole week is

c. The greatest number of saplings were planted on , and the least
number of saplings were planted on . Why do you think that is the
case? Why were more saplings planted on certain days of the week and less on
others? Can you think of possible explanations or reasons? How could you try
and figure out whether your explanations are correct?

a. 70

b. 310

c. Saturday, Wednesday

The variation in the number of saplings planted on different days may be because of
rainy season or different number of students present on different days. (Discuss for
other reasons.)

Q.11. The number of tigers in India went down drastically between 1900 and 1970.
Project Tiger was launched in 1973 to track and protect tigers in India. Starting
in 2006, the exact number of tigers in India was tracked. Shagufta and Divya
looked up information about the number of tigers in India between 2006 and 2022
in 4-year intervals. They prepared a frequency table for this data and a bar graph
to present this data, but there are a few mistakes in the graph. Can you find those
mistakes and fix them?

Ans. There are mistakes in the bars of 2006, 2010, 2014, 2018.

Section 4.5
Page no. 103
Figure it out

Q.1. If you wanted to visually represent the data of the heights of the tallest persons in
each class in your school, would you use a graph with vertical bars or horizontal
bars? Why?

Ans. To present the data of the heights of the tallest persons in each class in a school, vertical
bar graph is useful as heights of persons can be compared by heights of bars easily.
(Although both bar graphs can be used.) (Think of more reasons!)

Q.2. If you were making a table of the longest rivers on each continent and their
lengths, would you prefer to use a bar graph with vertical bars or with horizontal
bars? Why? Try finding out this information, and then make the corresponding
table and bar graph! Which continents have the longest rivers?

Ans. In this case, bar graph with horizontal bars is useful as length of a river is a horizontal
feature, so lengths of rivers can be compared with lengths of horizontal bars easily.
(Although both bar graphs can be used.) (can you think of any other reasons?)