team. 4. If a team names the object with the first hint, they get 20 points, with e the second hint 10 points, and with the third hint 5 points. One example with three hints: (i) Idisplay information for all to share, with a swipe I m clean and bare. (ii) Iam rectangular or a square, whom neither teacher nor student can spare. (iii) Iam mostly black, sometimes green, now in white too I am seen. III Visit the library and look for an encyclopedia. What is it? Check how it is different from a dictionary. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. IV A thesaurus is a reference book or digital tool that provides a collection of words with similar meanings, allowing users to find alternative words or phrases to express the same idea. Choose any five words and find out their alternative words from the thesaurus. 121 Tue Macic Brush OF DREAMS Let us do these activities before we read. I II III PT saneneenesneneesesnsstentenseseneeseansssesseessensensenensenees He aX Work in pairs. Discuss the following questions. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. 1. Mention a magical object that you would like to have. Give a reason for your choice. 2. What would you draw for yourself, if you had a magic paint brush? Why? 3. Would you use the magic paint brush to draw for someone else? If yes, why? If no, why not? Work in pairs. Discuss instances of acts of kindness that you have heard, read, or experienced. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. Work in pairs and guess the meanings of the words given below and draw pictures depicting their meanings. Share with your classmates and teacher. paintbrush joy fortress feast fear winding twig bows drawing cold Now, arrange these words into different categories as given below. THUGS: asssssssesessscsesesesesescscscscscscscseacscaeseseasecaeaees * , Xx ACTIONS: saesesscecccscsscsscsscssecsecssssscssessessessessssssssesseees YSTERY AND MAGIC ! GO/and gather wild beans, Gopi, ( Go and fetch some rice. Go and pluck the mangoes d bring home something nice. | Gopi sits beneath the banyan, _ A twig is in her hand. \She sits there drawing pictures, Biktures in the sand. The winds blow by and sweeps away The pictures in the sand. About this magic br He slips the brush into her hand And tells her to be sure, Paint not for the wealthy ones, \But only for the poor. POORVI a =o a our ae o Did you gather wild beans, Gopi? ; " Did you fetch some rice? A C ) Did you pluck the mangoes \ \ | / And bring home something nice? YY . No beans, no rice, no mangoes! SS Gopi grins and runs inside. aa om ae. ee She paints a bowl of khichdi .s-.and waits, _ -Until the paint has dried. ~ + ig ie ae < 2 * re. 4 4. *\ ae) : h The young and old all wish to see ~~ =. \ . | ; The magic brush