come in two types: present participles ( living and striking ) usually ending in -ing, and past participles ( rugged ) usually ending in -ed, -d, -t, -en, or n. (though irregular verbs may vary) Present participles are used to describe ongoing or continuous actions. For example, People have seen these lights moving quickly in random directions but often hanging out in one spot for a while before fading. . : Past participles usually describe actions that have already been completed. For example, When the vehicles are parked at the indicated spot, they begin moving forward at a speed of almost 20km/h. Now, fill in the blanks using present participle or past participle form of the verbs in the box given below. stand amaze carve scatter glow 1. The marble monument looks even more spectacular in the moonlight. 2. The view of the Himalayas from Darjeeling attracts visitors from all over the world. 3. The Sun Temple in Konark features intricately stone wheels and walls. 4. at a height of 182 m, the Statue of Unity is dedicated to Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel. 5. The islands of the Andaman and Nicobar offer some of the cleanest beaches in India. MYSTERY AND MAGIC V Study the highlighted word in the following sentence from the text. VI Crossing the many waterways without bridges was difficult for people in the past, during monsoons. In the given sentence, the highlighted word crossing , is one example of a verb used as a noun. Such a verb is called gerund. Gerunds are verb forms that can function as nouns and they end in -ing. They can serve as the subject, complement, or object in a sentence, as well as the object of a preposition. For example, Subject of a sentence: Swimming is my favourite hobby. Subject complement: Her passion is painting. Object of a verb: I enjoy reading books in my free time. Object of a preposition: She is interested in learning new languages. After certain verbs: Shekar avoided talking about his weekend plans. Underline the gerunds and participles in the following sentences. Write G for gerunds and P for participles in the space provided. One example has been done for you. 1. Dancing is a great way to express emotions. G 2. Travelling can broaden your perspective. 3. The falling leaves signalled the arrival of autumn. 4. She enjoys cooking new recipes for her family. 5. Reading helps improve your vocabulary. 6. He watched the shimmering stars in the night sky. 7. Forgetting the keys inside, Kanchan locked the door. Combine the following pairs of sentences using participles or gerunds. You may use the clues given in brackets. One example has been done for you. 1. Nitesh entered the room. He saw his friend sitting in the corner. (participle) Entering the room, Nitesh saw his friend sitting in the corner. POORVI 2. Smitha walked carelessly. She slipped on the doormat. (participle) 3. Sleep for eight hours. It is good for health. (gerund) 4, Ranjith felt