Tournament by Title Byline (Reporter s Name and Class) An Inter-school Football Tournament | Paragraph 1: was organised by our Vidyalaya from| . What 21 April 20XX to 24 April 20XX at Motinagar | , Who Football Ground. Ten teams participated in the When tournament. Where Note: use of past tense, for example, organised, participated, etc. The tournament was declared open by the | Paragraphs 2 and 3: Chief Guest, Dr. Singh, Honorary Sports| + Description of the event Secretary of the State, on Wednesday, 21 April| in detail 20XX in the presence of all the teams and | note: spectators from the participating schools. The matches were held from 8:30 a.m. to 11:30 a.m. on all the days of the tournament. Following a (i) use sequence markers: following, after, subsequently, tough competition, the teams from ABC Senior finally Secondary School and XYZ Senior Secondary School emerged as the finalists. use of passive form: was declared, were For the final match, players from both these held, were cheered, teams were cheered by students from their ete. respective schools. After an exciting match, the score was tied at 3-3. Subsequently, a penalty shootout was used as tie breaker by the referee to decide the winner. Finally, the team from ABC Senior Secondary School won the penalty shootout and was declared the winner. The winning team was awarded with a trophy, | Paragraph 4: medals, and certificates by the Chief Guest.|. prize giving ceremony Addressing the students, he said, Allofyoumust take up a sport to keep yourself healthy. The inter-school football tournament was a great success, showcasing exceptional talent, teamwork, and sportsmanship among the participating teams. Remarks by the Chief Guest MYSTERY AND MAGIC Now, asa member of the Art and Craft Club, write a report on an Inter-school Art Exhibition organised by your school. Include the necessary details. - Let us explore I Work in pairs. Read the words and observe the images given below. Check if your answers match. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. 1. ; (C4 a 0, 4. y 5. ) These are optical illusions which may trick the eye and make you think gy . that you can see two different things. a II Read the steps to play a language game Name the Mystery Object. 1. Divide the class into teams. 2. Each team chooses an object and prepares three hints to enable the other teams to name the object. 3. Each team takes turns to name the object given by the other team. 4. If a team names the object with the first hint, they get 20 points, with e the second hint 10 points, and with the third hint 5 points. One example with three hints: (i) Idisplay information for all to share, with a swipe I m clean and bare. (ii) Iam rectangular or a square, whom neither teacher nor student can spare. (iii) Iam mostly black, sometimes green, now in white too I am seen. III Visit the library