of audiences and on television, internationally. He was awarded Padma Shri on 26 2 January 1964 for his contribution to the world of magic. THE WORLD'S GREATEST MAGICIAN II Words can also play tricks. Read the riddles about things that seem to be unreal and find what they refer to. 1.1 can fill a room, but I take up no space. I m often heard, but never seen. What am I? 2. The more you take, the more you leave behind. What am I? 3.I have cities but no houses, I have forests but no trees. What am I? 4.1m tall when I m young and short when I m old, in a dark room, my story is told. III You are asked to create a magical object. What object would you create? Make a drawing with all its details and mention its special quality on the same sheet. Put up the sheet on the display board. SPECTACULAR WONDERS Let us do these activities before we read. I Look at the pictures given below and sort them into natural and man-made wonders. Natural: and Man-made: and > > > TT II Which of these wonders man-made or natural are more appealing and why? Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. III Work in pairs. Write down two wonders of nature that have amazed you. Discuss what makes them impressive. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. IV Work in groups of four. Complete the web chart given below with words that you associate with the phrase, Nature s Power . Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. POORVI X mystifying: <a strange or impossible to explain spectacle: an unusual sight that attracts interest exotic: uncommon botanical: relating to plants feats: tasks difficult to achieve, especially those involving a lot of skill indigenous: native tangible: noticeable wy Say Let us read India is home to some of the most mystifying natural phenomena that surprise and spark our imagination. 1. THE VALLEY OF FLOWERS, UTTARAKHAND The Valley of Flowers is an eyecatching spectacle with around 600 species of exotic flowers, including orchids, poppies, primulas, marigold, daisies, and anemones. It is a place where nature blooms in its full glory offering an attractive view. The trek to the valley offers spectacular views of beautiful waterfalls and wild streams. The valley is also home to rare wildlife species like the grey langur, flying squirrel, red fox, lime butterfly, and snow leopard, to name a few. With a stunning backdrop of the mighty Himalayan ranges, the Valley of Flowers National Park presents an unforgettable experience for visitors. Spread over a huge area in the Chamoli district, the Valley of Flowers National Park isa UNESCO World Heritage Site. Between the months of May and October, this area turns into a botanical wonderland! 2. THE Livinc Root Bripces, MEGHALAYA Imagine building a_ bridge without the use of cement, stones, concrete, etc. Is it possible? The living root bridges are incredible feats of engineering built