from other boys. But there was nothing he could do about his nickname. He was stuck with it. Only his parents and teachers called him by his real name, Leroy. Everyone else called him Encyclopedia. An encyclopedia is a book or set of books filled with facts from A to Z. So was Encyclopedia s head. He read more books than anyone in Idaville, and he never forgot a fact. His pals said he was like a library and computer rolled into one, and more user-friendly. At the dinner table on Tuesday night, Chief Brown stared at his cream-of-mushroom soup. Encyclopedia and his mother knew what that meant. He had a mystery he could not solve. Tim Nolan died yesterday, he announced in a matter-of-fact manner. That name is familiar, Mrs. Brown said. Wasn t he mixed up in a jewellery robbery a few years ago? Five years ago, Chief Brown replied. Two masked men held up the Diamond Mart on Sixth Avenue. They got away witha million dollars worth of jewellery. I thought Tim Nolan was arrested, Mrs. Brown said. He was questioned, not arrested, Chief Brown corrected. I always believed that Nolan and a friend, a man named Daniel Davenport, pulled the hold-ups. There wasn t any proof, though. Encyclopedia sat quietly. He knew his mother and father were discussing the case for his benefit. His father filled in the facts. Nolan and Davenport had met, Chief Brown said, while both were in prison in South Carolina. They became friendly because of shared interests. Nolan was let out first. He settled in Idaville and started a small palm-tree nursery. It barely yielded him a living. Davenport came to live with Nolan a week before the jewellery store hold-up. During the hold-up, one MYSTERY AND MAGIC in a matter-offact manner: without showing much emotion hold-ups: robberies conducted with the use of threat or violence nur place oung and trees e grown for sale POORVI gunman s mask slipped. A clerk thought she recognised Nolan. But she wasn t absolutely sure. I remember now, Mrs. Brown said. The clerk refused to testify against him, and no trace of the stolen jewellery ever turned up. Davenport hasn t been seen since the hold-up, Chief Brown said. My hunch is that he and Nolan decided to hide the loot until things cooled down. Didn t you search Nolan s house, dear? I got a court order this morning, Chief Brown said. Officers Lewis and Maloney just about took Nolan s house apart. They didn t find one piece of the stolen jewellery. Is there some mystery about Nolan s death yesterday? Mrs. Brown inquired. Yes and no, Chief Brown answered. Nolan suffered from a bad heart for many years. Yesterday morning he had a stroke. He must have realised he was dying. With his last strength, he managed to put his will on the kitchen table. It leaves everything he owns, including his palm-tree nursery to Davenport. Let us discuss I Complete