coded message was meant for Davenport/imply that the message was likely a clue about the location of the stolen jewellery) II Answer the following questions. 1. Nolan and Davenport were very close. Support this statement with evidence from the text. . Why did Davenport disappear right after the jewellery hold-up? What might his plans have been if, Nolan had not died? . What does Mrs. Brown s interest in the case tell us about her? . Explain why Chief Brown was proud of his son. . Why were Chief Brown s suspicions regarding Nolan and Davenport justified, even when there was a lack of concrete proof? . Analyse the role of the four-word coded message in the story. . Write a character sketch on Leroy with the help of the character traits table given in Let us discuss section. You may begin it like this: Encyclopedia was a knowledgeable eighth grader who never forgot a fact that he read. MYSTERY AND MAGIC Let us learn I Match the phrasal verbs from the text given in Column 1 with their meanings in Column 2. You may refer to a dictionary. Now, fill in the blanks with the phrasal verbs given in Column 1. > . Finally, some important evidence about the case has . After I , | understood that I had made a big mistake. . Icouldn t why he was angry with me. GOA He his special coat and went to his friend s birthday party. . Ravi forgets to do his homework but he it as teacher didn t ask for it that day. td F. Ido not know what to his behaviour. II Fill in the blanks in the following sentences by choosing the correct word pairs from the box given below. 1. After running for 50 kilometres last for two days. , | felt 2. When the committee met yesterday, they brought local cases to the POORVI 3.While learning to drive, Rina used too much force on the , causing the car to down. . 4. He has composed a beautiful of music in order to * bring to thousands of people. 5.She was busy her hair not caring about the flowers in her garden. ee III Leroy solved the mystery of the missing fifth word with his critical thinking abilities. Work in pairs to solve the puzzles given in the illustrations below and infer what they say. One example has been done for you. Answer: Top secret IV Spoonerism is a mistake made when speaking, where the first sounds of the words in a phrase or a sentence are exchanged with each other. This usually gives a funny meaning. Some examples of spoonerism are saying wrong load instead of long road , round of mice instead of mound of rice . MYSTERY AND MAGIC Find the correct order for the following spoonerisms. 1. knowing sits 2. it s roaring with pain. 0, i 3. plaster man 4. blarm wanket ae 5. tars and crucks 6.