t Vi i f AR: ze / 2s SHI K EWEN PIWINX Ni 1 YY Yrs See \ 3 Tue Case OF THE FirtH WorpD Oey | Let us do these activities before we read. I Work in pairs. Solve the crossword puzzle given below with the clues [m] Z. in the form of anagrams. 0873CHo3 Note: An anagram is a word or phrase that is made by rearranging the letters in a different order to make a new word or phrase. For example, Neat is an anagram of a net . Across: 3. Declare 6. Tucks 7. Heart 9. Felt 10.Sown 12. Sword 13. Evil Down: 1. Aces 2. Read 4. Tool 5. Alps 6. Hooks 8. Mane 11. Loves II Work in pairs. Match the different meanings of case in Column 2 with the correct usage in the sentences in Column 1. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. 1. Lalit said that he could not sing but that was not the case| (i) writing as he sang melodiously later format 2. The lawyer was waiting for the case to be taken up in court 3. My pencil case is a gift from my grandmother (iii) situation 4. The subject of a formal letter is written in title case. (iv) matter Now, read the following text and find out which case the title refers to. POORVI nickname: oh name Encyclopedia Brown is a young boy who lives in Idaville, USA. His father is the Chief of Police. In spite of being so young he often helps his father solve mysteries that even the police find difficult to solve. Their discussions are generally held at the dining table. Read this story to find out how the boy wonder solves a case that has been troubling his father... Encyclopedia s father was Chief of Police. Everyone thought that he must be the smartest police chief in the country. Chief Brown was smart and quick. He didn t sit around and worry. When he came up against a case he couldn t solve, he acted at once. He cleared his desk, put on his hat, and went home to dinner. Encyclopedia solved the case for him before dinner was over. Chief Brown would have liked to tell everyone about his only child. But who would believe him? Who would believe that the best detective alive was an eighth grader? So, he said nothing. Encyclopedia never spoke of the help he gave his father. He didn t want to seem different from other boys. But there was nothing he could do about his nickname. He was stuck with it. Only his parents and teachers called him by his real name, Leroy. Everyone else called him Encyclopedia. An encyclopedia is a book or set of books filled with facts from A to Z. So was Encyclopedia s head. He read more books than anyone in Idaville, and he never forgot a fact. His pals said he was like a library and computer