you re in a new environment, don t just look around pay attention to sounds, smells, and textures too. A third tip is to ask questions. Curious people tend to be better observers because they actively try to understand what they re noticing. Asking questions about what you see, like Why is this here? or What purpose does it serve? forces your brain to think critically about what you re observing. Next, take notes or make sketches. Writing down what you observe can help reinforce details in your memory. Even quick sketches of an object or place can strengthen your understanding of its features. Finally, it s important to practise mindfulness. Mindfulness helps ~ - you stay present in the moment and fully engage with your > ; & ~ surroundings. When you re mindful, you re not distracted by . anything, this leads to improved observation skills. Start incorporating these techniques into your daily routine, and soon you'll be observing things you never noticed before! F II You will once again listen to the podcast. As you listen, complete the given sentences by filling in the blanks with one to three exact words a you hear. ' _ Tu Macc Brusit oF Dreams - >) . i Let us listen (refer to page 132) & b. ma/, I You will listen to five speakers speak about a magical power they wish for. As you listen, match statements 1-7 with speakers (i)-(v). There are two statements you do not need. SPEAKER (i) : IfI could have any magical power, I d choose the ability to predict the future. Imagine being able to see profits and losses before time. I could make better savings and secure my business. Plus, I 'd use it to help others make wise financial decisions as well. SPEAKER (ii) : I think having the power to learn instantly would be amazing! Exams would be easy, and I d have more time for activities I enjoy, like playing cricket. If I could remember everything, it would make life so much easier! ~ SPEAKER (iii) : I would want the power of flying. Imagine being able to see the world from up above clearly. I would be able to go from one place to another quickly without using any means of transport. It would be a dream come true. >) SPEAKER (iv) : At my age, I d love to have the power of healing. There are so many aches and pains wy that come with growing old, but it s not just for me. If I could heal others too, I 'd help my family stay healthy and happy. SPEAKER (v) : If I had a magical power, I d want control a) over the weather. We depend so much on the rains. With this power, I could ensure that crops always get the right amount of rain and sunshine. Let us listen (refer to page 148) I You will listen to a brother and sister discuss