where the first sounds of the words in a phrase or a sentence are exchanged with each other. This usually gives a funny meaning. Some examples of spoonerism are saying wrong load instead of long road , round of mice instead of mound of rice . MYSTERY AND MAGIC Find the correct order for the following spoonerisms. 1. knowing sits 2. it s roaring with pain. 0, i 3. plaster man 4. blarm wanket ae 5. tars and crucks 6. shake a tower 7. bead a rook 8. mardon me padam Read the following sentences from the text and study the highlighted words. 1. Everyone thought that he must be the smartest police chief in , the country. ; 2. She read what he had copied. 3. They tell where the jewellery is hidden. 4. Nom is a shortening of nominative, a grammatical term, stated Mrs. Brown, who had taught English and other subjects in high school. s * + 5. Nolan and Davenport had met, Chief Brown said, while both were = in prison in South Carolina. 6. When he came up against a case he couldn t solve, he acted at once. 7. The code is simple, especially as it s written on a sheet from a calendar. 8. They became friendly because of shared interests. 9. Encyclopedia solved the case for him before dinner was over. Now, fill in the blanks with the words in the box given below to complete the following sentences. There are two extra words that you do not need. where why who though which when because whose if how { 1 i] 1 I 1 I 1 ( ! Detective stories are exciting, keeping readers guessing (i) the real culprit is. They take place in settings (ii) ______ clues are hidden carefully. Gii) the mystery seems tricky, a clever detective always finds answers. Readers often wonder (iv) criminals leave small but important clues. The challenge is to decide (v) suspect is guilty. (vi) the truth is revealed, everything makes sense. But one may wonder (vii) they could have solved it themselves. These stories are fun (viii) they make readers think till the very end. POORVI VI Combine the following pairs of sentences using the word given in brackets. One example has been done for you. 1. We gave him the signal. He was waiting for the signal. (that) Answer: We gave him the signal that he was waiting for. 2. We went to a place. The incident occurred there. (where) 3. Teacher said she would retire soon. She is now nearly sixty. (who) 4. It was the day. Half the class was absent. (when) VII Read the following sentences from the text. 1. What s suspicious about that? Mrs. Brown asked. 2. What do you make of the four words, Leroy? 3. Wasn't he mixed up in a jewellery robbery a few years ago? 4. Didn t you search Nolan s house, dear? 5. Is there a young fir tree in Mr.