mighty Himalayan ranges, the Valley of Flowers National Park presents an unforgettable experience for visitors. Spread over a huge area in the Chamoli district, the Valley of Flowers National Park isa UNESCO World Heritage Site. Between the months of May and October, this area turns into a botanical wonderland! 2. THE Livinc Root Bripces, MEGHALAYA Imagine building a_ bridge without the use of cement, stones, concrete, etc. Is it possible? The living root bridges are incredible feats of engineering built by the indigenous people of Meghalaya. The living root bridges are one of Meghalaya s most beautiful tangible UNESCO world heritage sites. Crossing the many waterways without bridges was difficult for people in the past, during monsoons. Attempts to use bamboo or wooden bridges across these waterways proved futile as these bridges could not last long in the heavy rains and strong waters. Living root bridges are an innovative and indigenous solution to solve this age-old problem. They are made of intertwined roots which are a sort of magic, but they aren t imaginary. These bridges have been built for centuries by the indigenous people of the land. It is a naturally built ecosystem oflocal flora. It also symbolises the relationship and knowledge that the local people have over their region and the cultural significance that it holds for them. Under ideal conditions, a root bridge is thought to be able to persist for hundreds of years. These bridges frequently rise 50 to 100 feet in the air. The state s longest living root bridge is said to be a whopping 175 feet in length. There are approximately 100 or so known living root bridges across different villages. 3. THE LONAR CRATER LAKE, MAHARASHTRA The Lonar Crater Lake is a geological wonder, nestled in the town of Lonar in Buldhana district, Maharashtra. It is believed to have been formed thousands of years ago. This ancient landform, consisting of a giant hole, came into existence when a colossal meteorite, blazing at an extremely high speed, crashed into the Earth, leaving behind a stunning mark. It is the only crater in India formed in basaltic rock by a meteorite impact and ranks as the third largest in the world, placing it among the top five largest craters globally. The crater s perfectly circular depression cradles a unique saline lake at its core, creating a striking visual contrast against the surrounding rugged terrain. This site is a rare and extraordinary blend of celestial impact and terrestrial beauty. The rim of the meteor crater offers a breath-taking spectacle of nature s power and the enduring allure of our planet s ancient past. MYSTERY AND MAGIC futile: useless yy intertwined: twisted together persist: continue to exist whopping: / huge . VV nestled: situated in a half-hidden or sheltered position colossal: extremely large cradles: holds rugged: rough terrestrial: on or related to earth allure: attraction POORVI optical illusion: something that tricks your eyes and makes you see it differently from how it really is serene: calm