without using vehicles I 2 Let us speak I Intonation is the rise and fall of the pitch of tone while speaking. -_ MYSTERY AND MAGIC The falling tone is the fall in the pitch of the voice from a high level to a low level. It is marked []. The falling tone is generally used in imperative sentences. Such sentences are used in speech for different communicative purposes to express a command or an instruction, to ask for a favour or to give a warning. Read the following sentences from the text with the falling tone. ss Come here! ~~ Seize this magic brush... > Paint my fortress tall! >" Go and fetch some rice. Work in pairs. Take turns to make requests for the following formal and informal situations. Situation 1 You request your teacher to organise a class picnic. Situation 1 You request your sibling to help you with the completion of your project. Formal Requests Situation 2 You request your class teacher for an extra sports period, since you missed it last week. Informal Requests Situation 2 You request your mother to enroll you in a dance class. Situation 3 You request your Activity incharge teacher to include you in the upcoming inter-school event. Situation 3 You request your cousin to come over to spend the weekend with you. You may use the following phrases when you make the request. Can/Will you... Would you mind if. * Do you think you could... e | would like to... Would it be possible... Do you mind if... By any chance do you know... I was wondering if... POORVI I II Let us write Imaginative essay is a type of creative writing where the writers use their imagination. An imaginative essay can be based on real-life events, observation, or experiences. It is usually a descriptive piece or a personal reflection. Read the sample of an imaginative essay. My Life as EcoFlash Imagine an ordinary 13-year-old student who is also a secret superhero protecting the environment. That s my life as EcoFlash! By day, m Meenu, an ordinary Grade 8 student. By evening, I use my powers to keep my neighbourhood green and clean. As EcoFlash, I have the ability to grow plants, purify water, and clean polluted air with a wave of my hand. I wear a green suit with a glowing leaf symbol and carry a small seed pouch that holds magic seeds to restore damaged areas. My mission is to fight pollution, save trees, and educate people about taking care of our planet. My friends wonder why I m always carrying a plant in my bag or why my shoes are muddy, but I can never tell them the truth. Once, my little brother saw me turning a garbage dump into a beautiful garden and almost spilled my secret to our parents. I had to convince him it was a magic trick! Being EcoFlash is not just about powers but also responsibility. Every time I see clean