offers a breath-taking spectacle of nature s power and the enduring allure of our planet s ancient past. MYSTERY AND MAGIC futile: useless yy intertwined: twisted together persist: continue to exist whopping: / huge . VV nestled: situated in a half-hidden or sheltered position colossal: extremely large cradles: holds rugged: rough terrestrial: on or related to earth allure: attraction POORVI optical illusion: something that tricks your eyes and makes you see it differently from how it really is serene: calm backwaters: a part of a river where the water does not flow bioluminescence: light produced inside the body ofa living organism by a chemical reaction eco-tourism: tourism that is responsible towards preserving the environment acquaint: to become familiar with something wy 4. MaGnetic HILLs IN Lew District, LADAKH In the travels around Leh-Ladakh, is a fascinating sight which arouses curiosity to no end the Magnetic Hill, a place where gravity takes a backseat! Lying at a distance of around 30 km from Leh, the Magnetic Hill is marked by a yellow signboard which reads The Phenomenon That Defies Gravity . It also instructs visitors to park vehicles in the box marked with a white point on the road, which is known as the Magnetic Road. When the vehicles are parked at the indicated spot, they begin moving forward at a speed of almost 20km/h. This unusual place creates an optical illusion where vehicles appear to roll uphill, a sight that has left tourists in disbelief for years, caused by the peculiar alignment of surrounding slopes and the horizon line. 5. GLowInG WartERS OF KERALA Situated 15 kms from Kerala s Kochi town, Kumbalangi is a beautiful village with vast green vegetation. In the serene backwaters of Kumbalangi village, one can see magically glowing waters in the night. This phenomenon is called bioluminescence, and is caused by a high concentration of micro-planktons in the sea, which are small organisms found in marine and freshwater. This beautiful sight has captured the attention of locals as well as tourists, making Kumbalangi an eco-tourism village in India. One can experience the village life in all its beauty and simplicity, and acquaint oneself to their cuisine and culture. MYSTERY AND MAGIC 6. THE SUNDARBANS Can a forest exist in a coastal zone? Yes, they are called mangrove forests, where trees take root under water in the low-oxygen soil. The roots slow down the movement of tidal waters, stabilising the coastline and reducing erosion. The Sundarbans is one such mangrove forest spread over 1,400 kms in West Bengal, lying in the delta of rivers, such as the Ganga, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna. The name is derived from sundari trees that are plentiful in the area. The area is also populated by an extensive range of flora and fauna, including many bird species, the majestic Bengal tiger, and other threatened species, such as the estuarine crocodile and the Indian python. 7. THE INVISIBLE CHANDIPUR BEACH, ODISHA Have you_ seen __ things disappearing in front of your