They didn t find one piece of the stolen jewellery. Is there some mystery about Nolan s death yesterday? Mrs. Brown inquired. Yes and no, Chief Brown answered. Nolan suffered from a bad heart for many years. Yesterday morning he had a stroke. He must have realised he was dying. With his last strength, he managed to put his will on the kitchen table. It leaves everything he owns, including his palm-tree nursery to Davenport. Let us discuss I Complete the following statements with suitable reasons. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. 1. Leroy s nickname was Encyclopedia and everyone called him by that name because___ 2. At the dinner table on Tuesday night, Chief Brown stared at his cream-of-mushroom soup as . 3. Encyclopedia sat quietly at the dinner table because 4. Nolan put the will on the kitchen table because II Do you think Chief Brown would need Leroy s help to solve this case? If yes, why? If no, why not? MYSTERY AND MAGIC \) 0 ree (# What s suspicious about that? Mrs. Brown asked. Nothing about the will itself just about a sheet from his desk calendar. It was clipped to the will, said Chief Brown. He took out his pocket notebook and leafed through the pages. IT copied what Nolan wrote on the sheet, he said. Here it is. He handed the notebook to Mrs. Brown. She read what he had copied. It has Davenport s name and address, she said, and a few words I don t understand. were a < vdieo , * She handed the notebook to Encyclopedia. ba says what " isto happen a to somebody s Encyclopedia read the four words below Davenport s name _ money and What do you make of the four words, Leroy? and address: Nom Utes Sweden Hurts. property after their death Mrs. Brown looked at him hopefully. Usually he needed to ask leat only one question to solve a case before dessert. cated through: They were still on the soup. quickly turned Encyclopedia leaned back and closed his eyes when he did his (the pages) hardest thinking. After several seconds, he opened his eyes and asked his question. Is there a young fir tree in Mr. Nolan s palm-tree nursery? Chief Brown thought a moment. Yes, there is... one. On the south side of the house. How did you know? \ The four words say so, Encyclopedia answered. (HP They do? said Chief Brown. y ~ See for yourself, Encyclopedia urged. Chief Brown studied the four words: Nom Utes Sweden Hurts. He shook his head and passed the notebook to Mrs. Brown again. Can you figure it out? POORVI Nom is a shortening of nominative, a grammatical term, S a ; stated Mrs. Brown, who had taught English and other subjects confessed: . . . . . . in high school. Utes are an American Indian tribe. Sweden is a country in northern Europe. Hurts is hurts. She lifted her gaze