Chief Brown studied the four words: Nom Utes Sweden Hurts. He shook his head and passed the notebook to Mrs. Brown again. Can you figure it out? POORVI Nom is a shortening of nominative, a grammatical term, S a ; stated Mrs. Brown, who had taught English and other subjects confessed: . . . . . . in high school. Utes are an American Indian tribe. Sweden is a country in northern Europe. Hurts is hurts. She lifted her gaze to Encyclopedia and shook her head. T can t figure it out, she confessed. Davenport disappeared right after the hold-up, Encyclopedia reminded her. o ie . admitted As Dad said, Davenport and Nolan must have hidden the stolen jewellery. Probably not a week or so ago, Nolan changed the hiding place. You think that he tried to tell Davenport by phone and failed to reach him? Mrs. Brown asked. So he wrote the four words as he was dying? Chief Brown nodded. We'll find Davenport now that we know his address. He ll learn he has been left the palm-tree nursery, Mrs. Brown said. And the four words will tell him where the jewellery is hidden! code: hidden Right, Encyclopedia said. The code is simple, especially message as it s written on a sheet from a calendar. Davenport will understand it easily. Still, it wouldn t make much sense to someone who isn t looking for a hiding place. Leroy! Mrs. Brown exclaimed. What do the four words mean? NO You already guessed, Mom. They >) z) tell where the jewellery is hidden. \ Mrs. Brown looked ready to explode with impatience, Where? Encyclopedia smiled. Why, under the fifth word, he said. What Was The Fifth Word? To tell Davenport where he had hidden the stolen jewellery, Nolan wrote a four-word code. As the key to the code, he wrote the four words on a sheet from a desk calendar. The four words stood for days of the week. Nolan dropped the letters d-a-y. Then he used the other letters to form words. So, Nom = Monday, Utes = Tuesday, Sweden = Wednesday and Hurts = Thursday. The unwritten fifth word was Fir, or Friday. The jewellery was found inside a twenty-gallon jug of earth from which grew the young fir tree in Nolan s nursery just as Encyclopedia had foreseen. DONALD J. SOBOL (ADAPTED) Let us discuss I A fact is something that can be proven true or false. A fact is not based on people s beliefs. An opinion on the other hand is a belief, feeling, or judgement, and can vary from one person to another. An opinion cannot be proven. Identify which of the following statements from part I and II of the story are facts or opinions. One example has been done for you. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. 1. Encyclopedia s father was the Chief of Police. Fact 2. Everyone thought that Chief Brown must be the smartest police chief in