protect Gopi from the Zamindar s anger 3. The river and the beast | (iii) the power of art and imagination to VI Identify whether the following statement is true or false. While Gopi uses the magic brush to help others, the Zamindar wants to use it for personal gain. This contrast drives the moral of the story. Let us think and reflect I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow. x 1. But ona stone there sits a man, A brush is in his hand. He looks around. He calls to Gopi. Come here! he whispers. Hush! We mustn t let the village know About this magic brush. He slips the brush into her hand MYSTERY AND MAGIC And tells her to be sure, Paint not for the wealthy ones, But only for the poor. (i) Fillin the blank by selecting the correct option from those given in the brackets. The man is whispering and telling Gopi to keep the brush a secret reflects his (careful and secretive/magical and delightful) nature. (ii) What is the significance of the man slipping the brush into Gopi s hand? (iii) Complete the following sentence with a suitable reason. The most likely reason the man instructs Gopi to Paint not for wealthy ones but only for the poor is because he (iv) Select the most appropriate title for the extract from the two given below. me A. The Magic Brush s Secret B. Gopi s Special Gift 2. And soon the news spreads far and wide, Through forests, fields, and plains, Until the Zamindar himself Hears of these magic gains. I order you to paint for me, A fortress tall and grand. Paint treasures, jewels, and riches rare, Enough to rule this land. (i) Complete the following sentence with the correct reason. The news of Gopi s magic brush spreads through forests, fields, I \ and plains because of its (ii) Why does the poet refer to things painted by Gopi s paintbrush as magic gains ? POORVI (iii) Which of the following statements given below is false? Rectify the false statement. A. Gopi s magic brush draws the attention of the powerful Zamindar. B. The Zamindar requests Gopi to paint a grand fortress and jewels. (iv) What does the Zamindar s demand for a grand fortress and jewels reveal about his character? II Answer the following questions. 1. Explain why Gopi made the right decision by refusing to paint for the Zamindar. 2. Gopi threatens to draw a beast to scare away the Zamindar. Justify her action. How would you have dealt with the situation differently? 3. What is the significance of Gopi celebrating with the villagers at the end of the poem? 4. Compare Gopi s use of the magic brush to how the Zamindar would have used it. ol . What can be inferred about Gopi s character based on her refusal to follow the Zamindar s orders? 6. Justify the appropriateness of the title of the