else called him Encyclopedia. MYSTERY AND MAGIC (i) Complete the following sentence with a suitable reason. Chief Brown s dilemma can be called unique because (ii) What can be inferred about why Encyclopedia never spoke of the help he gave his father? A. He is shy and lacks confidence in his abilities to share his insights. B. He wants to avoid the jealousy others might feel about his skills. C. He desires to blend with the other boys to prevent seeming different. D. He is embarrassed about being smarter than most adults around him. (iii) The parents choose not to call their son Encyclopedia . Select the reason that is false. A. For them he is more than his unique abilities; he is their child, with a personal identity. B. Calling him by his real name reflects their affection and the desire to acknowledge him as an ordinary boy. C. They want him to be remembered as different from the others around. (iv) What does the writer mean by the fact that Leroy was stuck with the name Encyclopedia? 2. Chief Brown studied the four words: Nom Utes Sweden Hurts. He shook his head and passed the notebook to Mrs. Brown again. Can you figure it out? Nom is a shortening of nominative, a grammatical term, stated Mrs. Brown, who had taught English and other subjects in high school. Utes is an American Indian tribe. Sweden is a country in northern Europe. Hurts is hurts. She lifted her gaze to Encyclopedia and shook her head. I can t figure it out, she confessed. Davenport disappeared right after the hold-up, Encyclopedia reminded her. (i) What does Chief Brown s reaction of shaking his head suggest about his understanding of the four words? 2a POORVI \ry A. He is confident that the words are a clue. a . B. He is confused, unable to make sense of the words. F Y . & ~ C. He believes the words are random and meaningless. D. He thinks the words are unrelated to the case. F (ii) Identify whether the given statement is true or false. \/ >) Mrs. Brown explained the actual meanings of the individual words rather than decoding the hidden message behind them. (iii) What does Mrs. Brown s inability to decode the words suggest about the message? (iv) Complete the following sentence suitably. The purpose of Encyclopedia s reminder in the last line of the extract was to . (refocus the discussion on the context of the crime/suggest that the coded message was meant for Davenport/imply that the message was likely a clue about the location of the stolen jewellery) II Answer the following questions. 1. Nolan and Davenport were very close. Support this statement with evidence from the text. . Why did Davenport disappear right after the jewellery hold-up? What might his plans have been if, Nolan had not died? . What does Mrs. Brown s interest in the case tell us about her? . Explain why Chief Brown