phrase with one from the extract. India is the birthplace of several rare species of flora and fauna that thrive in its diverse ecosystems. (ii) What does the phrase nature s unusual side suggest about the phenomena described? (iii) Complete the similarity by choosing the correct option. spark: imagination: : A. inspiration; creativity B. wonder; amazement C. effort; reward D. knowledge; books (iv) Identify whether the following statement is true or false. \ Some natural phenomena can surprise people. 2. Have you seen things disappearing in front of your eyes? Well, such f things happen at times, when we keep things at some place, and just forget where we have kept them. But, what if there s a sea that . disappears? This happens in Odisha. It is a beach in the Balasore district where one can witness the sea disappearing mysteriously the Chandipur Beach which is known for its unique feature of playing hide-and-seek with its visitors. (i) Complete the following sentence with a suitable reason. The writer s most likely purpose to introduce the information about the Chandipur Beach phenomenon with a question is to . (engage the reader s curiosity and create a sense of suspense/draw the reader to learn more about the unusual phenomenon/set the tone for the surprising nature of the content that follows) \ XN (ii) Select the option that is correct for both Assertion (A) and ~ (Gp Reason (R). 7 y (A): Chandipur Beach in Odisha is known for its unique feature of the sea disappearing. (R): The tides retreat drastically, exposing the Chandipur beach. A. Both (A) and (R) are true, and (R) is the correct explanation of (A). B. Both (A) and (R) are true, but (R) is not the correct explanation of (A). C. (A) is true, but (R) is false. D. (A) is false, but (R) is true. 143 POORVI (iii) What does the term unique suggest about the beach in Balasore? eS A. very popular s " B. one of its kind C. ancient place D. far from city (iv) What does the writer want to convey with the use of the phrase playing hide-and-seek with its visitors ? I -_ Answer the following questions. 1.How are the living root bridges a boon for the local people of Meghalaya? 2. Why is the Lonar Crater Lake considered a remarkable and rare site? 3. What might be the writer s purpose of highlighting the awe-inspiring natural wonders of India? 4. The writer uses descriptive language and introductory questions for some of the natural phenomena. What impact does it have on the readers? 5. Which of these unusual phenomena did you find the most interesting and why? ' wae D> ~ 7 @ g " Let us learn I Fill in the blanks with the correct expressions from the text given in the box below. ; came into existence to no end in full glory . _ in disbelief tonameafew age-old problem 1. Ihave read many stories 2. Do