opinion on the other hand is a belief, feeling, or judgement, and can vary from one person to another. An opinion cannot be proven. Identify which of the following statements from part I and II of the story are facts or opinions. One example has been done for you. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. 1. Encyclopedia s father was the Chief of Police. Fact 2. Everyone thought that Chief Brown must be the smartest police chief in the country. 3. An encyclopedia is a book or set of books filled with facts from AtoZ. 4. Leroy s friends said that he was like a library and computer rolled into one, and more user-friendly. 5. Two masked men held up the Diamond Mart on Sixth Avenue. 6. Nolan and Davenport had met while both were in prison in South Carolina. MYSTERY AND MAGIC 7 = e* lad ? = foreseen: & predicted ~ * ne / = a a 2a POORVI 7. Chief Brown s hunch was that Davenport and Nolan decided to hide \ oN _ the loot until things cooled down. 3 & ~ 8. Nolan wrote a four words code to tell Davenport where he had hidden 7" the stolen jewellery. F II Complete the table by choosing the character traits of Leroy given in the box below. There is an extra word that you do not need. One example has been done for you. cleverness knowledgeable keen t listener gentle humble 2. Encyclopedia never spoke of the help he gave his father. He didn t want to seem different from other boys. 3. Encyclopedia sat quietly. He knew his mother and father were discussing the case for his benefit. 4. Usually, he needed to ask only one question to solve a case before dessert. 1. He read more books than anyone in| knowledgeable Idaville, and he never forgot a fact. Let us think and reflect I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow. 1. Chief Brown would have liked to tell everyone about his only child. But who would believe him? Who would believe that the best detective alive ed s* was an eighth grader? So, he said nothing. > ) ~ Encyclopedia never spoke of the help he gave his father. He didn t want N to seem different from other boys. But there was nothing he could do about his nickname. He was stuck with it. Only his parents and teachers called him by his real name, Leroy. Everyone else called him Encyclopedia. MYSTERY AND MAGIC (i) Complete the following sentence with a suitable reason. Chief Brown s dilemma can be called unique because (ii) What can be inferred about why Encyclopedia never spoke of the help he gave his father? A. He is shy and lacks confidence in his abilities to share his insights. B. He wants to avoid the jealousy others might feel about his skills. C. He desires to blend with the other boys to prevent