village folk, ~(% A feast of sweets and tea. > A courtyard bright, a band to play, a | And songs of victory. ADAPTED FROM A FOLK TALE Let us discuss I Arrange the events in order of occurrence in the poem. The last one has been marked for you. Share your answers with your classmates and teacher. 1. Gopi paints a bowl of khichdi, which becomes real and \ ' / aoe amazes the villagers. - 7 1 2. The Zamindar orders Gopi to paint treasures for him. ~ s ! ve 3. Gopiis told to gather food but instead sits drawing pictures o in the sand. 4. Gopi returns to the village with the Zamindar and his men chasing her. 5. The Zamindar throws Gopi into prison. 6. Gopi paints a road and a horse to escape. 7. Gopi uses the magic brush to paint useful items for the villagers. 8. Gopi paints a wide river, stopping the Zamindar and his men. 9. Aman gives a magic brush to Gopi to paint only for the poor. 10. Gopi scares the Zamindar away, and celebrates with the villagers. (HP II Fillin the blanks by choosing the correct answer from the box given below. LY . a SD \ triumphant and celebratory tension and suspense playful and innocent The tone of the poem shifts throughout, reflecting the different moods of the story. Initially, the tone is 1. as Gopi uses her imagination to draw in the sand, and later when the Zamindar enters the story, the tone shifts to one of 2. . In the final part of the poem, the tone becomes 3. as Gopi escapes, the Zamindar is defeated, and the villagers rejoice. POORVI III Fillin the blanks by choosing the correct option from within the brackets. 1. The poem mostly follows a simple rhyme scheme, which adds a rhythmic flow. (ABCB, ABBA, ABAB) > 2. This poem belongs to the poetry genre, which tells a story through verse. (descriptive, narrative or ballad, free style) IV Give examples from the poem for the following explanations. 1. The poem is rich in imagery, creating clear pictures in the reader s mind. For example, 2. What is the effect of repetition in the line On you, and you and you! ? V Match the phrases from the poem in Column 1 with what they symbolise in Column 2. 1. The magic paintbrush | (i) greed and the desire for wealth change the world 2. The grand fortress (ii) barriers to protect Gopi from the Zamindar s anger 3. The river and the beast | (iii) the power of art and imagination to VI Identify whether the following statement is true or false. While Gopi uses the magic brush to help others, the Zamindar wants to use it for personal gain. This contrast drives the moral of the story. Let us think and reflect I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow. x 1. But ona stone there