to scare away the Zamindar. Justify her action. How would you have dealt with the situation differently? 3. What is the significance of Gopi celebrating with the villagers at the end of the poem? 4. Compare Gopi s use of the magic brush to how the Zamindar would have used it. ol . What can be inferred about Gopi s character based on her refusal to follow the Zamindar s orders? 6. Justify the appropriateness of the title of the poem. 7. If you had the magic brush, how would you use it in today s world? Ld 9 Let us learn I The verb draw has different meanings in different contexts. Match the sentences in Column 1 with their appropriate meanings in Column 2. cota atu 1. Hi h ] 1 fr is spec drew loud applause from @ onaed the audience. 2. The event will draw huge crowds from |_.. . . (ii) pulled out all neighbouring places. 3. Plants draw water from the soil. (iii) got a reaction 4. I reached the station when the train] . , ; (iv) attract was drawing into the station. 5. The room was dark, so she drew the . . Lo (v) moving curtains to let the sunlight in. 6. He drew a piece of paper from the . P Pap (vi) absorb folder. MYSTERY AND MAGIC II Fill in the crossword. Clues have been given below. You will find the words in the poem. POORVI III There are certain expressions that convey a sudden feeling or reaction. They can be used to express a variety of emotions and thoughts. Example: ... he whispers. Hush! ( Hush denotes the act of silencing someone) Now, match the expressions in Column 1 with what emotions or reactions they convey, in Column 2. romps Sent a ee 6. Oops! (vi) delight 7. Hey! (vii) alarm Now, create sentences using any five expressions from Column 1. Let us listen I You will listen to five speakers speak about a magical power they wish for. As you listen, match statements 1-7 with speakers (i)-(v). There are two statements you do not need. (Transcript for teacher on page 152 ) 1. Power of healing ailments Ld 2. Ability to end poverty in the world Ld 3. Power to control the weather as per need [| 4. Ability to make wise business decisions [| eee eee ee 5. Power to predict one s own future clearly 6. Ability to remember information quickly 7. Power to move around without using vehicles I 2 Let us speak I Intonation is the rise and fall of the pitch of tone while speaking. -_ MYSTERY AND MAGIC The falling tone is the fall in the pitch of the voice from a high level to a low level. It is marked []. The falling tone is generally used in imperative sentences. Such sentences are used in speech for different communicative purposes to express a command or an instruction, to ask for a