West Bengal, lying in the delta of rivers, such as the Ganga, the Brahmaputra, and the Meghna. The name is derived from sundari trees that are plentiful in the area. The area is also populated by an extensive range of flora and fauna, including many bird species, the majestic Bengal tiger, and other threatened species, such as the estuarine crocodile and the Indian python. 7. THE INVISIBLE CHANDIPUR BEACH, ODISHA Have you_ seen __ things disappearing in front of your eyes? Well, such things happen at times, when we keep things at some place, and just forget where we have kept them. But, what if there s a sea that disappears? This happens in Odisha. It is a beach in the Balasore district where one can witness the sea disappearing mysteriously the Chandipur Beach which is known for its unique feature of playing hide-and-seek with its visitors. The sea can actually be witnessed disappearing and reappearing. This is because the sea water moves. It retreats by 2-5 km during ebb tide, the duration between the high tide and low tide, and comes back to the shore at the time of high tide. This unusual natural phenomenon keeps on happening estuarine: living in an estuary (an area where a freshwater river meets the ocean) retreats: goes backwards ebb tide: period of time when water flows away from the shore POORVI daily, where one can actually see the sea, and then watch it \ - disappear in front of their eyes! e 7 These awe-inspiring natural wonders of India highlight the mystique: mystique of the country s landscapes, each phenomenon mystery telling its own story of nature s artistic flair and enigmatic STUETTEV charm. They challenge our understanding of the natural world Ae puzzling and captivate our senses. They serve as a reminder of the , TIMES: extraordinary forces that shape our environment, blending interest scientific intrigue with the magic of folklore. Let us discuss I Complete the information in the table given below. One example has , been done for you. Share your answers with your classmates and | - teacher. _ = 1. The Valley of|Chamoli district, | Around 600 species of Flowers Uttarakhand exotic flowers 2. The Living Root Bridges Buldhana district, Maharashtra West Bengal . Balasore district, Let us think and reflect I Read the given extracts and answer the questions that follow. 1. India is home to some of the most mystifying natural phenomena that surprise and spark our imagination. MYSTERY AND MAGIC (i) Replace the underlined phrase with one from the extract. India is the birthplace of several rare species of flora and fauna that thrive in its diverse ecosystems. (ii) What does the phrase nature s unusual side suggest about the phenomena described? (iii) Complete the similarity by choosing the correct option. spark: imagination: : A. inspiration; creativity B. wonder; amazement C. effort; reward D. knowledge; books (iv) Identify whether the following statement is true or false. \ Some natural phenomena can surprise people. 2.