inside, Kanchan locked the door. Combine the following pairs of sentences using participles or gerunds. You may use the clues given in brackets. One example has been done for you. 1. Nitesh entered the room. He saw his friend sitting in the corner. (participle) Entering the room, Nitesh saw his friend sitting in the corner. POORVI 2. Smitha walked carelessly. She slipped on the doormat. (participle) 3. Sleep for eight hours. It is good for health. (gerund) 4, Ranjith felt happy about the result. He called his parents. (participle) 5. Father encouraged Meena. Meena joined the course. (gerund) Let us listen I You will listen to a brother and sister discuss a natural phenomenon. As you listen, mark the four true statements from 1-6 given below. (Transcript for teacher on page 153) 1. The brother was taken aback to see the posted pictures. 2.The brother admitted to not knowing about his sister s favourite picture. 3. The sister stated that the rainbow mountain was like any other mountain. 4. The brother was aware of the reason for the formation of colours on the mountain. 5. The brother was surprised to learn about the mountain being covered with snow till recently. 6. The sister understood nature s role in the beauty of the mountain. MYSTERY AND MAGIC Let us speak I Work in groups of four. Make a presentation on a place of interest in and around your region that people like to visit. You may use the following guidelines to make your presentation. Guidelines: 1. Slides 1-2: Choose any popular place of interest in your region. . 2. Slides 3-4: Mention where it is located and how to reach there. 3. Slides 5-6: Describe the attractions of the place, why it is popular and explain its historical importance, if any. 4. Slides 7-8: List out weather conditions, local food, customs, and language. 5. Slides 9-10: Suggest the best time of the year to visit and why you recommend this place. Let us write I You just read vivid descriptions of the natural wonders of our country. Write a descriptive essay for your school magazine describing anything from nature that attracted your attention. It may be an object, a place, or an event experienced by you. Remember to give a title to your essay. Use proper format and content organisation begin with a title, include introduction (one paragraph), body (two to three paragraphs), and conclusion (one paragraph). POORVI Let us explore I Man-made Wonders 1. Kallanai Dam (The Grand Anaicut) in Tamil Nadu is one of the world s oldest dams andis stillin use. The Kallanai Dam represents a significant achievement in ancient Indian hydraulic engineering. It was built by the Chola King Karikala around 150 CE. 2. Another spectacular legacy of ancient wisdom that we have is the world s first residential university at Nalanda in Bihar. Nalanda was me { . established much before any European university, providing higher me education to thousands of students. It was declared as