for some of the natural phenomena. What impact does it have on the readers? 5. Which of these unusual phenomena did you find the most interesting and why? ' wae D> ~ 7 @ g " Let us learn I Fill in the blanks with the correct expressions from the text given in the box below. ; came into existence to no end in full glory . _ in disbelief tonameafew age-old problem 1. Ihave read many stories 2. Do you know when this little town ? 3. His hard work has helped him 4. There are no simple solutions to the of traffic jams. MYSTERY AND MAGIC 5. He opened the ancient wooden box and stared at the treasure 6. The garden is in spring with lots of beautiful flowers in bloom. II Select the correct synonyms from the box given below that match the list of words in 1-5. You may refer to a thesaurus. colossal exotic serene enigmatic spectacular 1. mysterious, puzzling, baffling 2. mighty, gigantic, huge I 3. breath-taking, stunning, awe-inspiring ws, 4. peaceful, calm, tranquil i 5. unusual, peculiar, foreign III The expressions hide-and-seek and flora and fauna are used in the text. These are called binomials a pair of fixed words joined by and or or . The binomials are mostly synonyms, antonyms, rhyming words, same sound words (alliterations), etc. Match the binomials in Column 1 with their meanings in Column 2. You may refer to a dictionary. VA OG, 1. odds and ends (i) put different things together to get a range of possibilities 2. on and off (ii) complete part of or belong to 3. mix and match (iii) choose only the best (things, people, etc.) 4. all or nothing (iv) at some time in the future 5. part and parcel (v) sometimes, occasionally 6. pick and choose | (vi) increase or develop very quickly 7. sooner or later (vii) small, unimportant things 8. leaps and (viii) something to be done completely or not at bounds all Use the binomials given in Column 1 in sentences of your own. POORVI IV Study the highlighted words in the following sentences from the text. The living root bridges are one of Meghalaya s most beautiful... . * ...creating a striking visual contrast against the surrounding rugged terrain. i In the given sentences, the highlighted words living , striking , and rugged are examples of verbs used as adjectives. Such verbs are called participles. Participles are verb forms that can function as adjectives, and they come in two types: present participles ( living and striking ) usually ending in -ing, and past participles ( rugged ) usually ending in -ed, -d, -t, -en, or n. (though irregular verbs may vary) Present participles are used to describe ongoing or continuous actions. For example, People have seen these lights moving quickly in random directions but often hanging out in one spot for a while before fading. . : Past participles usually describe actions that have already been