scribbling in a notebook, doing his accounts. Suraj sat at an open window staring out at the darkness. His father was going to Delhi on a business trip and had decided to take the boy along. ( I don t know where he gets to, most of the time, he d complained. I think it s time he learnt something about my business. ) The night mail rushed through the forest with its hundreds of passengers. The carriage wheels beat out a steady rhythm on the rails. Tiny flickering lights came and went, as they passed flickering: : : ; burning small villages on the fringe of the jungle. unsteadily Suraj heard the rumble as the train passed over a small bridge. fringe: edge It was too dark to see the hut near the cutting, but he knew they must be approaching the tunnel. He strained his eyes looking out into the night; and then, just as the engine let out shrill: sharp a shrill whistle, Suraj saw the lamp. sound He couldn t see Sunder Singh, but he saw the lamp, and he knew that his friend was out there. The train went into the tunnel and out again; it left the jungle < behind and thundered across the endless plains. Suraj stared out at the darkness, thinking of the lonely cutting in the forest and the watchman with the lamp, who would always remain a firefly for those travelling thousands as he lit up the darkness for steam engines and leopards. RuskIN BonpD N a | Unit 4.indd 148 07-Mar-25 1:52:18 PM TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE Let us discuss 1. Sunder Singh knew that the leopard was in the tunnel because 2. Why do you think Suraj was unable to do any shouting in the tunnel in the beginning? (i) He was afraid of the leopard. (ii) He didn t want to disturb the leopard. (iii) He was trying to listen for the leopard. (iv) He didn t really believe Sunder Singh. 3. What made the leopard disappear into the darkness? 4. How did Suraj know Sunder Singh was at the tunnel? 5. Why did Suraj s father take him along to Delhi? Let us think and reflect I Read the following lines and answer the questions that follow. 1. Suraj had to turn and look back at the opening to reassure himself that there was still daylight outside. Ahead of him, the tunnel s other opening was just a small round circle of light. The tunnel was still full of smoke from the train, but it would be several hours before another train came through. Till then, the cutting belonged to the jungle again. Suraj didn t stop, because there was nothing to do in the tunnel and nothing to see. He had simply wanted to walk through, so that he would know what the inside of a tunnel was really like. (i) Write whether the following statement is true or false. Suraj looked back at the opening