to drive it out? asked Suraj, beginning to share the watchman s concern. Not this leopard. It knows me well. We have seen each other many times. It has a weakness for goats and stray dogs, but it will not harm us. Even so, I ll take my axe with me. You stay here, Suraj. No, m coming with you. It will be better than sitting here alone in the dark! All right, but stay close behind me. And remember, there is nothing to fear. | Unit 4.indd 146 07-Mar-25 1:52:14 PM Unit 4.indd 147 Raising his lamp, Sunder Singh advanced into the tunnel, shouting at the top of his voice to try and scare away the animal. Suraj followed close behind, but he found he was unable to do any shouting. His throat was quite dry. They had gone about twenty paces into the tunnel when the light from the lamp fell upon the leopard. It was crouching between the tracks, only five metres away from them. It was not a very big leopard, but it looked lithe and sinewy. Baring its teeth and snarling, it went down on its belly, tail twitching. Suraj and Sunder Singh both shouted together. Their voices rang through the tunnel. And the leopard, uncertain as to how many terrifying humans were there in the tunnel with him, turned swiftly and disappeared into the darkness. To make sure that it had gone, Sunder Singh and Suraj walked the length of the tunnel. When they returned to the entrance, the rails were beginning to hum. They knew the train was coming. Suraj put his hand to one of the rails and felt its tremor. He heard the distant rumble of the train. And then the engine came round the bend, hissing at them, scattering sparks into the darkness, defying the jungle as it roared through the steep TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE lithe: thin, graceful sinewy: lean and muscular snarling: growling twitching: a short, sudden movement defying: opposing \ \ VN 07-Mar\ 25 1:52:17 PM Poorvi sides of the cutting. It charged straight at the tunnel, and into it, thundering past Suraj like the beautiful dragon of his dreams. she gevnid when it had gone, the silence returned and the forest mA seemed to breathe, to live again. Only the rails still trembled with the passing of the train. They trembled again to the passing of the same train, almost a week later, when Suraj and his father were both travelling in it. Suraj s father was scribbling in a notebook, doing his accounts. Suraj sat at an open window staring out at the darkness. His father was going to Delhi on a business trip and had decided to take the boy along. ( I don t know where he gets to, most of the time, he d complained. I think it s time he learnt something about my business. ) The night mail rushed through the forest with its hundreds of passengers. The carriage wheels beat