autobiography inspires readers around the world. j # ts Unit 4.indd 169 (si 1:52:30 PM VW Poorvi & | Unit 4.indd 170 a Let us think and reflect I Read the extract given below and answer the questions that follow. Bachendri Pal instilled confidence in Arunima and said, My child, you decided to climb Mount Everest in these situations with a prosthetic leg you have conquered the Everest within you; the world will realise it later. On 21 May 2013, after 52 exhausting days, Arunima Sinha reached the summit of Mount Everest. Standing at the top of the world, she felt a surge of emotions pride, relief} and an overwhelming sense of achievement. 1. Complete the sentence with a suitable reason. Bachendri Pal said that Arunima had conquered the Everest within her because 2. How might Arunima have felt after what Bachendri Pal told her? 3. Choose a phrase from the extract which shows that reaching the summit of Mount Everest was tiring. 4. Select the correct option to complete the sentence. After her success when Arunima felt an overwhelming sense of achievement , she would have most likely said, (i) Iam confident of my abilities (ii) I will accomplish this soon (iii) Iam excited to begin this climb (iv) I finally realised my dream II Answer the following questions. 1. What did Arunima do in order to fulfill her ambition of conquering Mount Everest? 2. Arunima is a beacon of hope and resilience. Support this statement with evidence from the text. 3. Arunima s autobiography is titled Born Again on the Mountain: A Story of Losing Everything and Finding It Back. Why do you think this title is appropriate? 4 4. Arunima says, Failure is when we don t have goals = worthy enough. What would be the most likely impact of this statement on readers? 07-Mar-25 1:52:32 PM Unit 4.indd 171 TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE I Read the underlined phrases in sentences (i)-(v) and match them with their appropriate meanings given in the box below. 1. genuine, sincere efforts 2. strength of mind 3. periods of time filled with tiring and demanding activities 4, an incident or experience that significantly changes a person s life 5. a source of inspiration or encouragement (i) Nisha was relieved when the final match was over after several exhausting days of practice. (ii) Despite several failures, her heartfelt attempts to learn the guitar showed her determination and passion for music. (iii) Moving to a new city was a life-altering event for Jagan, as it gave him the chance to make new friends and try different activities. (iv) Competing in the marathon requires not just physical strength but also mental fortitude to stay focused and finish the race. (v) The lighthouse served as a beacon of hope for the sailors lost at sea. II Complete the following table by filling in the gaps with correct parts of speech mentioned. An example has been done for you. Nouns Adjectives _- Verbs (present) Adverbs determination |