long hot day, but now the earth was cooling,and gqownwards a light breeze was moving through the trees. It carried with it the scent of mango blossoms, the promise of rain. Sunder Singh was waiting for Suraj. He had watered his small garden, and the flowers looked cool and fresh. A kettle was boiling on a small oil stove. seven sisters: birds, also Iam making tea, he said. There is nothing like a glass of hot called jungle tea while waiting for a train. babblers and found in groups of six to eight They drank their tea, listening to the sharp notes of the tailorbird and the noisy chatter of the seven sisters. Unit 4.indd 145 f Poorvi As the brief twilight faded, most of the birds fell silent. Sunder Singh lit his oil lamp and said it was time for him to inspect the tunnel. He moved off towards the tunnel, while Suraj sat on the cot, sipping his tea. In the dark, the trees seemed to move closer to him. And the nightlife of the forest was conveyed on the breeze the sharp call of a barking deer, the cry of a fox, quaint: unusual the quaint tonk-tonk of a nightjar. There were some sounds ithe a that Suraj didn t recognise sounds that came from the trees, nocturnal bird creakings and whisperings, as though the trees were coming to withashortbill life, stretching their limbs in the dark, shifting a little, flexing flexing: bending their fingers. trimming: Sunder Singh stood inside the tunnel, trimming his lamp. (here) adjusting The night sounds were familiar to him and he did not give the wick of the them much thought; but something else a padded footfall, a lamp rustle of dry leaves made him stand still for a few seconds, peering into the darkness. Then, humming softly to himself, he returned to where Suraj was waiting. Ten minutes remained for the night mail to arrive. As Sunder Singh sat down on the cot beside Suraj, anew sound reached both of them quite distinctly a rhythmic sawing sound, as if someone cutting through the branch of a tree. What s that? whispered Suraj. Tt s the leopard, said Sunder Singh. I think it s in the tunnel. The train will soon be here, said Suraj. Yes, my friend. And if we don t drive the leopard out of the tunnel, it will be run over and killed. I can t let that happen. But won t it attack us if we try to drive it out? asked Suraj, beginning to share the watchman s concern. Not this leopard. It knows me well. We have seen each other many times. It has a weakness for goats and stray dogs, but it will not harm us. Even so, I ll take my axe with me. You stay here, Suraj. No, m coming with you. It will be better than sitting here alone in the dark! All right, but stay close behind me. And remember,