140 07-Mar-25 1:52:08 PM al but presently a sound like distant thunder issued from the tunnel, and he knew the train was coming through. y 4 ae A second or two later, the steam engine shot out of the tunnel, snorting and puffing like some green, black, and gold dragon, some beautiful monster out of Suraj s dreams. Showering sparks left and right, it roared a challenge to the jungle. Instinctively, Suraj stepped back a few paces. Waves of hot steam struck him in the face. Even the trees seemed to flinch from the noise and heat. And then the train had gone, leaving only a plume of smoke to drift lazily over the tall shisham trees. The jungle was still again. No one moved. Suraj turned from his contemplation of the drifting smoke and began walking along the embankment towards the tunnel. The tunnel grew darker as he walked further into it. When he had gone about twenty yards, it became pitch dark. Suraj had to turn and look back at the opening to reassure himself that there was still daylight outside. Ahead of him, the tunnel s other opening was just a small round circle of light. The tunnel was still full of smoke from the train, but it would be several hours before another train came through. Till then, the cutting belonged to the jungle again. TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE instinctively: without thought or plan flinch: make a quick movement plume of smoke: long, thin cloud of smoke shisham: a tree found in northern parts of India contemplation: deep thought reassure: comfort, calm 141 < Hg # ts Ni 1:52:10 PM Poorvi scuttled: ran Suraj didn t stop, because there was nothing to do in the tunnel hurriedly and nothing to see. He had simply wanted to walk through, so that he would know what the inside of a tunnel was really need like. The walls were damp and sticky. A bat flew past. A lizard bright Tak scuttled between the lines. swishing: Coming straight from the darkness into the light, Suraj was moving with a dazzled by the sudden glare and put a hand up to shade his brushing sound eyes. He looked up at the tree-covered hillside and thought he saw something moving between the trees. It was just a flash of orange and gold, and a long swishing tail. It was there between the trees for a second or two, and then it was gone. About fifteen metres from the entrance to the tunnel stood the watchman s hut. Marigolds grew in front of the hut, and at the back there was a small vegetable patch. It was the watchman s duty to inspect the tunnel and keep it clear of obstacles. Every day, before the train came through, he would walk the length of the tunnel. If all was well, he would return to his hut and take a nap. If something was wrong, ohstacles: he would walk back up the line and wave