ADVE . Trav, Let us listen (refer to page 162) 1. Listen to this announcement made in the morning assembly about a school trip to the National Science Centre. As you listen, circle the words that are not correct. Good morning students! I have some very exciting news to share with you all. The muchawaited educational trip to the National Science Centre will be held on 16 September, that is in two weeks! As you know this would be a fantastic opportunity to explore and learn more about the world around us. We will be starting from school at 8.00 in the morning and return by 5.30 in the evening. All of you must bein proper school uniform. Don t forget to carry your identity cards. Light refreshments will be provided at the museum. But do carry a water bottle and a packed lunch. You are not permitted to wear any jewellery or carry mobile phones. You may carry a notebook and a pen to make notes. Interested students must bring a permission slip signed by your parent and submit them to their class teachers by 10 September. It is going to be a fun trip so don t miss out. If you have any more questions, please contact Mr. Mukherjee, the excursion in-charge. 2. Now, listen to the announcement again and rectify the sentences. Let us listen (refer to page 173) 2 @ You will listen to five speakers share their opinion about adventure sports. As you listen match the statements 1-8 with the speakers (i)-(v). There are three extra statements that you do not need. SPEAKER (i): As a parent, I fear the risks involved, especially with activities like rock climbing or paragliding. Unit 4.indd 177 I m quite worried about the safety risks ofadventure sports. It s important to consider these risks before letting children participate. SPEAKER (ii): Adventure sports are thrilling! All my friends agree; it is amazing. It s not just about fun; it s about pushing your limits and experiencing something new. I think it s worth trying, of course, with a trainer. SPEAKER (ili): As organisers of adventure camps, we take safety very seriously. Our team ensures all equipment is regularly checked and maintained. Participants are given thorough training and are always supervised by professionals. We focus on minimising risks while still providing an exciting experience. SPEAKER (iv): At our school, we organise adventure camps with activities like trekking and zip-lining. However, we stick to basic sports that are safe and manageable for students. We always prioritise safety, ensuring that all necessary precautions and measures are in place. Being careful is what we promote. SPEAKER (v): In my opinion, sports should be about fitness and enjoyment, like track and field or swimming. Why risk your life for a fleeting moment of thrill just for a feeling of adventure? Traditional sports are safer and just as fulfilling! 07-Mar-25 1:52:36 PM