May 2013, after 52 exhausting days, Arunima Sinha reached the summit of Mount Everest. Standing at the top of the world, she felt a surge of emotions pride, relief, and an overwhelming sense of achievement. She displayed the Indian flag at the summit and left behind a photograph of her idol, Swami Vivekananda, whose teachings had inspired her throughout her journey. Arunima s feat did not end with Everest. By July 2016, she had summited seven peaks in Europe, Africa, Australia, South America, North America, and of course, Mount Everest in Asia. In January 2019, she climbed the seventh peak on Antarctica and became world s first female amputee to climb Mount Vinson. Her goal to complete the Seven Summits was achieved. Throughout her journey, Arunima has faced numerous challenges and setbacks. Yet, her story is not just about physical endurance but a also about mental = . p 07-Mar-25 1:52:29 PM Asia T Ap . RAVEL AND ADVENTURE South America North America Everest ; Aconcagua Africa . Europe Denali Antarctica Kilimanjaro Elbrus Australia Vinson Kosciuszko fortitude and the power of a positive mind set. Her message is itude:_ simple yet profound: Never give up and work hard. Always rage over a remember your goal and work on it. long period Arunima s autobiography, Born Again on the Mountain: A Story oat of Losing Everything and Finding It Backrecordsher incredible * difficult journey to the top of the world. It is a story of triumph over vcctaments adversity, a testament to the human spirit s capacity to rise aon , above the most challenging circumstances. conferred: She was conferred with the honorary doctorate by the _ givenan official University of Strathclyde, Glasgow, UK. In her words, Failure _ title or honour is not when we fall short of achieving our goals. It is when we don t have goals worthy enough. Never forget your goal, BORN AG AIN respect it, work hard, and youwillbethe winner. Dr.Arunima 9 Sinha has not only conquered mountains but has also won [ie MOUNTAIN people s hearts the world over, inspiring them to reach their i own summits. Let us discuss I Read the statements given below and explain each statement in your words. 1. Arunima Sinha is considered a beacon of hope and resilience. 2. Arunima decided to climb Mount Everest despite losing her leg. 3. Bachendri Pal s guidance was crucial in Arunima s journey to the summit of Mount Everest. 4. Arunima s achievements go beyond just physical endurance. 5. Arunima s autobiography inspires readers around the world. j # ts Unit 4.indd 169 (si 1:52:30 PM VW Poorvi & | Unit 4.indd 170 a Let us think and reflect I Read the extract given below and answer the questions that follow. Bachendri Pal instilled confidence in Arunima and said, My child, you decided to climb Mount Everest in these situations with a prosthetic leg you have conquered the Everest within you; the world will realise it later. On 21 May 2013,