. What are the activities you would like to do with your friends? 5. How much time will it take to complete your adventure trip? Let us read The railroad track is miles away, And the day is loud with voices speaking, Yet there isn t a train goes by all day But I hear its whistle shrieking. All night there isn t a train goes by, Though the night is still for sleep and dreaming, But I see its cinders red on the sky, And hear its engine steaming. My heart is warm with the friends I make, And better friends I ll not be knowing; Yet there isn t a train I wouldn t take, No matter where it s going. Epna St. VINCENT MILLAY Unit 4indd 158) Unit 4.indd 159 TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE Let us discuss I The main ideas of each stanza of the poem are given below. Write the number of the stanza against the matching main idea. 1. At night, the speaker imagines the train and hears its engine in the quiet. 2. The speaker feels a strong desire to take any train, no matter where it goes. 3. The speaker hears the train whistle during the day, even though the train is far away. II Read the poem and underline the rhyming words in each stanza. Write the rhyming words from each stanza. An example has been done for you. 1. Stanza (i): away-day; 2. Stanza (ii): 3. Stanza (iii): III Identify the rhyme scheme of the poem from the options given below. 1. AABB 2. ABCA 3. ABAB 4, ABBC IV Identify the word in the poem that personifies the whistle of the train. V Tone refers to the attitude the poet has about the poem. Which of these words can be used to describe the poet s tone in this poem? ' serious excited curious worried thoughtful ' content enthusiastic critical joyful VI Select the words that tell us what the train symbolises for the poet. 1. education 2. adventure 3. comfort 4. opportunities VII Complete the following by choosing the correct option from those given in brackets. The poet repeats the line, ...there isn t a train goes by, in all three stanzas to . (highlight the speaker s fascination with the train/suggest that the area has many trains passing through) 07-Mar;25 1:52:24 PM Poorvi VIII The poem contrasts the busy day with the stillness of the night. What is the common factor in these? IX Imagery is a literary device that uses descriptive language to create mental pictures and appeal to the reader s senses (sight, sound, smell, taste and touch). It makes the descriptions more relatable. Select the phrases from the poem that are examples of imagery. One example is given: day is loud. Let us think and reflect I Read the extract given below and answer the questions that follow. 1. My heart is warm with the friends I make, And better friends I'll not be knowing...