that he has lent his tunnel to the Government? 2. According to Sunder Singh, It is safer in the forest than in the town . What example does Sunder Singh give to support his opinion? What does this tell us about him? 3. Sunder Singh has become part of the jungle life. Support the view with a suitable reason. a | Unit 4.indd 150 07-Mar-25 1:52:21 PM Unit 4.indd 151 TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE 4. Sunder Singh and Suraj form an_ unlikely friendship. What draws them together? 5. Why is Sunder Singh referred to as a firefly ? 6. Do you think Suraj is an adventure-loving boy? Give reasons. > Let us learn I Complete the following sentences using the suitable phrases from the text given in the box below. = j= He He HK- Ke HK HK MK Ke eK eK eK Me eK Ke Ke eK eK eK eK eK eK Ke eK eK eK eK eK eK eK eK eK ee eK eK eK eK eK eK eK eK He 1. We could hear the of the train long before it came into view at the station. 2. The street was completely dark but the little boy walked to his house guided by the from the houses. 3. The from the carpenter s workshop grew louder every hour. 4. From the balcony, she watched the from her neighbour s chimney float across the backyard. II The text has many sound words . Some of these words are given in Column 1 and their meanings are given in Column 2. Match the words with their meanings. You can use a Os YPIZ Columns) _fetumn2_) 1. creaking (i) making a noise like a long s sound ( 2. chatter (ii) making a long low sound when a \ xO door or wooden object moves or xX is moved 3. hissing (iii) repeated series of short high sounds made by birds or monkeys 4. rust (iv) blowing with short, quick blasts, as the wind 5. puffing (v) asoft low, dry sound made by the movement of things such as ~ eS leaves, paper, etc. WN V4 fy Now, complete the sentences given below by filling in the blanks with the correct form of the sound words given in Column 1. 1. The steam engine reached the station black smoke into the sky. 2. Suddenly the snake raised its hood and made a noise. 3. When the wind blew, I heard the of the wooden roof. 4. He heard a of leaves behind him when he was walking in the woods. 5. Iget disturbed by the continuous of the monkeys in the neighbourhood. II Read what the watchman Sunder Singh did regularly at the tunnel as part of his duty. Notice the use of would . Every day, before the train came through, he would walk the length of the tunnel. If all was well, he would return to his hut and take a nap. If something was wrong, he would walk