Required -l_Le--4t, oy . snow- covered oo. snow skiing . skis, ski suit, hills Spring, Autumn, trekkin a Winter iw | ep scuba divin SCTILDE. GUE & mask, fins, II Prepare an information booklet with fact sheets of five Indian mountaineers. Include the following information in the fact sheet. pas 1. name (and photograph, if available) mu 2. place of birth 5. training received 3. profession 6. sport known for (if any) 4. accomplishments awards or honours Unit 4.indd 175 TRANSCRIPTS , Towne Let us listen (refer to page 153) A famous museum in your town is organising a treasure hunt in the museum premises. You and your friends decide to participate in it. Upon arrival, you find that there are many other teams. Each team is given an audio guide (recorded information) and a map to the museum. 1. Look at the map given below. Try and predict what each of the rooms might be. 2. Listen to the audio recording and as you listen, mark your map with the route to take to find the treasure. To help you, the names of a few rooms in the museum are given below. Now listen to the audio and mark the various rooms. Welcome to the City Museum. We start our tour at the entrance hall. Here you will find the information booth and a display devoted to the history of this museum. To the right of the Entrance Hall you will find the (i) library. On the left is the museum shop. Go straight from the Entrance Hall till you reach the (ii) Art Gallery. The gallery is famous for its collection of rare paintings from various parts of India. There are three doors that lead out of the Art Gallery. The first door on the left leads to the Decorative Art Gallery, where you will find items like jewellery, carvings, and textiles from Medieval India. The next door is temporarily closed due to renovation work. The third door on the right leads to the (iii) Weapons Room, where you will find an extensive collection of Indian weapons including bows, swords, shields, and helmets. From the weapons room take a left turn. You will find the world-famous (iv) Musical Instruments Section, where you can find musical instruments from every country in the world. The second room to the left in this gallery will take you to the (v) Auditorium. Hidden here is your treasure! All the best to all. May the best team win! 07-Mar-25 1:52:35 PM TRAVEL AND ADVE . Trav, Let us listen (refer to page 162) 1. Listen to this announcement made in the morning assembly about a school trip to the National Science Centre. As you listen, circle the words that are not correct. Good morning students! I have some very exciting news to share with you all. The muchawaited educational trip to the National Science Centre will be held on 16 September, that is in two weeks! As you know this would be a