behind him when he was walking in the woods. 5. Iget disturbed by the continuous of the monkeys in the neighbourhood. II Read what the watchman Sunder Singh did regularly at the tunnel as part of his duty. Notice the use of would . Every day, before the train came through, he would walk the length of the tunnel. If all was well, he would return to his hut and take a nap. If something was wrong, he would walk back up the line and wave a red flag LF and the engine driver would slow down. At night, the watchman lit an oil lamp and made a similar inspection of the tunnel. 1. Why is the word would used here? (i) to make a polite request (ii) to express a desire (iii) to talk about a habit in the past In these sentences, the word would is used to speak about a past habit. Would isused in these sentences to describe repeated activities for rio time in the past. We call them habitual or routine actions ape inthe past . =_. Would and used to both describe something that happened regularly in the past. However, used to indicates a past action that doesn t happen any longer. I used to paint when I was in Grade 4. Riya used to eat a lot of junk food, but she stopped last year. 2. Complete the sentences using the verb in brackets with the correct form of used to or would . An example has been done for you. A 07-Mar-25 1:52:22 PM TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE When I was a child we used to live in a village near a forest. Back then, we (i) (grow) vegetables in our back garden. Every day we (ii) (get up) early and go for a walk. The weather in summer (iii) (be) really nice. There was a lake near the house and we (iv) (go) there every Sunday for a picnic. Winters (v) (be) rather cold. In the evenings, my father (vi) __ (tell) us incredible stories and we (vii) (listen) with admiration. IV We use punctuation marks to make our writing clear. You already know how to use full stops and commas. Let us look at three more punctuation marks brackets, semicolon, and colon. Colon (:) is used to introduce a list or an explanation. You need the following ingredients to make Ela Ada: ghee, coconut, jaggery, and rice flour. He has one goal: to win the championship. Semicolon (;) is used to connect two clauses which are closely related without a conjunction. She loves reading; he prefers watching movies. Suraj followed close behind; but he found he was unable to do any shouting. Now, use semicolons and colons to punctuate the following paragraph. We explored the busy by-lanes of Charminar, the heart of Hyderabad it was an exciting day. We wanted to do a few things buy bangles, taste biryani, and purchase pearl earrings, which are special to this area. As we