faced a life-altering event. It challenged her in ways she could never have imagined. As she lay in the hospital bed with one leg amputated, Arunima made a vow that many would deem impossible: not only to walk again with a prosthetic leg but to scale Mount Everest. In 2013, she did just that, becoming the first Indian female amputee to achieve this feat. Hence, in 2015, she was awarded the Padma Shri, the fourth highest civilian award in India. She was also awarded the Tenzing Norgay National Adventure Award and National Award for Best Female Mountaineer. Arunima hails from Ambedkar Nagar, a small district in Uttar Pradesh. Her father was an army engineer, and her mother worked as a health supervisor. Sports were a significant part of Arunima s life, with her family having a natural inclination towards athletics. After completing her law degree following her post-graduation, Arunima decided to pursue a job in the paramilitary forces, which would allow her to continue her passion for sports while having a regular income. On the fateful night of 11 April 2011, she met with a train accident. The hours that followed were harrowing. She never imagined she would survive that night, but survive she did, miraculously, displaying an extraordinary will to live. Arunima received a prosthetic leg and underwent physiotherapy. It was during this period that she made a profound decision. Inspired by an article about Mount Everest, she resolved to conquer the highest peak in the world. To pursue her ambition, Arunima Sinha completed a basic mountaineering course at the Nehru Institute of Mountaineering in Uttarkashi, followed by eighteen months of rigorous training. Arunima approached Bachendri Pal, the TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE Courtesy: Hindustan Times beacon: source of inspiration resilience: ability to recover quickly from a difficulty amputated: cut off a part of the body (here the leg) prosthetic leg: an artificial leg that helps people to move around easily feat: achievement harrowing: extremely disturbing and painful rigorous: severe Unit 4.indd 168 Poorvi a (1A | 2 NEHRU INSTITUTE oF = = (MOUNTAINEERING 3 _< x endeavour: an attempt to do something surge: a sudden and great increase endurance: (here) ability to continue doing something difficult for a long time first Indian woman to summit Everest, to guide her in the endeavour. Bachendri Pal instilled confidence in Arunima and said, My child, you decided to climb Mount Everest in these situations with a prosthetic leg you have conquered the Everest within you; the world will realise it later. On 21 May 2013, after 52 exhausting days, Arunima Sinha reached the summit of Mount Everest. Standing at the top of the world, she felt a surge of emotions pride, relief, and an overwhelming sense of achievement. She displayed the Indian flag at the summit and left behind a photograph of her idol, Swami Vivekananda, whose teachings had inspired her throughout her journey. Arunima s feat did not end with Everest. By July 2016, she had summited seven peaks in Europe, Africa,