device that uses descriptive language to create mental pictures and appeal to the reader s senses (sight, sound, smell, taste and touch). It makes the descriptions more relatable. Select the phrases from the poem that are examples of imagery. One example is given: day is loud. Let us think and reflect I Read the extract given below and answer the questions that follow. 1. My heart is warm with the friends I make, And better friends I'll not be knowing... (i) Choose the suitable option to complete the following. The line My heart is warm refers toa heart thatis__. A. filled with worries B. full of love C. feeling upset D. experiencing anger (ii) What does the speaker say about her current friends? (iii) What does the line better friends Pll not be knowing suggest about the speaker s feelings toward their current friends? (iv) Complete the following suitably. The tone of the speaker in these lines is _ . (grateful/content) II Answer the following questions. 1. What does the phrase cinders red on the sky tell us about the train at night? 2. What is the significance of the repeated references to the train s whistle? 3. What does the line no matter where it s going reveal about the speaker s attitude towards travel? 4. Do you think the poet actually sees and hears the train? Why or why not? | Unit 4.indd 160 N a 07-Mar-25 1:52:25 PM TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE Let us learn I Read the expressions from the poem given in Column 1 and match them with what they indicate in Column 2. . miles away (i) The speaker s affection for their friends . cinders red (ii) The fast and powerful movement of the train . heart is warm (iii) The busy and noisy atmosphere during the day . day is loud (iv) The glow of the train s sparks lighting up the night sky . engine steaming (v) The distance of the train from t speaker Now, use the expressions in Column 1 to fill in the following blanks correctly. 1. After meeting her old friend, her with the joy of rekindled memories. 2. As I arrived at the railway station I could hear the 3. The marketplace is bustling, and the with the chatter of shoppers and vendors. 4. The bonfire glowed brightly, throwing into the dark night sky. 5. The sound of a train could still be heard as the evening grew quiet. II The poet uses the word shrieking to tell us about the sound of the train s whistle. There are other words that tell us about different types of related sounds. Read the meanings of such words in Column 1 and match them with the words in Column 2. You may use a dictionary. Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher. 1. shouting loudly, ofteninanger (i) wailing or excitement 2. crying out in fear or excitement (ii) hollering Unit 4.indd 161 Poorvi 3. crying loudly with