full of smoke from the train, but it would be several hours before another train came through. Till then, the cutting belonged to the jungle again. Suraj didn t stop, because there was nothing to do in the tunnel and nothing to see. He had simply wanted to walk through, so that he would know what the inside of a tunnel was really like. (i) Write whether the following statement is true or false. Suraj looked back at the opening of the tunnel to check if the train was coming. (ii) Choose the correct option to complete the sentence given below. Suraj did not stop anywhere in the tunnel because _ A. there was nothing to see in the tunnel B. the tunnel was damp and sticky C. he was in a hurry to get out of the tunnel D. it was time for another train to come Unit 4.indd 149 Poorvi (iii) What does the sentence Till then, the cutting belonged to the jungle again mean? (iv) Suraj wanted to know the inside of the tunnel. What character trait of Suraj is highlighted here? 2. The train will soon be here, said Suraj. Yes, my friend. And if we don t drive the leopard out of the tunnel, it will be run over and killed. I can t let that happen. But won't it attack us if we try to drive it out? asked Suraj, beginning to share the watchman s concern. Not this leopard. It knows me well. We have seen each other many times. It has a weakness for goats and stray dogs, but it will not harm us. Even so, I'll take my axe with me. You stay here, Suraj. (i) What was the watchman s concern? (ii) Complete the sentence with a suitable reason. Sunder Singh was sure that the leopard in the tunnel would not attack him and Suraj because (iii) Select the sentences that are true from those given below. A. Suraj wants to see the leopards in the jungle. B. Suraj is concerned about Sunder Singh s safety. C. The leopard in the tunnel attacks goats and stray dogs. D. Sunder Singh wants to protect Suraj. E. Sunder Singh knows all about the animals in the jungle. (iv) Choose the correct option to complete the sentence. Sunder Singh decides to take his axe with him. This tells us that he was A. violent B. cautious C. bold D. afraid II Answer the following questions. 1. What does Sunder Singh convey by saying that he has lent his tunnel to the Government? 2. According to Sunder Singh, It is safer in the forest than in the town . What example does Sunder Singh give to support his opinion? What does this tell us about him? 3. Sunder Singh has become part of the jungle life. Support the view with a suitable reason. a | Unit 4.indd 150 07-Mar-25 1:52:21 PM Unit 4.indd 151 TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE 4. Sunder Singh and Suraj form an_