which is pronounced with a /s/ sound. The letter c has two sounds. It can be pronounced as a /k/ or /s/ sound. But which is right depends on the next letters of the words. * Letter c produces /s/ sound if it is followed by the letters e , i , A or y . For example, city ( c is followed by i ). This /s/ sound is known as the soft c sound. * Letter c produces /k/ sound if it is followed by the letters a , o , or uw or aconsonant at the end of the word. For example, cat ( c is followed by a ). This /k/ sound is known as the hard c sound. That is why cinders is pronounced with a /s/ sound. The letter c is followed by 7! Now, work in pairs. Pronounce the given words aloud. Keep the rules of the soft and hard c pronunciation in mind. cell cable race cake decide receive | concert circle bicycle echo uncle Let us write Poorvi Day Bright, sunny Dancing, playing, running = _ Out comes the sun, down goes the sun Resting, listening, dreaming Quiet, peaceful Night In this example we see how two different ideas day and night are connected through the poem. Let usnow write a diamante poem that connects reading and adventure . are er rs OY linking your topics three -ing words about adventure Share your poem with your classmates and the teacher. II We come across many interesting characters while travelling. They become interesting because of their actions, their behaviour, and manner of speaking. Describe one such character that you met. Follow these steps. 1. Choose the character. 2. Create a first draft of your description including the following details. (i) What is the name of the character? (ii) What does the character look like? (iii) What does the character do? 164 gr Unit 4.indd 164 07-Mar-25 1:52:26 PM TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE (iv) What kind of person is she or he? (v) Include any line or incident from the text that you like the most. 3. Check your description for any spelling mistakes or errors. 4. Show your classmates your work and ask for suggestions. 5. Rewrite your description including all the changes and suggestions for improvement. Let us explore I The Mountain Railways of India are outstanding examples of hill railways and they are designated as a UNESCO World Heritage Site under the name Mountain Railways of India. These three railways are the Darjeeling Himalayan Railway, the Nilgiri Mountain Railway, and the Kalka-Shimla Railway. The Matheran Hill Railway and Kangra Valley Railway are on the tentative list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites. rs They are still fully operational as living examples of the ingenious engineering enterprise of the late nineteenth and early twentieth \ centuries. The owner of the three properties is the Railway Ministry of ~ the Indian Government. N V7 on In groups of four, find out more about these