it gave him the chance to make new friends and try different activities. (iv) Competing in the marathon requires not just physical strength but also mental fortitude to stay focused and finish the race. (v) The lighthouse served as a beacon of hope for the sailors lost at sea. II Complete the following table by filling in the gaps with correct parts of speech mentioned. An example has been done for you. Nouns Adjectives _- Verbs (present) Adverbs determination | determined determine determinedly a relief relievedly inspiring inspire resistance resistantly success successful AFL! 07-Mary3 ? 1:52:32 PM TN Ill Study the highlighted words in the following sentences from the text. e Arunima made a vow that many would deem impossible. Her father was an army engineer. * Standing at the top of the world, she felt a surge of emotions pride, relief, and an overwhelming sense of achievement. She planted the Indian flag at the summit and left behind a photograph of her idol, Swami Vivekananda. Arunima Sinha s journey from a devastating accident to scaling the highest peak in the world stands as a beacon of hope and resilience. The highlighted words are articles. A and an are indefinite articles; the is the definite article. The choice between a and an depends on the sound that follows the article, specifically the initial sound of the word that follows. N 1. Fill in the blanks with a , an , the . Put an x where no article is required. We planned (i) adventurous trip to (ii) remote island. (iii) island was known for its beautiful landscapes and (iv) diverse wildlife. On (v) first day, we set out to explore (vi) island s dense jungle. (vii) guide led us through (viii) thick foliage and showed us (ix) hidden waterfall. In (x) evening, we gathered around (xi) campfire to share stories and enjoy (xii) meal we cooked. (xiii) experience was truly unforgettable, and we felt (xiv) connection with (xv) nature. 2. There is an error in each sentence that has been underlined. Correct the error in the following sentences. (i) We waited for a hour before the bus finally arrived. (ii) The guide insisted on an uniform jacket for the group s safety during the trek. (iii) Mount K2 is a second highest peak in the world. (iv) A Ganga is a sacred river in India, known for its cultural importance. (v) Challenges are faced with courage and determination by a brave. (vi) A North Star has guided travellers for centuries. SN J 07-Mar-25 1:52:33 PM TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE Let us listen & You will listen to five speakers share their opinion about adventure sports. As you listen match the statements 1-8 with the speakers (i)-(v). There are three extra statements that you do not need. (Transcript for the teacher on pg. 177) Let us speak In groups of four, select a role from 1-4 given below and speak about the views allotted to each. Use the prompts and vocabulary given.