tell us about the sound of the train s whistle. There are other words that tell us about different types of related sounds. Read the meanings of such words in Column 1 and match them with the words in Column 2. You may use a dictionary. Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher. 1. shouting loudly, ofteninanger (i) wailing or excitement 2. crying out in fear or excitement (ii) hollering Unit 4.indd 161 Poorvi 3. crying loudly with grief or (iii) screeching sorrow 4. making a high-pitched, piercing (iv) yelling sound 5. calling out loudly, often in a (v) whimpering casual or informal way 6. crying softly in a low, broken (vi) bawling voice 7. crying loudly and (vil) screaming uncontrollably Now, complete the following paragraph by using suitable words from Column 2. The street was filled with a variety of sounds. Ashopkeeper was1._ to attract customers, while a child nearby was 2. at his friend to wait for him. From the other side of the road, a toddler was 3. uncontrollably after dropping his ice cream, and his mother tried to calm him as he began 4. softly. In the background, someone s loud 5. voice added to the bustling noise of the busy evening. Ryo | | Let.us listen I Listen to this announcement made in the morning assembly about a school trip to the National Science Centre. As you listen, circle the information that is not correct. (Transcript for the teacher on pg. 177) 1. The trip to the National Science Centre is organised on 15 September. 2. Students will start from school at 8.00 in the morning and return by 5.00 in the evening. 3. Refreshment will not be provided during the trip. 4. Students are permitted to carry a phone, a notebook, and a pen. 5. The permission slip is to be signed by the class teacher. 6. The permission slip is to be submitted to your class teacher by 10 September. 7. Mr. Mukherjee is the Adventure Club in-charge. N a & | Unit 4.indd 162 07-Mar-25 1:52:26 PM TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE II Now, listen to the announcement again and rectify the sentences. Pa Zz x Let us speak When speaking in English, small differences in pronunciation can change the overall meaning of the words. One such difference is in the pronunciation of the consonant c . For example: cat (uses /k/ sound for c ) and city (uses the /s/ sound for c ) The poem uses the word cinders , which is pronounced with a /s/ sound. The letter c has two sounds. It can be pronounced as a /k/ or /s/ sound. But which is right depends on the next letters of the words. * Letter c produces /s/ sound if it is followed by the letters e , i , A or y . For example, city ( c is followed by i ). This /s/ sound is known as the soft c sound. * Letter c produces