SN J 07-Mar-25 1:52:33 PM TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE Let us listen & You will listen to five speakers share their opinion about adventure sports. As you listen match the statements 1-8 with the speakers (i)-(v). There are three extra statements that you do not need. (Transcript for the teacher on pg. 177) Let us speak In groups of four, select a role from 1-4 given below and speak about the views allotted to each. Use the prompts and vocabulary given. Take turns to express your opinions, agreement, and disagreement. Role-Specific Prompts 1. School Student: Talk about why you think Physical Education should be included in school activities. 2. Parent: Discuss your concerns or support for your child participating in Physical Education activities. 3. Physical Education Teacher: Share your experiences about Physical Education activities and why you think they are valuable. Unit 4.indd 173 Poorvi 4. Sports Camp Organiser: Explain how you ensure safety and why you believe sports are beneficial for participants. Prompts In my opinion... * I believe that... From my point of view... I disagree with... One reason for this is... I agree with the idea that... I disagree with the notion that... I support this perspective because... * I find it hard to agree because... Vocabulary you may use precautions unique experiences fun safe enjoyable thrilling builds confidence concern explore overcomefear participate Let us write Read the various components of a formal letter from the box given below. complimentary close receiver s address subject date introduction statement of request expression of interest salutation signature line sender s address 1. Now, read the letter given below and write the matching components. Sender s Address Date Receiver s Address School Subject: Request to join Adventure Club Madam/Sir, I am Sreelakshmi, a student of Grade 7-C. I am interested in adventure activities like trekking, hiking, rope climbing, and exploring sites of natural beauty. I would love to be a part of the Adventure Club of the school and participate in the adventure activities organised. I request you to grant me permission to join the club. Yours sincerely, Sreelakshmi 174 ge Unit 4.indd 174 07-Mar-25 1:52:34 PM TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE 2. Write a letter to the Principal of your school requesting her to organise an excursion to a nearby hill station for Grade 7 students of your school. Let us explore I Find out more information about the following adventure sports in our country and complete the table given below. _ Name Preferred Time| Equipment 14 na . of the Year Required -l_Le--4t, oy . snow- covered oo. snow skiing . skis, ski suit, hills Spring, Autumn, trekkin a Winter iw | ep scuba divin SCTILDE. GUE & mask, fins, II Prepare an information booklet with fact sheets of five Indian mountaineers. Include the following information in the fact sheet. pas 1. name (and photograph, if available) mu 2. place of birth 5. training received 3. profession 6. sport known for (if any) 4. accomplishments awards or honours Unit 4.indd 175