i ) Ww hy ie i ) j 1 Vee Nik UAE ios. THE TUNNEL : Let us do these activities before we read. srvacnos I What kind of an adventure activity would you like to be a part of ; Now, choose the option(s) that best applies to you. 1. How would you like to spend your weekends? (i) Trying new activities (ii) Reading a book | (iii) Spending time with friends (iv) Learning something new. 2. Which of these places would you prefer to explore? (i) Dense forests and clear streams (ii) Magical lands with fairies (iii) Busy cities with interesting people (iv) Quiet places to think and create 3. Which one of these activities would you prefer to do? (i) Climbing a mountain or exploring a jungle (ii) Finding a hidden treasure or discovering a secret world (iii) Solving puzzles or guessing riddles with friends (iv) Making something creative or building a model | Unit 4.indd 139 07-Mar-25 1:52:07 PM Poorvi Based on your choices, which of the following do you think applies the best to you? Discuss with your classmates. * Bold Explorer Imaginative Dreamer Energetic Planner Thoughtful Creator You may add to the list as per your choices. Let us read shimmered: shined with a light that I appears to move It was almost noon, and the jungle was very still, very silent. railway Heat waves shimmered along the railway embankment where embankment: it cut a path through the tall evergreen trees. The railway lines a stone wall were two straight black serpents disappearing into the tunnel made to carry in the hillside. the railway over . . wie . . Suraj stood near the cutting, waiting for the midday train. It low ground ; ; ; _ : was?ta station, and he wasn t catching a train. He was waiting cutting: a so that he could watch the steam engine come roaring out of narrow valley the tunnel. cut through a hill to make < He had cycled out of the town and taken the jungle path until space for a he had come to a small village. He had left the cycle there, and railway line walked over a low scrub-covered hill and down to the tunnel scrub-covered: . ; exit. covered with short trees and Now he looked up. He had heard, in the distance, the shrill bushes whistle of the engine. He couldn t see anything, because the train was approaching from the other side of the hill; | Unit 4.indd 140 07-Mar-25 1:52:08 PM al but presently a sound like distant thunder issued from the tunnel, and he knew the train was coming through. y 4 ae A second or two later, the steam engine shot out of the tunnel, snorting and puffing like some green, black, and gold dragon, some beautiful monster out of Suraj s dreams. Showering sparks left and right, it roared a challenge to the jungle. Instinctively, Suraj stepped back a few paces. Waves of hot