connect two clauses which are closely related without a conjunction. She loves reading; he prefers watching movies. Suraj followed close behind; but he found he was unable to do any shouting. Now, use semicolons and colons to punctuate the following paragraph. We explored the busy by-lanes of Charminar, the heart of Hyderabad it was an exciting day. We wanted to do a few things buy bangles, taste biryani, and purchase pearl earrings, which are special to this area. As we walked through the lanes, we saw stalls selling spices, clothes, and jewellery the market was full of colours. We visited some famous spots Charminar, Golconda Fort, Salar Jung Museum, and Chowmahalla Palace each place was beautiful. Or I an Let us listen A famous museum in your town is organising a treasure hunt in the museum premises. You and your friends decide to participate in it. Upon arrival, you find that there are many other teams. Each team is given an audio guide (recorded information) anda map to the museum. (Transcript for the teacher on pg. 176) \ Unit 4.indd 153 dr-mahsg 1:52:22 PM | Poorvi Listen to the audio recording and as you listen, mark your map with the route to take to find the treasure. To help you, the names of a few rooms in the museum are given below. Now listen to the audio and mark the various rooms. library auditorium weapon room art gallery musical instruments hall You are here => Closed for Renovation Let us speak Anju is going on a trekking trip with her family during the summer vacation. They have reached the railway station. Anju calls the tour manager for directions to the trekking site. Work in pairs and have this conversation. Student A will play the role of Anju and mark the route on the map given below. Student B will play the role of the tour manager. Looking at the map, give directions to reach the trekking site from the railway station. You may use phrases like the ones in the box to help you. ; turn left turn right keep going straight till... ! take the next left take the next right take the roundabout : take the second left start from... on the opposite side | right around the corner in front of next to al | Unit 4.indd 154 07-Mar-25 1:52:22 PM TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE Lassi Corner Let us write Write a descriptive paragraph about your experience of a train journey. Describe the sights, sounds, and feelings you experienced during the journey. Include details about the people around you, the scenery outside, and the atmosphere inside the train to make your paragraph vivid and engaging. You may use the following guidelines to help you create the paragraph. Start with how the journey began: boarding the train, finding your seat, and the initial impressions. Describe the sounds: the whistle of the train, the chatter of passengers, and the rhythmic clatter of wheels on the tracks. Mention the sights: the