the watchman s hut. Marigolds grew in front of the hut, and at the back there was a small vegetable patch. It was the watchman s duty to inspect the tunnel and keep it clear of obstacles. Every day, before the train came through, he would walk the length of the tunnel. If all was well, he would return to his hut and take a nap. If something was wrong, ohstacles: he would walk back up the line and wave a red flag, and the block the way engine driver would slow down. At night, the watchman lit an oil lamp and made a similar inspection of the tunnel. Of porcupine: a course, he would not stop the train if there was a porcupine small animal on the line. But if there was any danger to the train, he d go Ween aes back up the line and wave his lamp to the approaching engine. on its hack P If all was well, he d hang his lamp at the door of his hut and go to sleep. < He was just settling down on his cot for an afternoon nap when he saw the boy emerge from the tunnel. He waited until Suraj was only a metre or so away and then said, Welcome, welcome. I don t often have visitors. Sit down for a while, and tell me why you were inspecting my tunnel. Ts it your tunnel? asked Suraj. | Unit 4.indd 142 07-Mar-25 1:52:11 PM TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE a 4 > 7 | It is, said the watchman. It is truly my tunnel, since no one else will have anything to do with it. I have only lent it to the Ne Government. v Suraj sat down on the edge of the cot. I wanted to see the train come through, he said. And then, when it had gone, I thought I d walk through the tunnel. And what did you find in it? Nothing. It was very dark. But when I came out, I thought I saw an animal up on the hill but I m not sure, it moved off very quickly. It was a leopard you saw, said the watchman. My leopard. Do you own a leopard too? T do. And do you lend it to the Government? T do not. Is it dangerous? No, it s a leopard that minds its own business. It comes to this range for a few days every month. range: area Have you been here a long time? asked Suraj. Many years. My name is Sunder Singh. My name s Suraj. There is one train during the day. And there is one train Unit 4.indd 143 Poorvi night mail: a during the night. Have you seen the night mail come through train that runs the tunnel? at night No. At what time does it come? About nine o clock, if it isn t late. You could come and sit here with me, if you like. And after