the Darjeeling Himalayan Railway, the Nilgiri Mountain Railway, and the Kalka-Shimla Railway. The Matheran Hill Railway and Kangra Valley Railway are on the tentative list of UNESCO World Heritage Sites. rs They are still fully operational as living examples of the ingenious engineering enterprise of the late nineteenth and early twentieth \ centuries. The owner of the three properties is the Railway Ministry of ~ the Indian Government. N V7 on In groups of four, find out more about these heritage trains and make a presentation in the class. II As an excellent example of the Make in India success story, the Indian Railways launched India s first indigenous semi-high-speed train, Vande Bharat Express. It has become a symbol of India s aspirations for modern, efficient, and comfortable rail travel. The first Vande Bharat Express train was flagged off on 15 February 2019, on the New DelhiKanpur-Allahabad-Varanasi route, running at a speed of 160 kilometres per hour. Courtesy PIB. Posted on: 02 September 2024 3:41p.m. In groups of four, find out more about these heritage trains and make a presentation in the class. 7 et III Some of the underwater rail tunnels are the Thames Tunnel in London, ) the Seikan Tunnel in Japan and the Channel Tunnel between England ' and France. mes India s first underwater metro route in Kolkata started in March 2024. vss A part of this special metro line runs beneath the Hooghly River. s. IV Which of these trains do you think would be adventurous to travel in ? ae Discuss among yourselves. Unit 4.indd 165 CONQUERING THE SUMMIT Let us do these activities before we read. I Identify the activities represented by the icons given below. Share your answers with your classmates and the teacher. II Work in pairs and discuss the following questions. 1. Why do you think people undertake the activities identified above? 2. How would they prepare for these activities? 3. Which one of them do you find the most exciting? Why? Share your answers with the teacher. III Work in pairs to complete the word web given below. Share the answers with the teacher. | Unit 4.indd 166 07-Mar-25 1:52:28 PM Unit 4.indd 167 >=. Let us read This is a story that narrates the triumph of will, courage, determination, and dedication. Arunima Sinha s journey from a devastating accident to scaling the highest peak in the world stands as a beacon of hope and resilience. In 2011, at the age of 24, Arunima Sinha, a national-level volleyball player, faced a life-altering event. It challenged her in ways she could never have imagined. As she lay in the hospital bed with one leg amputated, Arunima made a vow that many would deem impossible: not only to walk again with a prosthetic leg but to scale Mount Everest. In 2013, she did just that, becoming the first Indian female amputee to achieve this feat. Hence, in 2015, she was awarded the Padma Shri, the fourth highest civilian award in India.