time? asked Suraj. Many years. My name is Sunder Singh. My name s Suraj. There is one train during the day. And there is one train Unit 4.indd 143 Poorvi night mail: a during the night. Have you seen the night mail come through train that runs the tunnel? at night No. At what time does it come? About nine o clock, if it isn t late. You could come and sit here with me, if you like. And after it has gone, instead of going to sleep I will take you home. T ll ask my parents, said Suraj. Will it be safe? Of course. It is safer in the jungle than in the town. Nothing happens to me out here. But last month, when I went into town, I was almost run over by a bus. Sunder Singh yawned and stretched himself out on the cot. And now I am going to take a nap, my friend. It is too hot to be up and about in the afternoon. Everyone goes to sleep in the afternoon, complained Suraj. My father lies down as soon as he s had his lunch. Well, the animals also rest in the heat of the day. It is only the tribe of boys who cannot, or will not, rest. Sunder Singh placed a large banana leaf over his face to keep away the flies, and was soon snoring gently. Suraj stood up, looking up and down the railway tracks. Then he began walking back to the village. Let us discuss 1. Suraj compares the train to a magical creature. Pick the phrases that convey the meaning. 2. Suraj knew that the train was close by because 3. What did Suraj see inside the tunnel? 4. Select the correct option. What does Sunder Singh convey about the tunnel? He says that (it is damp and sticky inside/he has lent it to the Government). 5. The watchman has created a system through which he informs the locomotive driver about any danger in the tunnel. The following flow chart shows this system. Refer to the text and complete the flow chart. | Unit 4.indd 144 07-Mar-25 1:52:13 PM TRAVEL AND ADVENTURE Goes to take anap Walks the length of the tunnel found Waves his lamp to warn the locomotive driver I The following evening, towards dusk, as the flying foxes swooped silently out of the trees, Suraj made his way to the swooped: watchman s hut. moved quickly . through the air It had been a long hot day, but now the earth was cooling,and gqownwards a light breeze was moving through the trees. It carried with it the scent of mango blossoms, the promise of rain. Sunder Singh was waiting for Suraj. He had watered his small garden, and the flowers looked cool and fresh. A kettle was boiling on a small oil stove. seven sisters: birds, also Iam making tea, he said. There is nothing like a glass of hot called jungle tea while