on the number line. Example 3 : Locate V2 on the number line. Solution : It is easy to see how the Greeks might have discovered B V2 . Consider a square OABC, with each side | unit in length (see O A Fig. 1.6). Then you can see by the Pythagoras theorem that OB = ,/I? +? =/2 . How do we represent 2 onthe number line? Fig. 1.6 This is easy. Transfer Fig. 1.6 onto the number line making sure that the vertex O coincides with zero (see Fig. 1.7). C B 3 2 15 0 AP 2 3 Fig. 1.7 We have just seen that OB = ,/2 . Using a compass with centre O and radius OB, draw an arc intersecting the number line at the point P. Then P corresponds to ./2 on the number line. Example 4 : Locate ./3 on the number line. Solution : Let us return to Fig. 1.7. Fig. 1.8 Construct BD of unit length perpendicular to OB (as in Fig. 1.8). Then using the Pythagoras theorem, we see that OD = (V2) +P = 3. Using a compass, with centre O and radius OD, draw an arc which intersects the number line at the point Q. Then Q corresponds to /3. Reprint 2025-26 8 MATHEMATICS In the same way, you can locate ./n for any positive integer n, after ./n 1 has been located. EXERCISE 1.2 1. State whether the following statements are true or false. Justify your answers. (i) Every irrational number is a real number. (ii) Every point on the number line is of the form ./m , where m is a natural number. (ii) Every real number is an irrational number. 2. Are the square roots of all positive integers irrational? If not, give an example of the square root of a number that is a rational number. 3. Show how 4/5 can be represented on the number line. 4. Classroom activity (Constructing the square root spiral ) : Take a large sheet of paper and construct the square root spiral in the following fashion. Start with a point O and draw a line segment OP, of unit length. Draw a line segment PP, perpendicular to OP, of unit length (see Fig. 1.9). Now draw a line segment P,P, perpendicular to OP,. Then draw a line segment P,P, perpendicular to OP,. Continuing in this manner, you can get the line segment P,P. by drawing a line segment of unit length perpendicular to OP ___,. In this manner, you will have created the points P.,, P,.,...., P.,... ., and joined them to create a beautiful spiral depicting V2, V3, V4, i Fig. 1.9 : Constructing square root spiral 1.3 Real Numbers and their Decimal Expansions In this section, we are going to study rational and irrational numbers from a different point of view. We will look at the decimal expansions of real numbers and see if we can use the expansions to distinguish between rationals and irrationals.