infinitely many rational numbers between | and 2. In general, there are infinitely many rational numbers between any two given rational numbers. 6 12 ie., 1= 6 and 2 = 6" Then you can check that numbers between | and 2. So, the five numbers are Let us take a look at the number line again. Have you picked up all the numbers? Not, yet. The fact is that there are infinitely many more numbers left on the number line! There are gaps in between the places of the numbers you picked up, and not just one or two but infinitely many. The amazing thing is that there are infinitely many numbers lying between any two of these gaps too! So we are left with the following questions: ) 1. What are the numbers, that are left on the number line, called? a 2. How do we recognise them? That is, how do we distinguish them from the rationals (rational numbers)? These questions will be answered in the next section. "d z Reprint 2025-26 NUMBER SYSTEMS 5 EXERCISE 1.1 1. Is zeroarational number? Can you write it in the form P , where p and q are integers and q #0? 1 2. Find six rational numbers between 3 and 4. 3. Find five rational numbers between : and =. 4. State whether the following statements are true or false. Give reasons for your answers. (i) Every natural number is a whole number. (ii) Every integer is a whole number. (iil) Every rational number is a whole number. 1.2 Irrational Numbers We saw, in the previous section, that there may be numbers on the number line that are not rationals. In this section, we are going to investigate these numbers. So far, all the numbers you have come across, are of the form P , where p and q are integers and g # 0. So, you may ask: are there numbers which are not of this form? There are indeed such numbers. The Pythagoreans in Greece, followers of the famous mathematician and philosopher Pythagoras, were the first to discover the numbers which were not rationals, around 400 BC. These numbers are called irrational numbers (irrationals), because they cannot be written in the form of a ratio of integers. There are many myths surrounding the discovery of irrational numbers by the Pythagorean, Hippacus of Croton. In all the myths, Hippacus has an unfortunate end, either for discovering that V2 is irrational or for disclosing the secret about V2 to people outside the Pythagoras (569 BCE 479 BCE) secret Pythagorean sect! Fig. 1.3 Let us formally define these numbers. A number s is called irrational, if it cannot be written in the form a where p and g are integers and q # 0. Reprint 2025-26 6 MATHEMATICS You already know that there are infinitely many rationals. It turns out that there are infinitely many irrational numbers too. Some examples are: V2, V3, 15m, 0.10110111011110... Remark : Recall that when we