Raising livestock Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:02:25 | " THINK ABOUT IT Can you think of any primary activities that you may have seen in the past? What are the natural resources used in these activities? Name two of them and discuss your experiences with your classmates. 1. hy B. Secondary activities Economic activities in which people are dependent on outputs of the primary sector and transform them to produce goods are known as secondary activities or secondary sector economic activities. The secondary sector includes the construction of buildings, roads, etc., and providing utilities like water, electricity, gas and other such necessities. It also includes the manufacturing of products in factories and production units to process raw material from the primary sector into some other form that can be further sold or consumed. Some examples of secondary sector activities include the processing of grains obtained from agricultural fields to make flour in mills, extraction of oil from groundnut and processing of tea leaves to derive tea. Similarly, wood from the forest is converted into furniture and paper, cotton is used to make clothes, and steel from iron ore is used to make automobiles like cars, trucks, etc. Textile factory Automobile factory Reprint 2025-26 | chapter14_310125.indd 199 & Secondary sector: The group of activities that involves processing of raw materials derived from primary sector into products for sale or consumption. 14 Economic Activities Around Us 03-02-2025 05:02:26 | a NAS IM eS ALLAN Lda hdd A ee Pharmaceutical factory Furniture production unit <) DON'T MISS OUT No. of units produced in Types of Automobiles India in 2022 Passenger vehicles like cars 45 lakhs cy Commercial vehicles like trucks 10.3 lakhs Three wheelers 8.6 lakhs (Source: Society of Indian Automobile Manufacturers, https:/www.siam. in/statistics.aspx?mpgid=8&pgidtrail=13 ) LET'S EXPLORE me) c oO > a = o3 Now that we have seen some examples of secondary sector f activities, can you name two more economic activities in the af g< secondary sector? o+ oe 1. gs 2. Reprint 2025-26 | chapter14_310125.indd 200 & 03-02-2025 05:02:26 | C. Tertiary activities All those economic activities that provide support to people involved in primary and secondary activities are called tertiary activities or tertiary sector economic activities. These include services that we may not be able to see but which still play a very important role. For example, the driver of a truck transports grains and vegetables from the farm to a factory or the market. The fruit or vegetable vendors sell the farm produce to household consumers. Similarly, doctors, nurses, teachers, lawyers and pilots provide their services to those who need them. There are technicians who repair and service electronic items including mobile phones and televisions, mechanics who repair vehicles like cars and tractors, and electricians who ensure regular supply of electricity. Their services make our lives easier. Similarly, communication services through mobile and _ internet, software development, and services at hotels, restaurants, banks, schools, hospitals, airports, shops, warehouses, etc. are all examples of tertiary sector economic activities. This sector