Economic Activities Around Us The root of prosperity is economic activity, the lack of it brings material distress. The absence of fruitful economic activity endangers both current prosperity and future growth. Kautilya s Arthashastra O0681CHI4 In Chapter 13, we learnt about two types of activities economic andnon-economic. Activities that create are called economic activities. We also learnt about the importance of non-economic activities. To understand these activities better we will learn how economic activities are classified and what differentiates them in this chapter. Economic Sectors: Broad groups that include various activities that help with the economic prosperity of a nation. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us chapter14_310125.indd 196 Over the decades, the number of economic activities has increased tremendously. For example, earlier most people were involved in activities such as agriculture, livestock rearing, production of tools, pottery and weaving cloth. As societies progressed, the number of economic activities through which people earn their livelihoods increased vastly. Today, there are diverse economic activities such as manufacturing computers, mobile phones and drones; working in banks, schools and hotels; driving various types of vehicles for transportation; making furniture; tailoring clothes using machines; creating software; repairing refrigerators and washing machines; etc. Classifying all these activities helps us to understand how they function and the links they have with each other. The Classification of Economic Activities into Economic Sectors Some economic activities share similar characteristics and based on this, they can be grouped together or classified into broader groups called economic sectors. The three main types of economic sectors are primary, secondary and tertiary economic sectors. The illustration on the facing page maps out the broad activities under these categories. A. Primary activities Those economic activities in which people are directly dependent on nature to produce goods are known as primary activities or primary sector economic activities. Primary sector: The group of activities that involves extraction of raw materials directly from nature such as farming, fishing, forestry, etc. Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:02:15 Fishing pane Forestry chapter14_310125.indd 197 O L_] 1 ia Electricity production Transportation Reprint 2025-26 @& 03-02-2025 05: Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us | chapter14_310125.indd 198 For example, work involving cultivation of grains and vegetables from agricultural farms, collecting wood from the forests, extracting coal from mines, fish from fisheries, eggs from poultry farms, etc., are all primary sector economic activities. The most common primary activities are agriculture, mining, fishing, raising livestock, forestry, etc. Below are some of the types of activities within the primary sectors. aE Raising livestock Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:02:25 | " THINK ABOUT IT Can you think of any primary activities that you may have seen in the past? What are the natural resources used in these activities? Name two of them and discuss your experiences with your classmates. 1. hy B. Secondary activities Economic activities in which people are dependent on outputs of the primary sector and transform them to produce goods are known as secondary activities or secondary sector economic activities.