teachers, lawyers and pilots provide their services to those who need them. There are technicians who repair and service electronic items including mobile phones and televisions, mechanics who repair vehicles like cars and tractors, and electricians who ensure regular supply of electricity. Their services make our lives easier. Similarly, communication services through mobile and _ internet, software development, and services at hotels, restaurants, banks, schools, hospitals, airports, shops, warehouses, etc. are all examples of tertiary sector economic activities. This sector is also called the service sector. Software development Reprint 2025-26 | chapter14_310125.indd 201 & Services at restaurant Tertiary Sector: The group of activities that involves the provision of services which complement both primary and secondary sectors, such as transportation, banking, and management of business. Warehouses: Large buildings used for storing products before they are sold, used or rented out to shops. 14 Economic Activities Around Us 03-02-2025 05:02:27 | Dairy: A place where milk is collected and stored. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us Se chapter14_310125.indd 202 Services at airports Retail stores Interdependence Among Sectors The three types of economic activities or economic sectors play an important role in the process of conversion of natural raw materials into finished products for final consumption. Let us go on an imaginary excursion to a village in Anand district of Gujarat to study an interesting example where we will understand how the three sectors are interconnected and support each other. Dairy cooperative: from farm to plate These days, farmers in Gujarat greet the day with the clinking of milk pails and the happy moos of their best friends, their cows or buffaloes! Cows have a special place in the lives of the farmers and their families. The farmers milk the cows and sell their milk to the dairy nearby. At the end of the month, they get paid for the milk based on its quantity and quality. However, this was not the case about 50 years ago. This is the amazing story ofa milk cooperative named Anand Milk Union Limited (AMUL). In the early 1940s, farmers in Anand district would sell milk to the neighbouring villages. Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:02:27 | They would have to cycle or walk to nearby villages to sell the milk under scorching heat. As you know, milk spoils or curdles very fast in hot weather. The farmers had to sell the milk quickly before it could spoil. This was a lot of effort for the small amount of money they would earn. So, they depended on people called middlemen, who would buy the milk in bulk at meagre prices from the farmers and sell it in the market. Many times, the farmers felt cheated and harassed by the middlemen. One day, the farmers collectively approached Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, a prominent national leader, with their problems. He advised them to form a cooperative to become independent and stop relying on the middlemen. As. Vallee Mei a cooperative, the farmers would be abl Patel milk as a