on people called middlemen, who would buy the milk in bulk at meagre prices from the farmers and sell it in the market. Many times, the farmers felt cheated and harassed by the middlemen. One day, the farmers collectively approached Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel, a prominent national leader, with their problems. He advised them to form a cooperative to become independent and stop relying on the middlemen. As. Vallee Mei a cooperative, the farmers would be abl Patel milk as a group, taking care of the entire operation of milk collection, processing and distribution themselves. The farmers took Sardar Patel s advice. AMUL was set up in 1946 under the leadership of Tribhuvandas Patel (lawyer and freedom fighter) and Dr. Varghese Kurien (an engineer who was working at a dairy factory in Mumbai). = rs 1 Ma} = : Me? SS, & Fe Varghese Kurien (left) and Tribhuvandas Patel (right) Reprint 2025-26 | chapter14_310125.indd 203 & Cooperative: A group of people who voluntarily come together to meet their economic and social needs ina formal way. They own the cooperative and decisions are taken by the members collectively. Middlemen: Persons who buy goods from producers and sell them to consumers. The middlemen charge a fee for this service. 14 Economic Activities Around Us o 03-02-2025 05:02:28 | Pasteurisation: A process by which milk is preserved through heating to a specific temperature to kill harmful bacteria. Factory: Building or group of buildings where goods are manufactured, or various components are put together, to make a final product. Retail: The sale of goods in small quantities for use by the end consumer rather than for resale. Export: Goods and services that are produced inone | country and sold to buyers or consumers in another country. Exploring Society: India and Beyond Economic Life Around Us | chapter14_310125.indd 204 This initiative brought farmers, including women, together and gave them control over the production and sale of milk. The milk producers collectively made their own decisions on all matters such as production, pasteurisation and sale of milk. The tasks were shared by everyone, which helped raise their income gradually. They did not need the middlemen anymore and became like one big family! As more and more farmers began to see the benefits of the cooperative, it continued to grow. The quantity of milk that was being collected was so huge that the farmers decided to make _ other products out of it. They set up a factory in Anand, and began to produce butter and milk powder. Today, the cooperative has a wide range of products made at many milk processing plants and factories all over India. Can you name a few? The products are then transported and sold in both small and large retail shops all over the country. In fact, they also export the products to several countries around the world. Is it not amazing? In this fascinating story, the farmers of this cooperative milk their cows to sell the milk later. This kind of