Why does ice float on water? Ice floats on water because it is lighter than liquid water (Fig. 9.23). Water has a special property that its density is highest at 4 C. It means water is heaviest at 4 C. As the temperature drops, and water turns into ice at 0 C, it undergoes a change in structure the particles arrange themselves in a way that takes up more space. This process is called expansion. Because the same amount of water now occupies a larger volume, its density decreases. As a result, ice becomes lighter than liquid water and floats on its surface. This is important for animals living in lakes and oceans because ice floats, it forms a layer on top, keeping the water underneath warm enough for fish and other creatures to survive, even in extremely cold weather. @ Takea glass tumbler and fill it with tap water. Carefully place a raw whole egg into the water and observe what happens. You will notice that the egg sinks to the bottom (Fig. 9.24). @ What change can you make to this setup to make the egg float in water instead of sinking? ie @ In this chapter, you have learnt the concept Ah of density and how it explains partially why pig. 9.24: Raw whole some objects float while others sink. egg sinks in water uriosity Textbook of Science for crade 8 @@@e@@e008@ @ Chapter 9.indd 148 6/28/2025 5:06:34 PM 5160006086 (chapter 9 The Amazing World of Solutes, Solvents, and Solutions) 149 Snapshots A solution is said to be formed when two or more substances mix to form a uniform mixture. Inthe solution formed by dissolving a solid ina liquid, the solid component is known as a solute and the liquid component is known as a solvent. In a solution formed by mixing two liquids, the component present in less quantity is known as solute and the other component is called solvent. In air, nitrogen is considered as a solvent, while oxygen, argon, carbon dioxide, and other gases are considered as solutes. A solution in which the maximum amount of solute has been dissolved, and no more ofit can be dissolved at that temperature is called a saturated solution. A solution in which more solute can be dissolved at a given temperature is called an unsaturated solution. Solubility is the maximum amount ofsolute that can be dissolved ina fixed quantity (100 mL) ofa solution or a solvent at a particular temperature. Generally, in liquids, the solubility of solids increases and that of gases decreases with an increase in temperature. The amount of matter present in an object is known as its mass. The space occupied by an object or a substance is known as its volume. Devices used to measure mass and volume are a weighing balance and a measuring cylinder, respectively. The mass per unit volume of a substance is known as its density (Density = Mass/Volume). Generally, density decreases with an increase in temperature and pressure