called the solute, while the one in larger amount is called the solvent. We know air is a mixture. Would a mixture of gases also be considered a solution? Just as water can act as a solvent in liquid solutions, gases can also form solution with air being a common example. Air is a gaseous solution. Since nitrogen is present in the largest amount in the air, it is considered as the solvent, while oxygen, argon, carbon dioxide, and other gases are considered as solutes. Chapter 9.indd 135 6/28/2025 5:05:31 PM Ever heard of ... The Chashni (sugar syrup) of the Indian sweet Gulab jamunis made ofa large amount of sugar (solid) dissolved in a small amount of water (liquid). However, the water is still considered as the solvent and sugar as the solute (Fig. 9.4)! Fig. 9.4: Gulab jamuns dipped in sugar syrup 9.2 How Much Solute Can a Fixed Amount of Solvent Dissolve? | Activity 9.1: Let us investigate e Take a clean glass tumbler and fill it What will happen if we half with water. keep on adding more salt in a given amount of water? e Add one spoon of salt into it and stir well till it dissolves completely (Fig. 9.5). e Gradually add a spoonful of salt into the glass tumbler and stir. Observe how many spoons of salt you can add before it stops dissolving completely. e Record your observations in Table 9.1. Table 9.1: Dissolution of salt in water Amount of salt taken Observation (salt dissolves/salt (teaspoon) does not dissolve) One Two Three Four Some discussion points e How many spoons of salt were you able to dissolve before some of it remained undissolved? e What does this indicate about the capacity of water to dissolve salt? uriosity Textbook of Science for crade 8 @@@e@@e00@@ e@ i Chapter 9.indd 136 6/28/2025 5:05:38 PM Chapter 9.indd 137 06086 0 {chapter 9 he Amazing World of Solutes, Solvents, You might have observed that, initially, the salt completely dissolves in the water, forming a solution. After adding a few more spoons of salt, a stage comes when the added salt does not dissolve completely and the undissolved salt settles at the bottom. This indicates that the water can no longer dissolve any more salt because it has reached its limit. The solution in which more solute can be dissolved at a given temperature, is called an unsaturated solution (Fig. 9.5). However, when the solute stops dissolving and begins to settle at the bottom, the solution is called a saturated solution at that particular temperature (Fig. 9.6). The amount of solute present in a fixed quantity of solution (or solvent) is termed as its concentration. Depending upon the amount of solute present in a fixed quantity of solution, it can be called a dilute solution (less amount of solute) or a concentrated solution (more amount of solute). Dilute and concentrated are relative terms. So, one can say in Activity 9.1, the solution obtained by dissolving one