clean watch glass or butter paper on the pan. Watch e Note the reading on the digital weighing balance. glass e Reset the digital weighing balance reading to zero by pressing the tare or reset button as shown in Fig. 9.12b. e Now, carefully place the solid object, such as stone, on the watch glass (Fig. 9.12c). Fig. 9.12(b): Tare the balance : e Note the reading displayed on the balance, which after placing a watch glass gives the mass of the stone, say 16.400 g. (You may use any other type of balance available in Stone _- your school.) or solid object The mass of a liquid may be measured by replacing the watch glass with a beaker and pouring the desired amount of liquid into it. Fig. 9.12(c): Weighing a solid object on digital balance A step further As mentioned in Chapter 5, the words mass and weight are often used interchangeably in everyday language. But they have different meanings in science, which can sometimes cause confusion. Mass is the quantity of matter present in an object or a substance. Its units are gram (g) and kilogram (kg). On the other hand, weight is the force by which the Earth attracts an object or a substance towards 8: 9.13: Two-pan balance itself, and it is measured in newtons (N). Most balances (except two-pan balances like in Fig. 9.13) actually measure weight, but their scales are marked in mass units, so they show values in grams or kilograms (Fig. 9.12c). uriosity Textbook of Science for crade 8 @@e@@e@@eeee@ @ Chapter 9.indd 142 6/28/2025 5:06:10 PM 000086 (chapter 9 The Amazing World of Solutes, Solvents, and Solutions) 143 How to measure volume? A tetra pack says it contains 200 mL buttermilk (chach) (Fig. 9.14). What does that mean? You learnt in Curiosity, Grade 6 that volume is the space occupied by an object. You also know that the SI unit of volume is cubic metres, written as m . It is the volume of a cube whose each side is one metre in length. Volume of smaller objects is conveniently expressed in a decimetre cube (dm?) or centimetre cube (cm?). One centimetre cube is also written as one cc. Volume of liquids is expressed in litres (L) which is equivalent to 1 dm . A commonly used submultiple of a litre is millilitre (mL) whichis Fig. 9.14: A pack of equivalent to 1 cm . buttermilk of 200 mL One of the common apparatuses used to measure the volume of liquids is a measuring cylinder. It is a narrow transparent cylindrical container with one side open and the other side closed as shown in Fig. 9.15. There are markings on the transparent body of the cylinder that indicate the volume of liquid in the measuring cylinder. We can use it to measure the desired amount of a liquid. Measuring cylinders are available in different sizes to measure volume 5 mL, 10 mL, 25 mL, 50 mL, 100 mL, 250 mL,