Chapter 9.indd 134 What do you think is happening in the picture above? What happens when you add too much sugar to your tea and it stops dissolving? How can you solve this problem? Why do sugar and salt dissolve in water but not in oil? Why is water considered a good solvent? Why are water bottles usually tall and cylindrical in shape instead of spherical? 0877CHO9 6/28/2025 5:05:29 PM | 0600080 (chapter 9 The Amazing World of Solutes, Solvents, and Solutions) 135 You must have taken an Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS) at some time in your life. ORS is used to treat dehydration by keeping your body hydrated. You have learnt to prepare ORS at home in Curiosity, Grade 6. You may have wondered why every sip of your homemade ORS tastes the same, no matter how much you drink. Why does it not taste salty in one sip and sweet in another? This is because when you add sugar and salt to water, they form a mixture in which the components are evenly distributed FS: 9.1: Mixture of throughout. sugar, salt, and water Can you predict whether this mixture is uniform or = ~ not (Fig. 9.1)? What happens when chalk powder is mixed ae a with water does it form a uniform mixture? See When salt and sugar are mixed with water, a uniform a mixture is formed, whereas when chalk powder or sand, or i sil sawdust is mixed with water, the components are not evenly iia distributed. Such mixtures are known as non-uniform mixtures (Fig. 9.2a and 9.2b). Fig. 9.2: Mixture of (a) Sand and water; (b) Sawdust and water Let us explore the science of mixing things together. 9.1 What Are Solute, Solvent, and Solution? A uniform mixture, such as that of salt or sugar, and water, is called a solution. Whenever a solid is mixed with a liquid to form a solution, the solid component is called the solute, and the liquid component is called the solvent. L% 2 Caso The solute dissolves in the solvent to form | Gi 0 9 % . s) 2) Oc a solution (Fig. 9.3). . . o ay 2 Yee oc ent Solute + Solvent Solution Occ . 508 When a solution is formed by mixing 28 ro os two liquids, it is not always clear which 7 substance is dissolving the other. In such Fig. 9.3: Magnified schematic picture of a cases, the substance present in smaller solute evenly distributed in a solvent amount is called the solute, while the one in larger amount is called the solvent. We know air is a mixture. Would a mixture of gases also be considered a solution? Just as water can act as a solvent in liquid solutions, gases can also form solution with air being a common example. Air is a gaseous solution. Since nitrogen is present in the largest amount in the air, it is considered as the solvent, while oxygen, argon, carbon dioxide, and other