Do Objects Float or Sink in Water? You must have observed that some objects float while others sink in water (Fig. 9.9). You may have noticed that, while washing rice, husk particles present in the rice float on the surface of water while rice sinks to the bottom of the container. Why does this happen? If you add oil to water, it floats on water. Generally, it is believed that objects that float in a liquid are lighter and others that sink are heavier than the liquid. , A wooden stick and an iron rod may be of the same size, Fig. 9.9: Some objects float yet the iron rod feels much heavier. When we say that iron while others sink inwater - Heavier than wood, we are referring to a special property known as density, which describes the heaviness of an object. However, the density of a substance is not the only factor that decides whether it will float or sink in a particular liquid. | Let us explore further. 9.5 What Is Density? Imagine a crowded bus where many people are packed together this is an example of high density whereas, the same bus with only a few people is an example of low density. Similarly, a forest where trees grow close to each other is called a dense forest (Fig. 9.10a), but if the trees are far apart (Fig. 9.10b), it is considered less dense. How do scientists define density? Let us find out. We have learnt that matter is anything that possesses mass and occupies space (volume). Density is defined as the mass present in a unit volume of that substance. The density of a substance may be expressed mathematically using the formula: ._ Mass Fig. 9.10 (b): Less dense forest Density = Volume Fig. 9.10 (a): Dense forest The density of a substance is independent of its shape or size. However, it is dependent on temperature and pressure. Pressure primarily affects the density of gases, while its effect on solids and liquids is negligible. uriosity Textbook of Science for crade 8 @o@e@@e@e0e0e00 Chapter 9.indd 140 6/28/2025 5:06:01 PM Chapter 9.indd 141 ome me mm | (chapter 9 The Amazing World of Solutes, Solvents, and Solutions) 141 The units in which density is expressed will depend upon the units of mass and volume taken. As you have learnt, the SI units of mass and volume are kilogram (kg) and cubic metre (m ), respectively. Therefore, the SI unit of density is kilogram per cubic metre, abbreviated as kg/m*. In case of liquids, other units of density are also used for convenience, such as gram per millilitre, abbreviated as g/mL and gram per cubic centimetre, abbreviated as g/cm . Conversion factor for density 1 kg/m? = 1000 g/m*= 1000 g/1000 L = 1 g/L = 1 g/1000 mL = 1 g/1000 cm? The mass of 1 mL of water is close to 1 g at room temperature. For the measurement of the mass of water, we generally