is called a saturated solution at that particular temperature (Fig. 9.6). The amount of solute present in a fixed quantity of solution (or solvent) is termed as its concentration. Depending upon the amount of solute present in a fixed quantity of solution, it can be called a dilute solution (less amount of solute) or a concentrated solution (more amount of solute). Dilute and concentrated are relative terms. So, one can say in Activity 9.1, the solution obtained by dissolving one spoon of salt is dilute as compared to that obtained by dissolving two or more spoons of salt. Can you now reflect which solution is more concentrated; 2 spoons of salt in 100 mL of water or 4 spoons of salt in 50 mL of water? From Activity 9.1, we can say that the maximum amount of solute that dissolves in a fixed quantity of the solvent is called its solubility. Does temperature affect the solubility of a solute? Let us find out! 9.2.1 How does temperature affect the solubility of a solute? Activity 9.2: Let us experiment (Demonstration activity) e Take about 50 mL of water in a glass beaker and measure its temperature using a laboratory thermometer, say 20 C. e Add a spoonful of baking soda (sodium hydrogen carbonate) to the water and stir until it dissolves. . Continue adding small amounts ofbaking (EUG AIDE: Be careful while using the soda while stirring, till some solid baking soda is left undissolved at the bottom of heating device. the beaker. 6 and Solutions) 137 Fig. 9.5: Unsaturated solution Se so < Solution Undissolved salt Fig. 9.6: Saturated solution 6/28/2025 5:05:40 PM Fig. 9.7: Dissolution of baking soda in water Chapter 9.indd 138 e Now, heat the contents to 50 C while Laboratory stand stirring (Fig. 9.7). e What happens to the undissolved baking soda? Laboratory thermometer e You will observe that it has dissolved. e Continue adding more baking soda while stirring at this temperature until some Water solid baking soda remains undissolved. containing e Again, heat the contents further to 70 C baking soda while continuing to stir. What do you Wire gauze observe? Tripodstand e@ The undissolved baking soda dissolves. Spirit lamp e Whatdo youinfer from this experiment? Water at 70 C dissolves more baking soda than water at 50 C. The amount of baking soda dissolved in water at 20 C is even lesser. It has been found that for most of the substances, the solubility increases with an increase in temperature. We can also say that a saturated solution at a particular temperature behaves as an unsaturated solution if the temperature is increased. Our scientific heritage Water has primarily been used as a solvent for the preparation of medicinal formulations in Ayurveda, Siddha, and other traditional systems of medicine in India. Additionally, drug formulations have been prepared using hydro-alcoholic extracts of the herbs. The Indian systems of medicine have also referred to the use of oils, ghee, milk, and other substances as solvents for