increases and that of gases decreases with an increase in temperature. The amount of matter present in an object is known as its mass. The space occupied by an object or a substance is known as its volume. Devices used to measure mass and volume are a weighing balance and a measuring cylinder, respectively. The mass per unit volume of a substance is known as its density (Density = Mass/Volume). Generally, density decreases with an increase in temperature and pressure affects density differently depending on the state of matter. Keep the curiosity alive Chapter 9.indd 149 1. State whether the statements given below are True [T] or False [F]. Correct the false statement(s). (i) Oxygen gas is more soluble in hot water rather than in cold water. (ii) A mixture of sand and water is a solution. (iii) The amount of space occupied by any object is called its mass. (iv) An unsaturated solution has more solute dissolved than a saturated solution. (v) The mixture of different gases in the atmosphere is also a solution. 6/28/2025 5:06:36 PM Chapter 9.indd 150 w ol [op) . Fill in the blanks. (i) The volume of a solid can be measured by the method of displacement, where the solid is in water and the in water level is measured. Gi) The maximum amount of dissolved in at a particular temperature is called solubility at that temperature. (iii) Generally, the density with increase in temperature. (iv) The solution in which glucose has completely dissolved in water, and no more glucose can dissolve at a given temperature, is called a solution of glucose. . You pour oil into a glass containing some water. The oil floats on top. What does this tell you? (i) Oil is denser than water (ii) Water is denser than oil (iii) Oil and water have the same density (iv) Oil dissolves in water A stone sculpture weighs 225 g and has a volume of 90 cm *. Calculate its density and predict whether it will float or sink in water. . Which one of the following is the most appropriate statement, and why are the other statements not appropriate? (i) A saturated solution can still dissolve more solute at a given temperature. (ii) An unsaturated solution has dissolved the maximum amount of solute possible at a given temperature. (iii) No more solute can be dissolved into the saturated solution at that temperature. (iv) A saturated solution forms only at high temperatures. . You have a bottle with a volume of 2 litres. You pour 500 mL of water into it. How much more water can the bottle hold? . An object has a mass of 400 g and a volume of 40 cm . What is its density? . Analyse Fig. 9.25a and 9.25b. Why does the unpeeled orange float, while the peeled one sinks? Explain. . Object A has a mass of 200 g and a volume of 40 cm. Object B has a mass of 240 g and