say that a saturated solution at a particular temperature behaves as an unsaturated solution if the temperature is increased. Our scientific heritage Water has primarily been used as a solvent for the preparation of medicinal formulations in Ayurveda, Siddha, and other traditional systems of medicine in India. Additionally, drug formulations have been prepared using hydro-alcoholic extracts of the herbs. The Indian systems of medicine have also referred to the use of oils, ghee, milk, and other substances as solvents for drug formulations, to help achieve the therapeutic benefits of the drug. What inspired Asima Chatterjee to work on medicinal plants? Asima Chatterjee is renowned for her work in developing anti-epileptic and anti-malarial drugs. She used solvents and solutions extensively to extract and isolate important compounds from medicinal plants. She earned a Doctorate of Science, becoming the second Indian woman to do so after Janaki Ammal. She became the first woman to receive the Shanti Swarup % Bhatnagar Award in the field of chemical science and ~ was also honoured with the Padma Bhushan. uriosity Textbook of Science for crade 8 @o@e@@e@e0e0e00 6/28/2025 5:05:50 PM Chapter 9.indd 139 ome me mm | (chapter 9 The Amazing World of Solutes, Solvents, and Solutions) Do gases also dissolve in water? 9.3 Solubility of Gases Many gases, including oxygen, dissolve in water. Oxygen dissolves in water only to a small extent. Even though present in minute quantities, it is this dissolved oxygen that sustains all aquatic life, including plants, fishes, and other organisms. Is the mixture of gases in water a uniform or non-uniform mixture? Itis a uniform mixture because the gases dissolve evenly in water to form a solution. Does temperature affect the solubility of gases in liquids also? If so, how? It has been observed that the solubility of gases generally decreases as temperature increases. More oxygen can dissolve in cold water, ensuring sufficient oxygen for aquatic life (Fig. 9.8). On the other hand, when water warms up, the solubility of Fig. 9.8: Aquatic species in water oxygen decreases. Now I understand that the mixtures we use can be of two types uniform and non-uniform. Uniform mixtures are called solutions, and their components are not visible separately. In non-uniform mixtures, the components can be seen either with the naked eye or with a magnifying device. I observed that in some non-uniform mixtures, such as sawdust in water, the sawdust floats, whereas in the mixture of sand and water, the sand sinks. I wonder why that happens? 5 6/28/2025 5:05:52 PM 9.4 Why Do Objects Float or Sink in Water? You must have observed that some objects float while others sink in water (Fig. 9.9). You may have noticed that, while washing rice, husk particles present in the rice float on the surface of water while rice sinks to the bottom of the container. Why does this happen? If you add oil to water, it floats on water. Generally, it is believed that objects that float in a liquid are lighter and others