of density? The outermost layer, called the crust, is the lightest and the density of the different layers increases aS we move towards the centre (Fig. 9.20). As one moves deeper into the Inner core (solid) Earth, both the pressure and the temperature Fig. 9.20: Layers of Earth rise significantly, making the materials heavier and more compact. Lower mantle Outer core (liquid) Ever heard of ... In ancient times, before large ships were invented, people used bamboo and wooden logs to travel across rivers and seas (Fig. 9.21). Bamboo was used because it is light, hollow, and floats easily on water. People tied bamboo poles together to make rafts and small boats for fishing, trading, and crossing water bodies. Wooden Fig. 9.21: Bamboo raft floats _ logs, especially from strong trees were on water either hollowed out to make boats or used as rafts. These simple boats, made from locally available materials, were important for moving around and connecting different places. Even today, similar traditional boats made of bamboo or wood are used in some regions not just for transport, but also as tourist attractions. 9.5.2 Effect of temperature on density Generally, the density of a substance decreases with heating and increases with cooling. This can be explained on the basis of what you have learnt in chapter Particulate Nature of Matter . As temperature increases, the particles of a substance whether, solid, liquid, or gas, tend to move away and spread. This results in an increase in volume but there is no change in mass. Since the Density = Mass/Volume, upon heating, the volume increases and the density decreases. This explains why hot air moves up as it is less dense than the cool air around it. The hot air balloon works on the same principle (Fig. 9.22). Fig. 9.22: Rising of hot air balloons Chapter 9.indd 147 6/28/2025 5:06:26 PM 9.5.3 Effect of pressure on density Pressure affects density differently depending on the state of matter. For gases, increasing pressure causes the particles to move closer together. As a result, the volume of the gas decreases and its density increases. In the case of liquids, pressure has a small effect because they are nearly incompressible. We have learnt in chapter Particulate Nature of Matter that the particles in solids are very close to each other. So, how is the density of solids affected when pressure is applied? Solids are even less affected by pressure than liquids, and changes in their density are usually negligible. Ever heard of ... Why does ice float on water? Ice floats on water because it is lighter than liquid water (Fig. 9.23). Water has a special property that its density is highest at 4 C. It means water is heaviest at 4 C. As the temperature drops, and water turns into ice at 0 C, it undergoes a change in structure the particles arrange themselves in a way that takes up more space. This process is called expansion. Because the same amount of