to the roundabout. Will you have a ride on the horse? he gently asked as he approached the ring. The child s throat tore into a thousand shrill sobs and he only shouted, I want my mother, I want my father! 4 / Moments gs ? Dvn Ba: Reprint 2025-26 Bow hsb The man headed towards the place where the snake-charmer still played on the flute to the swaying cobra. Listen to that nice music, child! he pleaded. But the child shut his ears with his fingers and shouted his double-pitched strain: I want my mother, I want my father! The man took him near the balloons, thinking the bright colours of the balloons would distract the child s attention and quieten him. Would you like a rainbowcoloured balloon? he persuasively asked. The child turned his eyes from the flying balloons and just sobbed, I want my mother, I want my father! The man, still trying to make the child happy, bore him to the gate where the flower-seller sat. Look! Can you smell those nice flowers, child! Would you like a garland to put round your neck? Et The Lost Child / 5 $a 7- oa ro . hiss PS ero Reprint 2025-26 The child turned his nose away from the basket and reiterated his sob, I want my mother, I want my father! Thinking to humour his disconsolate charge by a gift of sweets, the man took him to the counter of the sweet shop. What sweets would you like, child? he asked. The child turned his face from the sweet shop and only sobbed, I want my mother, I want my father! Mutk Rav ANAND 2 Tune Avour Ir 1. What are the things the child sees on his way to the fair? Why does he lag behind? 2. In the fair he wants many things. What are they? Why does he move on without waiting for an answer? 3. When does he realise that he has lost his way? How have his anxiety and insecurity been described? 4. Why does the lost child lose interest in the things that he had wanted earlier? 5. What do you think happens in the end? Does the child find his parents? wae Tau Avour Ir How to ensure not to get lost. BME Suecesren Reanine e The Coolie by Mulk Raj Anand e Kabuliwallah by Rabindranath Tagore 6 / Moments do* + Reprint 2025-26 st ek ts as