swing. Men, women and children, carried away in a whirling motion, shrieked and cried with dizzy laughter. The child watched them intently and then he made a bold request: I want to go on the roundabout, please, Father, Mother. The Lost Child / 3 bs diiee WG SF 5M) sok Reprint 2025-26 There was no reply. He turned to look at his parents. They were not there, ahead of him. He turned to look on either side. They were not there. He looked behind. There was no sign of them. A full, deep cry rose within his dry throat and with a sudden jerk of his body he ran from where he stood, crying in real fear, Mother, Father. Tears rolled down from his eyes, hot and fierce; his flushed face was convulsed with fear. Panic-stricken, he ran to one side first, then to the other, hither and thither in all directions, knowing not where to go. Mother, Father, he wailed. His yellow turban came untied and his clothes became muddy. Having run to and fro in a rage of running for a while, he stood defeated, his cries suppressed into sobs. At little distances on the green grass he could see, through his filmy eyes, men and women talking. He tried to look intently among the patches of bright yellow clothes, but there was no sign of his father and mother among these people, who seemed to laugh and talk just for the sake of laughing and talking. He ran quickly again, this time to a shrine to which people seemed to be crowding. Every little inch of space here was congested with men, but he ran through people s legs, his little sob lingering: Mother, Father! Near the entrance to the temple, however, the crowd became very thick: men jostled each other, heavy men, with flashing, murderous eyes and hefty shoulders. The poor child struggled to thrust a way between their feet but, knocked to and fro by their brutal movements, he might have been trampled underfoot, had he not shrieked at the highest pitch of his voice, Father, Mother! A man in the surging crowd heard his cry and, stooping with great difficulty, lifted him up in his arms. How did you get here, child? Whose baby are you? the man asked as he steered clear of the mass. The child wept more bitterly than ever now and only cried, I want my mother, I want my father! The man tried to soothe him by taking him to the roundabout. Will you have a ride on the horse? he gently asked as he approached the ring. The child s throat tore into a thousand shrill sobs and he only shouted, I want my mother, I want my father! 4 / Moments gs ? Dvn Ba: Reprint 2025-26 Bow hsb The man headed towards the place where the snake-charmer still played on the flute to the swaying cobra. Listen to that nice music, child! he pleaded. But the