We can estimate the area of any simple closed shape by using a sheet of squared paper or graph paper where every square measures 1 unit x 1 unit or 1 square unit. To estimate the area, we can trace the shape onto a piece of transparent paper and place the same on a piece of squared or graph paper and then follow the below conventions 1. The area of one full small square of the squared or graph paper is taken as 1 sq unit. Ignore portions of the area that are less than half a square. If more than half of a square is in a region, just count it as 1 sq unit. If exactly half the square is counted, take its area as 5 sq unit. %e& Find the area of the following figures. Chapter 6_Perimeter and Area.indd 140 Reprint 2025-26 13-08-2024 16:16:31 Perimeter and Area Let s Explore! Why is area generally measured using squares? Draw a circle on a graph sheet with diameter (breadth) of length 3. Count the squares and use them to estimate the area of the circular region. As you can see, circles can t be packed tightly without gaps in between. So, it is difficult to get an accurate measurement of area using circles as units. Here, the same rectangle is packed in two different ways with circles the first one has 42 circles and the second one has 44 circles. Why can t we use circles instead of squares to find the % Try using different shapes (triangle and rectangle) to fill the given space (without overlaps and gaps) and find out the merits associated with using a square shape to find the area rather than another shape. List out the points that make a square the best shape to use to measure area. 1. Find the area (in square metres) of the floor outside of the corridor. 2. Find the area (in square metres) occupied by your school playground. Let s Explore! %o& On a squared grid paper (1 square = 1 square unit), make as many rectangles as you can whose lengths and widths are a whole number of units such that the area of the rectangle is 24 square units. a. Which rectangle has the greatest perimeter? b. Which rectangle has the least perimeter? Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 6_Perimeter and Area.indd 141 13-08-2024 16:16:32 Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 c. If you take a rectangle of area 32 sq cm, what will your answers be? Given any area, is it possible to predict the shape of the rectangle with the greatest perimeter as well as the least perimeter? Give examples and reasons for your answer. 6.3 Area of a Triangle Draw a rectangle on a piece of paper and draw one of its diagonals. Cut the rectangle along that diagonal and get two triangles. % Check! whether the two triangles overlap each other exactly. Do they have the same area? Try this with more rectangles having different