wings. Match the phrases given under Column A with their meanings given under Column B: A B Fly a flag Move quickly/suddenly Fly into rage Be successful Fly along Display a flag on a long pole Fly high Escape from a place Fly the coop Become suddenly very angry Il]. We know that the word fly (of birds/insects) means to. move. through air using wings. Tick the words which have the same or nearly the same meaning. swoop flit paddle flutter ascend float ride skim sink dart hover glide descend soar shoot spring stay fall sail flap Wot Have you ever been alone or away from home during a thunderstorm? Narrate your experience in a paragraph. In This Lesson Wuat WE Have Done Provided two stories about flying one about a bird, another about a human being in a plane. bury] ynoqe SOT10]E OMT, Wuat You Can Do As they read the story of the seagull, students can be asked to imagine how a baby learns to walk, and compare and contrast the two situations. Reprint 2025-26 First Flight e After they read the second story students should be asked for their ideas about the phantom plane: Was it really there or did the pilot imagine it? If the students feel it was really there, who could have been piloting it? Ask students to narrate their own stories about flying. It could be about flying in an airplane, or flying a kite, or about watching a bird flying in short, anything to do with flight. Give students ten minutes to think quietly about the topic during this time, they can make notes about what they want to say. Then ask for volunteer speakers. Compound Words Whose Parts Mean Just the Opposite or Something Else Quicksand works slowly There in no egg in eggplant nor ham in hamburger; neither apple nor pine in pineapple. Boxing rings are square Reprint 2025-26 How to Tell Wild Animals This humorous poem suggests some dangerous ways to identify (or tell ) wild animals! Read it aloud, keeping to a strong and regular rhythm. If ever you should go by chance To jungles in the east; And if there should to you advance A large and tawny beast, If he roars at you as you're dyin You'll know it is the Asian Lion... Or if some time when roaming round, A noble wild beast greets you, With black stripes on a yellow ground, Just notice if he eats you. This simple rule may help you learn The Bengal Tiger to discern. If strolling forth, a beast you view, Whose hide with spots is peppered, As soon as he has lept on you, You'll know it is the Leopard. *Twill do no good to roar with pain, He'll only lep and lep again. Reprint 2025-26 First Flight If when you're walking round your yard You meet a creature there, Who hugs you very, very hard, Be sure it is a Bear. If you have any doubts, I