a compass or a radio, and without any more fuel in my tanks? Who was the pilot on the strange black aeroplane, flying in the storm, without lights? Reprint 2025-26 burAy y ynoqe SOT10]E OMT, First Flight 4. 5. 1 Thinkin about the Text 1. 2. 3. Tll take the risk. What is the risk? Why does the narrator take it? Describe the narrator s experience as he flew the aeroplane into the storm. Why does the narrator say, I landed and was not sorry to walk away from the old Dakota... ? What made the woman in the control centre look at the narrator strangely? Who do you think helped the narrator to reach safely? Discuss this among yourselves and give reasons for your answer. Thinking about I. Study the sentences given below. (a) They looked like black mountains. (b) Inside the clouds, everything was suddenly black. (c) In the black clouds near me, I saw another aeroplane. (d) The strange black aeroplane was there. The word black in sentences (a) and (c) refers to the very darkest colour. But in (b) and (d) (here) it means without light/with no light. Black has a variety of meanings in different contexts. For example: (a) I prefer black tea means I prefer tea without milk . (b) With increasing pollution the future of the world is black means With increasing pollution the future of the world is very depressing/ without hope . Now, try to guess the meanings of the word black in the sentences given below.-Check the meanings in the dictionary and find out whether you have guessed right. 1. Go and have a bath; your hands and face are absolutely black. 2. The taxi-driver gave Ratan a black look as he crossed the road when the traffic light was green. 3. The bombardment of Hiroshima is one of the blackest crimes against humanity. 4. Very few people enjoy Harold Pinter s black comedy. 5. Sometimes shopkeepers store essential goods to create false scarcity and then sell these in black. 6. Villagers had beaten the criminal black and blue. Reprint 2025-26 \bby xo II. Look at these sentences taken from the lesson you have just read: (a) I was flying my old Dakota aeroplane. (b) The young seagull had been afraid to fly with them. In the first sentence the author was controlling an aircraft in the air. Another example is: Children are flying kites. In the second sentence the seagull was afraid to move through the air, using its wings. Match the phrases given under Column A with their meanings given under Column B: A B Fly a flag Move quickly/suddenly Fly into rage Be successful Fly along Display a flag on a long pole Fly high Escape from a place Fly the coop Become suddenly very angry Il]. We know that the word fly (of birds/insects) means to. move. through air using wings. Tick the words which have the same or nearly the same meaning. swoop flit paddle