you to try, regardless of a possibility of failure? Speaking We have just read about the first flight of a young seagull. Your teacher will now divide the class into groups. Each group will work on one of the following topics. Prepare a presentation with your group members and then present it to the entire class. Progression of Models of Airplanes Progression of Models of Motorcars Birds and Their Wing Span Migratory Birds Tracing Their Flights 1 Wot Write a short composition on your initial attempts at learning a skill. You could describe the challenges of learning to ride a bicycle or learning to swim. Make it as humorous as possible. Reprint 2025-26 II The Black Aeroplane THE moon was coming up in the east, behind me, and stars were shining in the clear sky above me. There wasn t a cloud in the sky. I was happy to be alone high up above the sleeping countryside. I was flying my old Dakota aeroplane over France back to England. I was dreaming of my holiday and looking forward to being with my family. I looked at my watch: one thirty in the morning. T should call Paris Control soon, I thought. As I looked down past the nose of the aeroplane, I saw the lights of a big city in front of me. I switched on the radio and said, Paris Control, Dakota DS 088 here. Can you hear me? I m on my way to England. Over. The voice from the radio answered me immediately: DS 088, I can hear you. You ought to turn twelve degrees west now, DS 088. Over. I checked the map and the compass, switched over to my second and last fuel tank, and turned the Dakota twelve degrees west towards England. Tll be in time for breakfast, I thought. A good big English breakfast! Everything was going well it was an easy flight. Paris was about 150 kilometres behind me when I saw the clouds. Storm clouds. They were huge. They looked like black mountains standing in front of me across the sky. I knew I could not fly up and over them, and I did not have enough fuel to fly around them to the north or south. I ought to go back to Paris, I thought, but I wanted to get home. I wanted that breakfast. Tll take the risk, I thought, and flew that old Dakota straight into the storm. Inside the clouds, everything was suddenly black. It was impossible to see anything outside the aeroplane. The old aeroplane jumped and twisted in the air. I looked at the compass. I couldn t believe Reprint 2025-26 burAy y ynoqe SOT10]E OMT, First Flight ae. i.) my eyes: the compass was turning round and round and round. It was dead. It would not work! The other instruments were suddenly dead, too. I tried the radio. Paris Control? Paris Control? Can you hear me? There was no answer. The radio was dead