44 I. His First Flight II. Black Aeroplane Berore You READ 9 ) Two Stories about wo (D Flying Liam 0 Flaherty Frederick Forsyth Since the earliest times, humans have dreamt of conquering the skies. Here are two stories about flying. I. Ayoung seagull is afraid to fly. How does he conquer his fear? II. A pilot is lost in storm clouds. Does he arrive safe? Who helps him? I His First Flight THE young seagull was alone on his ledge. His two brothers and his sister had already flown away the day before. He had been afraid to fly with them. Somehow when he had taken a little run forward to the brink of the ledge and attempted to flap his wings he became afraid. The great expanse of sea stretched down beneath, and it was such a long way down miles down. He felt certain that his wings would never support him; so he bent his head and ran away back to the little hole under the ledge where he slept at night. Even when each of his brothers and his little sister, whose wings were far shorter than his own, ran to the brink, flapped their wings, and flew away, he failed to muster up courage to take that plunge which appeared to him so desperate. His father and mother had come around Reprint 2025-26 ledge a narrow horizontal shelf projecting from a wall or (here) a cliff calling to him shrilly, upbraiding him, threatening to let him starve on his ledge unless he flew away. But for the life of him he could not move. That was twenty-four hours ago. Since then nobody had come near him. The day before, all day long, he had watched his parents flying about with his brothers and sister, perfecting them in the art of flight, teaching them how to skim the waves and how to dive for fish. He had, in fact, seen his older brother catch his first herring and devour it, standing on a rock, while his parents circled around raising a proud cackle. And all the morning the whole family had walked about on the big plateau midway down the opposite cliff taunting him with his cowardice. The sun was now ascending the sky, blazing on his ledge that faced the south. He felt the heat because he had not eaten since the previous nightfall. He stepped slowly out to the brink of the ledge, and standing on one leg with the other leg hidden under his wing, he closed one eye, then the other, Reprint 2025-26 \bby x upbraiding scolding (to) skim to move lightly just above a surface (here, the sea) herring a soft-finned sea fish _ So iS) z iJ = a _ < = = _ % <=) First Flight and pretended to be falling asleep. Still they took no notice of him. He saw his two brothers and his sister lying on the plateau dozing with their heads sunk into their