feed whoever strays my way. He would have grown to admire <, the woman I ve become: ") cooking, writing, chopping wood, | Fun fact | staring into the fire. Egg on one s face Alice Walker Be embarrassed, feel foolish 1. What made Alice Walker,open a savings account in High School? 2: What lesson did her father give her on telling the truth? fy @ N 0/9, SENS r) FA. iS WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] (UTES) SME MEMS MEMS MSM SMS MEMS MEMS MS MS MS MS M6 MS 41S 1S et | Unit 3.indd 42 29-05-2018 17:30:00 | | Unit 3.indd 43 3. Tick (v) the correct answer. What does dancing in yoga meditation mean in the poem? (a) To cook relaxedly and with full concentration. (b) To cook while doing yoga exercises. (c) To cook food after doing yoga meditation. (d) Take lessons in cooking by joining class on yoga meditation. 4. Fill in the blank to complete the following statement. Alice Walker becomes nostalgic for her father and wishes, had he been alive he would have admired her for 5. Why do you think the title of the poem is Poem at Thirty-Nine ? VOCABULARY 1. Look at the words see, watch, look. at, view, observe, catch, glimpse. These are all synonyms. Fill in the blanks with appropriate words. You can change the tense where it is required. (a) We a television programme on tourism in India. It was very informative. (b) Somebody is keeping a over the tower. (c) The from the cliff is panoramic. (d) You can t afford to fall sick again, your diet. Unit 3 Via a Fun fact Contradictory proverbs The best things in life are free. but There s no such thing as free lunch. Birds of a feather flock together. but Opposites attract. Gl o> S ) ea Ol ag co) 6 S Se +) ENF CN ene FeO en fe Nema en Fe ON Fem FCN Fe ON Pen Fe CO Fe CN en Fenn FeO EATUTATOMTTTATATTT TT TTT TTT TTT TO TOTTI VTOOUIT OTTO TOTTI 29-05-2018 17:30:00 | PST Fun fact jl At the end / In the end At the end means at the time when something ends . In the end means finally . Examples: At the end of the play, there was great applause. The conclusion is given at the end of the passage. The subject looked difficult in the beginning, but everyone could understand it in the end. Arti and Rati didn t like each other when they first met, but became good friends in the end. fy @ Ny aM, Cam. (44) ie} [) o we Gaye SME MEMS MEMS MSM SMS MEMS MEMS MS MS MS MS M6 MS 41S 1S et | Unit 3.indd 44 (e) She the amazing view and drew a picture. (f) If you are able to a of dancing dolphins, you are lucky. Look at the following sentence: By that time he had his spectacles on