Anita agreed to her request. We decided to go to our village near Goa on holiday. Mona recommended going to the beach. The coast guard advised us against going into the water. He also warned us about the weak bridge. He warned The teacher asked _ the students to move farther from the stage. The students did not ask any further questions from the teacher. the children not to cross the bridge there. We thanked him and went back. (iv) The teacher explained the functioning of the heart with the help of a model. He wished us good luck for our practical exam. He also reminded us that the classes would resume from Tuesday. 2. Read the following sentences and choose the correct reporting verb from the options given against each sentence. (i) He me against eating junk food. Qa A) advised B) told C) suggested S (ii) The teacher me to telephone S my mother. S) A) informed B) advised C) reminded Ck) OTT (a\ G), ro) Unit 3 &S 5) oro } (OTTHN) Nea Me MaMa Mata ta MaMaatlaWatahiatiahatiahtatatabtl: | Unit 3.indd 45 29-05-2018 17:30:01 | fy @ N (9g, eI QO eee (iii) (iv) (v) (vi) av = i) (vii) Like two peas in a pod Nearly identical, very similar They re like two peas in a (viii) pod. He A) offered She book. A) told The host A) said The Police later to get me a cup of tea. B) said C) invited Ruchi of stealing her B) accused C) admitted for the delay. B) apologised C) regretted that one of the convicts had been arrested. A) convinced The little girl A) refused He was terrible. A) invited x) 3 Epitine B) declared C) confirmed to wear the sweater. B) denied taking the train as the road C) said no B) claimed C) suggested 1. Use capital letters, full-stops, commas and inverted commas wherever necessary in the following paragraph. Rewrite the paragraph in the space given below. My little 10 years daughter Sarah was born with a muscle missing in her foot and wears a brace all the time. she came home jumping up and down one beafutiful spring day to tell me that she had competed in field day - that s where they have lots of races and other competitive events because of her leg support my mind raced as I tried to think of encouragement for my sarah i wanted to tell some hard facts of life not letting this to get her down But, before I could get my word out, she said, Daddy, I won two of the races! I couldn t believe that! and then Sarah came out with a declaration, I had an advantage. Ah, i knew it. i thought she must have been given a head start, some kind of physical advantage. but again, before I could say anything, she said, Daddy, i didn t geta Gaye 55050505 05050505 05054505 05054S054505o5u5o5 UUTUMMUTTMMT OAT CMTC TTT TEM ONTO ere