fears by expressing how she felt. How was the matter eventually resolved? (a) Atticus agreed to allow her to learn from home. (b) Atticus agreed to continue reading as before. (c) Atticus agreed to speak to her teacher. (d) Atticus agreed to allow only the teacher to teach her. I m afraid our activities would be received with considerable disapprobation by the more learned authorities. In this context, the word disapprobation might mean (a) disapproval (b) disturbance (c) disgrace (d) disorientation Atticus decided to come to a compromise and to read to Scout but asked her not to mention it to her teacher because (a) he respected the wishes of the teacher yet didn t want to disappoint his daughter. WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] SME MEMS MEMS MSM SMS MEMS MEMS MS MS MS MS M6 MS 41S 1S et | Unit 3.indd 40 29-05-2018 17:30:00 | passage. Read the poem and answer the questions given below. You can recite too to appreciate the idea in the poem. (b) he might get into trouble with the teacher who might come after him. (c) he only cared for his daughter and thought the teacher was incorrect. (d) he was afraid that the teacher may not like it and Scout might get into trouble. The word reinforce means the following fortify, brace, stiffen, strengthen, underpin. Find the contextual meaning of reinforce in the Poem at Thirty-Nine How I miss my father. I wish he had not been so tired when I was born. Writing deposit slips and cheques I think of him. He taught me how. This is the form, he must have said: the way it is done. I learned to see bits of paper as a way to escape the life he knew and even in high school had a savings account. He taught me that telling the truth did not always mean a beating; though many of my truths must have grieved him Unit 3 Ze Bemused This word is not related to amuse in any way. Bemused means bewildered or perplexed. Gl o> S om CY) @: S CAC) (OTTHN) Nea Me MaMa Mata ta MaMaatlaWatahiatiahatiahtatatabtl: | Unit 3.indd 41 29-05-2018 17:30:00 | before the end. How I miss my father! He cooked like a person dancing in a yoga meditation and craved the voluptuous sharing of good food. Now I look and cook just like him: my brain light; tossing this and that into the pot; seasoning none of my life the same way twice; happy to feed whoever strays my way. He would have grown to admire <, the woman I ve become: ") cooking, writing, chopping wood, | Fun fact | staring into the fire. Egg on one s face Alice Walker Be embarrassed, feel foolish 1. What made Alice Walker,open a savings account in High School? 2: What lesson did her father give her on telling the truth? fy @ N 0/9, SENS r) FA. iS WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] (UTES) SME MEMS MEMS