more... That s really bothering you, isn t it? Yes sir. When Atticus looked down at me I saw the expression on his face that always made me expect something. Do you know what a compromise is? , he asked. Bending the law? No, an agreement reached by mutual concessions. It works this way , he said. If you'll concede the necessity of going to school, we'll go on reading every night just as we always have. Is it a bargain? Yes sir! We'll consider it sealed without the usual formality , Atticus said, when he saw me preparing to spit. As I opened the front screen door Atticus said, By the way, Scout, you d better not say anything at school about our agreement . Why not? I m afraid our activities would be received with considerable disapprobation by the more learned authorities. My brother and I were accustomed to our father s diction, and we were at all times free to interrupt Atticus for a translation when it was beyond our understanding. Huh, Sir? I never went to school , he said, but I have a feeling that if you tell Miss Caroline we read every night she'll get after me, and I wouldn t want her after me . 1. Why was Scout, the little girl upset? (a) She didn t like being told what to do. (b) She didn t want to read with her father. Unit 3 wisteria vine: flowering plants a genus of bargain: an agreement between two or more people as to what each will do for the other disapprobation: strong moral disapproval Gl o> S om ool eS 00) CA) (OTTHN) Nea Me MaMa Mata ta MaMaatlaWatahiatiahatiahtatatabtl: | Unit 3.indd 39 29-05-2018 17:30:00 | av Supposed This is often misused as suppose to which is incorrect because it lacks the letter d. fy @ N aM, (40) ces Gaye (c) She didn t want to stop reading with her father. (d) She didn t want to read with her teacher. How did Atticus, her father, react to her outburst? (a) He was angry. (b) He was patient. (c) He was annoyed. (d) He was sad. What little advice did Atticus give to his little girl to cope up with situations that might upset her? (a) to know and understand that life isn t fair. (b) to stay calm and then run away from the problem. (c) to try and see from the other person s point of view. (d) to face her fears by expressing how she felt. How was the matter eventually resolved? (a) Atticus agreed to allow her to learn from home. (b) Atticus agreed to continue reading as before. (c) Atticus agreed to speak to her teacher. (d) Atticus agreed to allow only the teacher to teach her. I m afraid our activities would be received with considerable disapprobation by the more learned authorities. In this context, the word disapprobation might mean (a) disapproval (b) disturbance (c) disgrace (d)