like each other when they first met, but became good friends in the end. fy @ Ny aM, Cam. (44) ie} [) o we Gaye SME MEMS MEMS MSM SMS MEMS MEMS MS MS MS MS M6 MS 41S 1S et | Unit 3.indd 44 (e) She the amazing view and drew a picture. (f) If you are able to a of dancing dolphins, you are lucky. Look at the following sentence: By that time he had his spectacles on and looked at her over them... Here, look means lay one s eye on or to direct one s gaze in a specified direction. Use appropriate words from the synonyms given below in the following sentences. glance, gaze, stare, peep, watch, see, observe (a) Ginny at her watch. (take a brief or hurried look) (b) The door was ajar and she couldn t resist in. (look quickly and furtively at something) (c) Lucy him playing. (look at or observe attentively over a period of time) (d) He could only her in astonishment. (look steadily and intently, especially in admiration, surprise or thought) (e) She that all the seats were already occupied. (notice or perceive something) (f) In the distance, she could the blue horizon. (perceive with the eyes) (g) He at her in amazement. (look fixedly or vacantly at someone or something with one s eyes wide open) Study the use of the word little in the following sentence: To the little girl he was a figure to be feared. Here, little means small in size. Now, consult a dictionary and find out the meaning of little in the following sentences. The first one has been done for you. My little sister young or younger sister (a) I was a bodyguard for a little while: WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] 29-05-2018 17:30:01 | (b) This little car does have a few problems: (c) We got a little help from a training scheme: (d) I have little doubt of their identity: Ck) @ GRAMMAR 1. Read the following passage and underline the reporting verbs. Te Fun fact | Farther/ Further Farther refers to physical (i) Anu s mother agreed that Anu could go to the party but cautioned her not to have too many sweets. The dentist has advised her not to eat too many sweets. (ii) Anita reminded Leena to buy milk and keep it in the distance. Further means fridge because Vrinda wanted to have coffee in the ese geriealy evening. Leena insisted that she would only make Examples: coffee. Anita agreed to her request. We decided to go to our village near Goa on holiday. Mona recommended going to the beach. The coast guard advised us against going into the water. He also warned us about the weak bridge. He warned The teacher asked _ the students to move farther from the stage. The students did not ask any further questions from the teacher. the children not to cross the bridge there. We thanked him and went back. (iv)