of the other two. Repeat the same with other ~ Ganita Prakash | Grade 8 10. 11. sets of numbers. What pattern do you notice? How do we write this as an algebraic equation? Expand both sides of the equation to check that it is a true identity. . What is the algebraic expression describing the following steps add any two numbers. Multiply this by half of the sum of the two numbers? Prove that this result will be half of the square of the sum of the two numbers. . Which is larger? Find out without fully computing the product. (i) 14 26 or 16 x 24 (ii) 25 x 75 or 26 x 74 A tiny park is coming up in Dhauli. The plan is shown in the figure. The two square plots, each of area g sq. ft., will have a green cover. All the remaining area is a walking path w ft. wide that needs to be tiled. Write an expression for the area that needs to be tiled. For each pattern shown below, (i) Draw the next figure in the sequence. (ii) How many basic units are there in Step 10? (iii) Write an expression to describe the number of basic units in Step y. an LT EE an LT EE a |i EE | Ti Ean Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 m We extended the distributive property to find the product of two expressions each of which has two terms. The general form for the same is (a + b) x (c+ d) = ac + ad + bc + bd. m= Wesaw some special cases of this identity. * (a+ b) =a + 2ab+ b * (a -b) =a -2ab + b * (a+b) (a-b)=a -b . = We considered different patterns, and explored how to understand them using algebra. We saw that, often, there are multiple ways to solve a problem and arrive at the same correct answer. Finding different methods to approach and solve the same problem is a creative process. Arrange 10 coins in a triangle as shown in the figure below on the left. The task is to turn the triangle upside down by moving one coin at a time. How many moves are needed? What is the minimum number of moves? A triangle of 3 coins can be inverted (turned upside down) with a single move, and a triangle of 6 coins can be inverted by moving 2 coins. The 10-coin triangle can be flipped with just 3 moves; did you figure out how? Find out the minimum possible moves needed to flip the next bigger triangle having 15 coins. Try the same for bigger triangular numbers. Is there a simple way to calculate the minimum number of coin moves needed for any such triangular arrangement? (We ieaetl NG is I TA A 6, , Chapter 6 We Distribute, Yet Things Multiply.indd 158 10-07-2025 15:10:54