domestic labour. But their work is not valued and does not get recognition. The result of this division of labour is that although women constitute half of the humanity, their role in public life, especially politics, is minimal in most societies. Earlier, only men were allowed to participate in public affairs, vote and contest for public offices. Gradually the gender issue was raised in politics. Women in different parts of the world organised and agitated for equal rights. There were agitations in different countries for the extension of voting rights to women. 08-04-2022 14:15:13 Chapter 3.indd 31 These agitations demanded enhancing the political and legal status of women and improving their educational and career opportunities. More radical women s movements aimed at equality in personal and family life as well. These movements are called FEMINIST movements. Political expression of gender division and political mobilisation PERCEPTIONS OF TO THE FASHION INDUSTRY, Zuban on this question helped to improve women s role in public life. We now find women working as scientists, doctors, engineers, lawyers, managers and college and university teachers which were earlier not considered suitable for women. In some parts of the world, for example in Scandinavian countries, such as Sweden, Norway and Finland, the IDEAL. WOMAN TO THE TV SERIAL MAKERS he'd SS THE | LDEAL. VIEWER WHICH ONE OF THESE TS You? i SWS. Ju Discuss all these perceptions of an ideal woman that prevail in our society. Do you agree with any of these? If not, what is your image of an ideal woman? Reprint 2025-26 Glossary Feminist: A woman or a man who believes in equal rights and opportunities for women and men. 08-04-2022 OO = iq) = [o) op) () Nn s) w [o) (aL s) w o _ z) [o) ) (an) Glossary Patriarchy: Literally, rule by father, this concept is used to refer to a system that values men more and gives them power over women. r3.indd 32 participation of women in public life is very high. In our country, women still lag much behind men despite some improvement since Independence. Ours is still a male-dominated, PATRIARCHAL society. Women face disadvantage, discrimination and oppression in various ways: @ The literacy rate among women is only 54 per cent compared with 76 per cent among men. Similarly, a smaller proportion of girl students go for higher studies. When we A time use survey was conducted in six states of our country. It shows that an average woman works every day for a little over seven and half hours while an average man works for six and a half hours. Yet the work done by men is more visible because most of their work leads to generation of income. Women also do a lot of direct income generating work, but the bulk of their work is household related. This work remains unpaid and invisible. Daily time use (hours: minutes) Activities Income generating work Household and related work Talking, Gossip No work/ Leisure Sleep, self-care, reading