@ 4 BAY OF BENGAL Legend 951 and above RR 926 - 950 [IY 901 - 92s [__] 876-900 ei Below 875 Reprint 2025-26 Can you identify your State on this map? What is the child sex ratio in it? How is it different from others with a different colour? Identify the States which have child sex ratio below 900. Compare this map with the poster on the next page. How do the two of them tell us about the same issue? 08-04-2022 oe) S S [o) D (cP) Nn s) w [o) (aL s) w o _ z) [o) ) (an) 50 million/2 Oxfam GB Could you think of some reasons why women s representation is so low in India? Do you think Americas and Europe have achieved a Satisfactory level of women s representation? r3.indd 34 women missing in South Asia Due to 4 different forms of violence and discrimination ratio has fallen below 850 or even 800 in some States. There are reports of various kinds of harassment, exploitation and violence against women. Urban areas have become particularly unsafe for women. They are not safe even within their own home from beating, harassment and other forms of domestic violence. Womens political representation All this is well known. Yet issues related to women s well being or otherwise are not given adequate attention. This has led many feminists and women s movements to the conclusion that unless women control power, their problems will not get adequate attention. One way to ensure this is to have more women as elected representatives. In India, the proportion of women in legislature has been very low. For example, the percentage of elected women members in Lok Sabha has touched 14.36 per cent of its total strength for the first time in 2019. Their share in the state assemblies is less than 5 per cent. In this respect, India is among the Women in national parliaments in different regions of the world (in%) World Average Nordic countries Americas Europe Sub Saharan Africa eee Region Pacific States Note: Figures are for the per cent of women in the directly elected houses of parliament as on 1 October 2018. Source: http://archive.ipu.org/wmn-e/world.htm Reprint 2025-26 08-04-2022 14:15:28 Chapter 3.indd 35 bottom group of nations in the world (see the graph below). India is behind the averages for several developing countries of Africa and Latin America. In the government, cabinets are largely all-male even when a woman becomes the Chief Minister or the Prime Minister. One way to solve this problem is to make it legally binding to have a fair proportion of women in the elected bodies. This is what the Panchayati Raj has done in India. One-third of seats in local government bodies -in panchayats and municipalities -are now reserved for women. Now there are more than 10 lakh elected women representatives in rural and urban local bodies. Women s organizations and activists had been demanding a similar reservation of at least onethird of seats in