Caste is one aspect of our experience but it is not the only relevant or the most important aspect. Caste can take various forms in politics: When parties choose candidates in elections, they keep in mind the caste composition of the electorate and nominate candidates from different castes so as to muster necessary support to win elections. When governments are formed, political parties usually take care that representatives of different castes and tribes find a place in it. Political parties and candidates in elections make appeals to caste sentiment to muster support. Some political parties are known to favour some castes and are seen as their representatives. @ Universal adult franchise and the principle of one-person-one-vote 08-04-2022 14:15:32 Chapter 3.indd 41 Caste inequality today Caste is an important source of economic inequality because it regulates access to resources of various kinds. For example, in the past, the so-called untouchable castes were denied the right to own land, while only the so-called twice born castes had the right to education. Although this kind of explicit and formalised inequality based on caste is now outlawed, the effects of centuries of accumulated advantages and disadvantages continue to be felt. Moreover, new kinds of inequalities have also developed. The relationship between caste and economic status has certainly changed a lot. Today, it is possible to find very rich and very poor people in every caste, whether low or high . This was not true even twenty or thirty years ago - it was very rare indeed to find rich people among the lowest castes. However, as this evidence from the National Sample Survey shows, caste continues to be very strongly linked to economic status in many important ways: The average economic status (measured by criteria like monthly consumption expenditure) of caste groups still follows the old hierarchy the upper castes are best off, the Dalits and Adivasis are worst off, and the backward classes are in between. e Although every caste has some poor members, the proportion living in extreme poverty (below the official poverty line ) is much higher for the lowest castes and much lower for the upper castes, with the backward classes once again in between. e Although every caste has some members who are rich, the upper castes are heavily over-represented among the rich while the lower castes are severely under-represented. Percentage of population living below the poverty line, 1999-2000 Caste and Community groups Urban Scheduled Tribes 35.6 Scheduled Castes 38.3 Other Backward Classes 29.5 Muslim Upper Castes 34.2 Hindu Upper Castes 9.9 Christian Upper Castes | 96 5.4 Sikh Upper Castes | oo 4.9 Other Upper Castes 2.7 All Groups 23.4 Note: Upper Caste here means those who are not from SC, ST, or OBC. Below the poverty line means those who spent *327 or less per person per month in rural and %454 or less per person per month in urban areas. Source: National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO), Government of India, 55th Round, 1999-2000 Reprint 2025-26 08-04-2022 oO