Upper Castes 9.9 Christian Upper Castes | 96 5.4 Sikh Upper Castes | oo 4.9 Other Upper Castes 2.7 All Groups 23.4 Note: Upper Caste here means those who are not from SC, ST, or OBC. Below the poverty line means those who spent *327 or less per person per month in rural and %454 or less per person per month in urban areas. Source: National Sample Survey Organisation (NSSO), Government of India, 55th Round, 1999-2000 Reprint 2025-26 08-04-2022 oO = qe) = [o) D ) Nn s) w [o) (aL s) w o _ z) [o) ) (an) Ajith Ninan - India Today Book of Cartoons caste as vote banks ? r3.indd 42 compelled political leaders to gear up to the task of mobilising and securing political support. It also brought new consciousness among the people of castes that were hitherto treated as inferior and low. The focus on caste in politics can sometimes give an impression that elections are all about caste and nothing else. That is far from true. Just consider these: No parliamentary constituency in the country has a clear majority of one single caste. So, every candidate and party needs to win the confidence of more than one caste and community to win elections. No party wins the votes of all the voters of a caste or community. When people say that a caste is a vote bank of one party, it usually means that a large proportion of Reprint 2025-26 the voters from that caste vote for that party. Many political parties may put up candidates from the same caste (if that caste is believed to dominate the electorate in a particular constituency). Some voters have more than one candidate from their caste while many voters have no candidate from their caste. The ruling party and the sitting MP or MLA frequently lose elections in our country. That could not have happened if all castes and communities were frozen in their political preferences. Clearly, while caste matters in electoral politics, so do many other factors. The voters have strong attachment to political parties which is often stronger than their attachment to their caste or community. People within the same caste or community have different interests depending on their economic condition. Rich and poor or men and women from the same caste often vote very differently. People s assessment of the performance of the government and the popularity rating of the leaders matter and are often decisive in elections. Politics in caste We have so far looked at what caste does to politics. But it does not mean that there is only a one-way relation between caste and politics. Politics too influences the caste system and caste identities by bringing them into the political arena. Thus, it is not politics that gets caste-ridden, it 08-04-2022 14:15:32 Chapter 3.indd 43 is the caste that gets politicised. This takes several forms: @ Each caste group tries to become bigger by incorporating within it neighbouring castes or sub-castes