seven and half hours while an average man works for six and a half hours. Yet the work done by men is more visible because most of their work leads to generation of income. Women also do a lot of direct income generating work, but the bulk of their work is household related. This work remains unpaid and invisible. Daily time use (hours: minutes) Activities Income generating work Household and related work Talking, Gossip No work/ Leisure Sleep, self-care, reading etc. Men Women 0:30 5:00 Source: Government of India, Time Use Survey, 1998-99. You can conduct a similar time use survey in your own household. Observe all the adult male and female members of your family for one week. Every day note down the number of hours each of them spends on the following activities: income generating activity (working at the office or shop or factory or field, etc.), household related activity (cooking, cleaning, washing, fetching water, looking after children or elders, etc.), reading and recreation, talking/gossiping, self-care, taking rest or sleeping. If necessary make new categories. Add up the time taken on each activity for a week and calculate the daily average for each activity for each member. Do women work more in your family as well? Reprint 2025-26 08-04-2022 14:15:18 Chapter 3.indd 33 Source: Census Report of 2011 look at school results, girls perform as well as boys, if not better in some places. But they drop out because parents prefer to spend their resources for their boys education rather than spending equally on their sons and daughters. @ No wonder the proportion of women among the highly paid and valued jobs, is still very small. On an average, an Indian woman works one hour more than an average man every day. Yet much of her work is not paid and therefore, often not valued. , INDIAN " Kilometers 3400 800 @ The Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 provides that equal wages should be paid to equal work. However in almost all areas of work, from sports and cinema, to factories and fields, women are paid less than men, even when both do exactly the same work. @ In many parts of India, parents prefer to have sons and find ways to have the girl child aborted before she is born. Such sex-selective abortion led to a decline in child sex ratio (number of girl children per thousand boys) in the country to merely 919. As the map shows, this N. jh INDIA. CHILD SEX RATIO, 2011 (0-6 YEARS) @ 4 BAY OF BENGAL Legend 951 and above RR 926 - 950 [IY 901 - 92s [__] 876-900 ei Below 875 Reprint 2025-26 Can you identify your State on this map? What is the child sex ratio in it? How is it different from others with a different colour? Identify the States which have child sex ratio below 900. Compare this map with the poster on the next page. How do the two of them tell us about the