solve this problem is to make it legally binding to have a fair proportion of women in the elected bodies. This is what the Panchayati Raj has done in India. One-third of seats in local government bodies -in panchayats and municipalities -are now reserved for women. Now there are more than 10 lakh elected women representatives in rural and urban local bodies. Women s organizations and activists had been demanding a similar reservation of at least onethird of seats in Lok Sabha and State Assemblies for women. A bill with this proposal was pending before the Parliament for many decades. In 2023, Nari shakti Vandan Adhiniyam (Womens Reservation Act, 2023) has been passed which will give 33 percent reservation of seats for women in Lok Sabha, State Legislative Assemblies and also Delhi Assembly. Gender division is an example that some form of social division needs to be expressed in politics. This also shows that disadvantaged groups do benefit when social divisions become a political issue. Do you think that women could have made the gains we noted above if their unequal treatment was not raised in the political domain? Reprint 2025-26 If casteism and communalism are bad, what makes feminism a good thing? Why don t we oppose all those who divide the society on any lines caste, religion or gender? oe) S S [o) D (cP) 02/04/2024 11:57:11 | Nn s) w [o) (aL s) w o _ z) [o) = ) (an) | Chapter 3.indd 36 Religion, communalism and politics Let us now turn to a very different kind of social division, the division based on religious differences. This division is not as universal as gender, but religious diversity is fairly widespread in the world today. Many countries including India have in their population, followers of different religions. As we noticed in the case of Northern Ireland, even when most of the people belong to the same religion, there can be serious differences about the way people practice that religion. Unlike gender differences, the religious differences are often expressed in the field of politics. Consider the following: Gandhiji used to say that religion can never be separated from politics. What he meant by religion was not any particular religion like Hinduism or Islam but moral values that inform all religions. He believed that politics must be guided by ethics drawn from religion. Human rights groups in our country have demanded that the Government should take special steps to prevent communal riots and protect religious minorities. @ Women s movement has argued that FAMILY LAws of all religions discriminate against women. So they have demanded that government should change these laws to make them more equitable. All these instances involve a relationship between religion Reprint 2025-26 and politics. But they do not seem very wrong or dangerous. Ideas, ideals and values drawn from different religions can and perhaps should play a role in politics. People should be able to express in politics their needs, interests and demands as a