far looked at what caste does to politics. But it does not mean that there is only a one-way relation between caste and politics. Politics too influences the caste system and caste identities by bringing them into the political arena. Thus, it is not politics that gets caste-ridden, it 08-04-2022 14:15:32 Chapter 3.indd 43 is the caste that gets politicised. This takes several forms: @ Each caste group tries to become bigger by incorporating within it neighbouring castes or sub-castes which were earlier excluded from it. Various caste groups are required to enter into a coalition with other castes or communities and thus enter into a dialogue and negotiation. New kinds of caste groups have come up in the political arena like backward and forward caste groups. Thus, caste plays different kinds of roles in politics. In some situations, expression of caste differences in politics gives many disadvantaged communities the space to demand their share of power. In this sense, caste politics has helped people from Dalits and OBC castes to gain better access to decision making. Several political and non-political organisations have been demanding and agitating for an end to discrimination against particular castes, for more dignity and more access to land, resources and opportunities. At the same time, exclusive attention to caste can produce negative results as well. As in the case of religion, politics based on caste identity alone is not very healthy in a democracy. It can divert attention from other pressing issues like poverty, development and corruption. In some cases, caste division leads to tensions, conflict and even violence. Reprint 2025-26 OO = iq) = [o) op) () 19/03/2024 10:44:04 | 1. Mention different aspects of life in which women are discriminated or disadvantaged in India. State different forms of communal politics with one example each. State how caste inequalities are still continuing in India. 4. State two reasons to say that caste alone cannot determine election results in India. 5. What is the status of women s representation in India s legislative bodies? 6. Mention any two constitutional provisions that make India a secular state. 7. When we speak of gender divisions, we usually refer to: (a) Biological difference between men and women (b) Unequal roles assigned by the society to men and women (c) Unequal child sex ratio (d) Absence of voting rights for women in democracies 8. In India seats are reserved for women in (a) Lok Sabha (b) State legislative assemblies (c) Cabinets (d) Panchayati Raj bodies IS es 9. Consider the following statements on the meaning of communal politics. Communal politics is based on the belief that: A. One religion is superior to that of others. B. People belonging to different religions can live together happily as equal citizens. C. Followers of a particular religion constitute one community. D. State power cannot be used to establish the domination of one religious group over others. Which of the statements are correct? 10. Which among the following statements about India s Constitution