children to pick up the broken pieces of their lives. The initial government plan was to set up institutions for orphans and widows. However, this step was successfully resisted, as it was felt that in such institutions, children would grow up without love, and widows Weathering the Storm in Ersama/ 41 +23 / ~ Seite yes, Woy ego Reprint 2025-26 would suffer from stigma and loneliness. Prashant s group believed orphans should be resettled in their own community itself, possibly in new foster families made up of childless widows and children without adult care. It is six months after the devastation of the super cyclone. This time Prashant s wounded spirit has healed simply because he had no time to bother about his own pain. His handsome, youthful face is what the widows and orphaned children of his village seek out most in their darkest hour of grief. HarsH MANDER Glossary menacing: dangerous and harmful incessant: unceasing; continual swirled: moved or flowed along with a whirling motion carcasses: dead bodies of animals bereaved: lost a close relation or friend through his/her death remnants: small remaining quantities motley: disparate; varied in appearance or character tumult: uproar of a disorderly crowd ae Tuink Avour Ir 1. What havoc has the super cyclone wreaked in the life of the people of Orissa? 2. How has Prashant, a teenager, been able to help the people of his village? 3. How have the people of the community helped one another? What role do the women of Kalikuda play during these days? 4. Why do Prashant and other volunteers resist the plan to set up institutions for orphans and widows? What alternatives do they consider? 42 / Moments rn ee OO 5a. Aes Reprint 2025-26 DF year ee Ae 5. Do you think Prashant is a good leader? Do you think young people can get together to help people during natural calamities? BME Tax Avour Ir Talk about the preparedness of the community for a natural disaster. (You can talk about evacuation plans and rehabilitation; permanent safe shelters; warning systems; relief efforts; building materials to withstand cyclone/flood/earthquake, i.e. safe housing; peoples organisation of their own rescue; the survival instinct, etc.) i Sueccsren Reavine A Home on the Street by Harsh Mander Paying for His Tea by Harsh Mander Eton Munda Won the Battle by Mahasweta Devi % Weathering the Storm in Ersama/ 43 et. af hile Ww 4 SPA > Ry aoe Reprint 2025-26