and all life will suffer. But oceans often also give rise to storms violent events with extreme rainfall or very strong winds, such as cyclones, which can cause widespread damage to coastal regions of the world. A tsunami is another natural disaster that originates in the ocean. It is a huge and powerful wave generally caused by a strong earthquake or a volcanic eruption at the bottom of the ocean. Tsunamis can travel thousands of kilometres and submerge coastal areas, causing widespread damage. 2 - Oceans and Continents Reprint 2025-26 chapter2_310125.indd 33 & 03-02-2025 04:57:59 | ., DON'T MISS OUT On 26 December 2004, India and another 13 countries around the Indian Ocean were struck by a powerful tsunami caused by an earthquake in Indonesia. More than two lakh people lost their lives. In India, the Andaman and Nicobar Islands (see Fig. 2.4 above, and also the subsection Islands further below) and the coasts of Tamil Nadu and Kerala were severely affected and suffered much damage and loss of life. Such tsunamis are rare but very destructive. Luckily, they can often be detected before they hit a coast. Many countries collaborate in such early warning systems . There is, in particular, an Indian Ocean Tsunami Warning System, to which many countries, including India, contribute. This helps to take measures to protect lives and property. Events that lead to loss of life and property are handled under disaster management. India has its own National Disaster Management Authority to deal with all kinds of disasters (we will see more examples in the next chapter). Continents Continents are visible on the map of oceans (Fig. 2.3). How many can you count? The answer is not so simple, as they can be counted in several ways. Depending on our choice, we may list any number of continents between four and seven! Here is why: = North America and South America are generally considered to be two continents; but if seen as a single landmass, they can also be considered as one. = Europe and Asia are generally considered as two continents, although the map makes it clear that they form a single landmass. For historical and cultural reasons, Europe s evolution has been very different India and the World: Land and the People Exploring Society: India and Beyond Reprint 2025-26 chapter2_310125.indd 34 & 03-02-2025 04:57:59 | from Asia s, which is why they can be seen as two continents. Geologists, however, often regard them as a single continent called Eurasia . = Africa and Eurasia are generally regarded as two continents, but sometimes as one. Let us summarise the different counts in a table: Four continents Africa-Eurasia, America, Antarctica, Australia Five continents Africa, America, Antarctica, Australia, Eurasia Africa, Antarctica, Australia, Eurasia, North America, South America (this is reflected in Fig. 2.3 on page 32) Six continents Sevencontinents Africa, Antarctica, Asia, Australia, Europe, North America, South America In practice, the last list of seven continents is the one most widely adopted and used. < )