Eurasia are generally regarded as two continents, but sometimes as one. Let us summarise the different counts in a table: Four continents Africa-Eurasia, America, Antarctica, Australia Five continents Africa, America, Antarctica, Australia, Eurasia Africa, Antarctica, Australia, Eurasia, North America, South America (this is reflected in Fig. 2.3 on page 32) Six continents Sevencontinents Africa, Antarctica, Asia, Australia, Europe, North America, South America In practice, the last list of seven continents is the one most widely adopted and used. < ) DON'T MISS OUT You may have seen the five Olympic rings, one of the symbols of the Olympic Games. They symbolise the gathering of sportspeople from all over the world. The rings were chosen to represent five inhabited continents Africa, America, Asia, Australia and Europe. Now let us look at the diagram on page 36, which is based on the list of seven continents. It does not show their actual shapes, but their relative sizes. Reprint 2025-26 chapter2_310125.indd 35 & 2 - Oceans and Continents 03-02-2025 04:58:00 | LET'S EXPLORE > Counting the numbers of squares, name the largest continent and the smallest. e > Which one is larger North America or South America? Africa or North America? Antarctica or Australia? > Re-colour the diagram by having a single colour for Europe and Asia and rename the result as Eurasia . Compare its size with South America s. > Write down the list of continents from the smallest to the largest. Islands If you have carefully observed the two maps earlier in this chapter (Fig. 2.2 and 2.3), you may have noticed that India and the World: Land and the People Exploring Society: India and Beyond Reprint 2025-26 | chapter2_310125.indd 36 & 03-02-2025 04:58:00 | the continents do not include all landmass. Some smaller pieces of land are left out; surrounded by water on all sides, they are called islands. (Continents are also surrounded by water, but because they are so large, they are not considered islands.) There are lakhs of islands on the planet, of very different sizes. , DON'T MISS OUT Greenland is the largest island in the world (locate it ona globe or a map). You would have to add the areas of the 10 largest states of India to reach its size. India has more than 1,300 small islands! Those include two major groups Andaman and Nicobar Islands in the Bay of Bengal and Lakshadweep Islands in the Arabian Sea (see Fig. 2.4). Since 1981, the Indian Antarctica Programme has been exploring Antarctica, a continent with a very cold climate and harsh environment (see the white expanse at the bottom of Fig. 2.1, which is mostly ice). In 1983, India established its first scientific base station there, called Dakshin Gangotri (two more bases were established later). About 40 teams of Indian scientists have conducted research in this faraway region, especially on the evolution of climate and environment. The settlement where the scientists live has a library and even a post office! Oceans and Life Oceans and