The Distribution of Water and Land on the Earth As it happens, oceans and continents are not distributed equally between the Northern and Southern Hemispheres. Fig. 2.2. Maps of the Earth as seen from above the North Pole (left) and above @ the South Pole (right). Let us examine the two maps in Fig. 2.2. Here too, the blue jocthese areas consist of oceans, along with their smaller extensions, terms are in . . , >; . the Glossary which have various names sea , bay , gulf , etc. at the end of LET'S EXPLORE this textbook. > What are the circular lines in each map called? And do you know what the lines radiating out of the two poles are called? (Hint: you studied them in the previous chapter, but here they are presented differently.) > Which hemisphere holds more water? > What do you think could be the approximate proportion of water to land in the Northern Hemisphere? And in the Southern Hemisphere? Discuss in groups. 2 - Oceans and Continents > Areall the oceans connected with one another, or are there separations between them? Reprint 2025-26 chapter2_310125.indd 29 & 03-02-2025 04:57:52 | = . eS < = SQ AR\ chapter2_310125.indd 30 The oceans together hold most of the water available on the planet. But this seawater is salty and unfit for consumption by most land animals, including humans. On the other hand, freshwater makes up a very small proportion of the planet s water resources; it is found in glaciers, rivers, lakes, in the atmosphere and also underground (the last is called sroundwater ). Y THINK ABOUT IT Ifthere is such abundance of water on the planet, why is there so much talk of water scarcity or a water crisis ? What ways of saving water are you aware of? Which ones have you seen practised at home, at your school, and in your village, town or city? Oceans o On the world map in Fig. 2.3 on page 32, we can observe Marine: five oceans the Pacific Ocean, the Atlantic Ocean, the Related 0 Indian Ocean, the Arctic Ocean and the Southern (or the oceans Antarctic) Ocean. and seas. Although we have listed five oceans, it is clear from the Flora: map that they are not really separate. The lines that divide The plant them on the map are no more than conventions the life of a natural world does not follow such boundaries. Seawater, Pevion on for example, constantly flows across different oceans, ne toe of ~<a sustaining a rich diversity of marine life. Many plant and animal species can be found across multiple oceans. Fauna: The marine flora includes tiny plants called algae and all he gum kinds of seaweeds; the marine fauna consists of thousands particular of species of colourful fish, dolphins, whales, and countless period of mysterious deep-sea creatures. Each part of the ocean, from time. the sun-lit surface to the dark depths, has its own diverse life forms. 2 -