toe of ~<a sustaining a rich diversity of marine life. Many plant and animal species can be found across multiple oceans. Fauna: The marine flora includes tiny plants called algae and all he gum kinds of seaweeds; the marine fauna consists of thousands particular of species of colourful fish, dolphins, whales, and countless period of mysterious deep-sea creatures. Each part of the ocean, from time. the sun-lit surface to the dark depths, has its own diverse life forms. 2 - Oceans and Continents Reprint 2025-26 chapter2_310125.indd 31 & 03-02-2025 04:57:59 | Pacific | Ocean \ \ _/ Arctic Ocean ; Atlantic Ocean, =o tg } - 8 8 = = = ee eee Southern Ocean | _ Fig. 2.3. A world map showing the five oceans, their conventional India and the World: Land and the People Exploring Society: India and Beyond | chapter2_310125.indd 32 boundaries, and the continents LET'S EXPLORE Locate the five oceans and, in the table below, mark the hemisphere or hemispheres they belong to. Northern Southern Hemisphere Hemisphere Pacific Ocean Atlantic Ocean Southern Ocean It is visible on the map that the Pacific Ocean is the largest of all, followed by the Atlantic Ocean. The Indian Ocean is the third largest, while the Southern Ocean is the fourth. The smallest one is the Arctic Ocean. Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 04:57:59 | ~, DON'T MISS OUT As the map of oceans makes clear, the main limits of the Indian Ocean are Asia to the north, Africa to the west and Australia to the east, apart from the Southern Ocean in the south. On either side of India, we find two parts of the Indian Ocean the Arabian Sea to the west and the Bay of Bengal to the east. Fig. 2.4 (on the right). This map of India is the same as Fig. 1.6, but with the addition of the Arabian Sea and the Bay of Bengal. Also marked are India s two major groups of islands (see subsection on Tslands further below). Oceans and disasters Returning to the picture of the Earth at the start of this chapter, you may have noticed white : shapes across the globe. Did you - Bay of guess what they are? They are 2 \ Bengal large masses of clouds. Such clouds bring rain to the continents; for . re . . IN e Ql and Nicobar instance, the monsoon rains we ; Islands ~.: . . 9 in India expect every summer originate in the ocean without such rains, our agriculture and all life will suffer. But oceans often also give rise to storms violent events with extreme rainfall or very strong winds, such as cyclones, which can cause widespread damage to coastal regions of the world. A tsunami is another natural disaster that originates in the ocean. It is a huge and powerful wave generally caused by a strong earthquake or a volcanic eruption at the bottom of the ocean. Tsunamis can travel thousands of kilometres and submerge coastal areas,