Oceans and Continents CHAPTER The ocean is everything. It covers seven-tenths of the terrestrial globe. Its breath is pure and healthy. It is an immense desert, where man is never lonely, for he feels life stirring all around. ... The ocean is the vast reservoir of Nature. The globe began with the ocean, so to speak, and who knows ff it will not end with it. ... Jules Verne (1870) The Big Questions @ What are oceans and continents? What are their names and their distribution? In what ways do oceans and continents impact life on Earth, including human life? Fig. 2.1 The Earth seen from space (photograph by the Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter). The view is centred on the Pacific Ocean, with Africa to the left, India and part of Asia at the top, Australia to the right, and Antarctica at the bottom. O68 1CHO2 chapter 310125.ind) 27 Let us return to our globe and rotate it gently. Or look at the picture of the Earth seen from the Moon. What is the most widespread colour you see? Blue, obviously, but what does it represent? You must have guessed the answer it is water . This means that most of the Earth s surface is actually covered with water almost three-fourths of the surface, in fact. That is why, when seen from outer space, the Earth appears mostly blue. Indeed, early astronauts lovingly called the Earth the blue planet . The largest water bodies we see on the globe are called oceans . But in the picture of the Earth (Fig. 2.1), you can see at least one other colour, brown. This colour is that of land, which covers a little over one-fourth of the globe. A large body of land is called a landmass , and a large continuous expanse of land is called a continent . Both oceans and continents play a vital role in shaping the climate of the Earth. They affect all aspects of life, including all plants and animals, and therefore, human life too. We see their impact throughout our history and culture, and in our daily lives. DON'T MISS OUT India and the World: Land and the People Exploring Society: India and Beyond chapter2_310125.indd 28 The emblem of the Indian Navy contains the motto Sam noh Varunah (pronounced Shamno Varunah ), which means, Be auspicious to us, O Varuna. This is an invocation to Varuna, a Vedic deity associated with the oceans, the Ras sky, and water in general. Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 04:57:52 | The Distribution of Water and Land on the Earth As it happens, oceans and continents are not distributed equally between the Northern and Southern Hemispheres. Fig. 2.2. Maps of the Earth as seen from above the North Pole (left) and above @ the South Pole (right). Let us examine the two maps in Fig. 2.2. Here too, the blue jocthese areas consist of oceans, along with their smaller extensions, terms are in . . , >; . the Glossary which