a very cold climate and harsh environment (see the white expanse at the bottom of Fig. 2.1, which is mostly ice). In 1983, India established its first scientific base station there, called Dakshin Gangotri (two more bases were established later). About 40 teams of Indian scientists have conducted research in this faraway region, especially on the evolution of climate and environment. The settlement where the scientists live has a library and even a post office! Oceans and Life Oceans and continents are vital parts of the environment and affect most aspects of our lives, even if we do not notice it. We have mentioned that oceans send rain to the continents; this is part of the Earth s water cycle, which you will further study in Science. Without oceans, for 2 - Oceans and Continents Reprint 2025-26 chapter2_310125.indd 37 & 03-02-2025 04:58:00 | India and the World: Land and the People Exploring Society: India and Beyond chapter2_310125.indd 38 < is = instance, there would be no rainfall! The Earth would be a desert. Moreover, more than half of the world s oxygen is produced by the oceans flora, which is why they are called the planet s lungs . The oceans, therefore, play a crucial role in regulating the climate and sustaining life on Earth. Oceans have deeply impacted humanity in many other ways. From early times, people have used oceans and seas to migrate to other regions, to trade in all kinds of goods, to conduct military campaigns, and as a source of food through fishing. Oceans have also nourished the cultures of coastal people all over the world. Almost all of them have tales and legends about the sea, sea gods and goddesses, sea monsters and treasures from the sea the oceans dangers but also their blessings. DON'T MISS OUT The United Nations has designated June 8 as World Oceans Day to remind us all of the major role the ocean plays in everyday life. It serves as the lungs of our planet, a major source of food and medicine and a critical part of the biosphere. Scientific studies have shown how the oceans are polluted by human activity we throw several million tonnes of plastic waste into the oceans every year, choking marine life. There are several other forms of pollution. As a result, the marine environment is under threat. Overfishing (excessive fishing) is another cause for the decline of marine life. It is our collective responsibility to protect oceans for the future of the planet and of humanity. Before we move on... > The Earth s surface has vast water bodies called oceans and large landmasses called continents . Oceans are interconnected. Continents may be counted in various ways; the most common count is seven. > The Northern Hemisphere has more land than the Southern Hemisphere. Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 04:58:00 | > Oceans support all kinds of marine life and play a critical role in the world climate. They are now seriously affected by human activity