0962CHOR Cuarpter 8 QUADRILATERALS ee 8.1 Properties of a Parallelogram You have already studied quadrilaterals and their types in Class VII. A quadrilateral has four sides, four angles and four vertices. A parallelogram is a quadrilateral in which both pairs of opposite sides are parallel. _ D C Let us perform an activity. Cut out a parallelogram from a sheet of paper and cut it along a diagonal (see Fig. 8.1). You obtain two triangles. What can you say about these triangles? Place one triangle over the other. Turn one around, if necessary. What do you observe? A B Observe that the two triangles are congruent to Fig. 8.1 each other. Repeat this activity with some more parallelograms. Each time you will observe that each diagonal divides the parallelogram into two congruent triangles. Let us now prove this result. Theorem 8.1 : A diagonal of a parallelogram divides it into two congruent triangles. Proof : Let ABCD be a parallelogram and AC be a diagonal (see Fig. 8.2). Observe that the diagonal AC divides parallelogram ABCD into two triangles, namely, A ABC and A CDA. We need to prove that these triangles are congruent. Reprint 2025-26 QUADRILATERALS 105 In A ABC and A CDA, note that BC || AD and AC is a transversal. So, Z BCA= Z DAC (Pair of alternate angles) D c Also, AB || DC and AC is a transversal. So, Z BAC=Z DCA (Pair of alternate angles) and AC=CA (Common) B So, A ABC = ACDA (ASA rule) Fig. 8.2 or, diagonal AC divides parallelogram ABCD into two congruent triangles ABC and CDA. Now, measure the opposite sides of parallelogram ABCD. What do you observe? You will find that AB = DC and AD = BC. This is another property of a parallelogram stated below: Theorem 8.2 : In a parallelogram, opposite sides are equal. You have already proved that a diagonal divides the parallelogram into two congruent triangles; so what can you say about the corresponding parts say, the corresponding sides? They are equal. So, AB=DC and AD=BC Now what is the converse of this result? You already know that whatever is given in a theorem, the same is to be proved in the converse and whatever is proved in the theorem it is given in the converse. Thus, Theorem 8.2 can be stated as given below : Ifa quadrilateral is a parallelogram, then each pair of its opposite sides is equal. So its converse is : Theorem 8.3 : If each pair of opposite sides of a quadrilateral is equal, then it is a parallelogram. Can you reason out why? D C Let sides AB and CD of the quadrilateral ABCD be equal and also AD = BC (see Fig. 8.3). Draw diagonal AC. Clearly, A ABC = A CDA (Why?) So, ZBAC= Z DCA A B and ZBCA= Z DAC (Why?) Fig. 8.3 Can you now say that ABCD is a parallelogram? Why? Reprint 2025-26 106 MATHEMATICS You have just seen that