opposite sides of a quadrilateral is equal, then it is a parallelogram. Can you reason out why? D C Let sides AB and CD of the quadrilateral ABCD be equal and also AD = BC (see Fig. 8.3). Draw diagonal AC. Clearly, A ABC = A CDA (Why?) So, ZBAC= Z DCA A B and ZBCA= Z DAC (Why?) Fig. 8.3 Can you now say that ABCD is a parallelogram? Why? Reprint 2025-26 106 MATHEMATICS You have just seen that in a parallelogram each pair of opposite sides is equal and conversely if each pair of opposite sides of a quadrilateral is equal, then it is a parallelogram. Can we conclude the same result for the pairs of opposite angles? Draw a parallelogram and measure its angles. What do you observe? Each pair of opposite angles is equal. Repeat this with some more parallelograms. We arrive at yet another result as given below. Theorem 8.4 : In a parallelogram, opposite angles are equal. Now, is the converse of this result also true? Yes. Using the angle sum property of a quadrilateral and the results of parallel lines intersected by a transversal, we can see that the converse is also true. So, we have the following theorem : Theorem 8.5 : [fin a quadrilateral, each pair of opposite angles is equal, then it is a parallelogram. There is yet another property of a parallelogram. Let us study the same. Draw a parallelogram ABCD and draw both its diagonals intersecting at the point O (see Fig. 8.4). Measure the lengths of OA, OB, OC and OD. What do you observe? You will observe that OA=OC and OB=OD. or, Odis the mid-point of both the diagonals. Repeat this activity with some more parallelograms. A B Each time you will find that O is the mid-point of Fig. 8.4 both the diagonals. So, we have the following theorem : Theorem 8.6 : The diagonals of a parallelogram bisect each other. Now, what would happen, if in a quadrilateral the diagonals bisect each other? Will it be aparallelogram? Indeed this is true. This result is the converse of the result of Theorem 8.6. It is given below: Theorem 8.7 : Jf the diagonals of a quadrilateral bisect each other, then it is a parallelogram. You can reason out this result as follows: Reprint 2025-26 QUADRILATERALS 107 Note that in Fig. 8.5, it is given that OA = OC D C and OB = OD. So, A AOB2=ACOD_ (Why?) o Therefore, Z ABO = ZCDO_ (Why?) From this, we get AB || CD Lo Similarly, BC || AD A B Therefore ABCD is a parallelogram. Fig. 8.5 Let us now take some examples. Example 1 : Show that each angle of a rectangle is a right angle. Solution : Let us recall what a rectangle is. A rectangle is a parallelogram in which one angle is a right angle. Let ABCD be a rectangle in which 7 A = 90 . D C We have to