The electric current is expressed by a unit called ampere (A), named after the French scientist, Andre-Marie Ampere (1775-1836). One ampere is constituted by the flow of one coulomb of charge per second, that is, 1A=1C/1s. Small quantities of current are expressed in milliampere (1 mA = 10 A) or in microampere (1 tA = 10 A). An instrument called ammeter measures electric current in a circuit. It is always connected in series in a circuit through which the current is to be measured. Figure 11.1 shows the schematic diagram of a typical electric circuit comprising a cell, an electric bulb, an ammeter and a plug key. Note that the electric current flows in the circuit from the positive terminal of the cell to the negative terminal of the cell through the bulb and ammeter. A schematic diagram of an electric circuit comprising cell, electric bulb, ammeter and plug key Example 11.1 A current of 0.5 A is drawn by a filament of an electric bulb for 10 minutes. Find the amount of electric charge that flows through the circuit. Solution We are given, [= 0.5 A; t= 10 min = 600 s. From Eq. (11.1), we have Q =I 0.5 A X 600 s 300 C Q U ES TION S$ What does an electric circuit mean? Define the unit of current. Calculate the number of electrons constituting one coulomb of charge. Science Reprint 2025-26 11.2 ELECTRIC POTENTIAL AND POTENTIAL DIFFERENCE What makes the electric charge to flow? Let us consider the analogy of flow of water. Charges do not flow in a copper wire by themselves, just as water in a perfectly horizontal tube does not flow. If one end of the tube is connected to a tank of water kept at a higher level, such that there is a pressure difference between the two ends of the tube, water flows out of the other end of the tube. For flow of charges in a conducting metallic wire, the gravity, of course, has no role to play; the electrons move only if there is a difference of electric pressure called the potential difference along the conductor. This difference of potential may be produced by a battery, consisting of one or more electric cells. The chemical action within a cell generates the potential difference across the terminals of the cell, even when no current is drawn from it. When the cell is connected to a conducting circuit element, the potential difference sets the charges in motion in the conductor and produces an electric current. In order to maintain the current in a given electric circuit, the cell has to expend its chemical energy stored in it. We define the electric potential difference between two points in an electric circuit carrying some current as the work done to move a unit charge from one point to the other Potential difference (V) between two points = Work done (W)/Charge (Q) Vv = wW/Q (11.2) The SI unit of electric potential difference