R \/\h/\N . Variable resistance or rheostat inn or | 2 _ Ammeter (a)}- Voltmeter 11.4 OHM S LAW Is there a relationship between the potential difference across a conductor and the current through it? Let us explore with an Activity. Activity 11.1 Set up a circuit as shown in Fig. 11.2, consisting of a nichrome wire XY of length, say 0.5 m, an ammeter, a voltmeter and four cells of 1.5 V each. (Nichrome is an alloy of nickel, chromium, manganese, and iron metals.) First use only one cell as the source in the circuit. Note the reading in the ammeter I, for the current and reading of the voltmeter V for the potential difference across the nichrome wire XY in the circuit. Tabulate them in the Table given. Next connect two cells in the circuit and note the respective readings of the ammeter and voltmeter for the values of current through the nichrome wire and potential difference across the nichrome wire. Repeat the above steps using three cells and then four cells in the circuit separately. Calculate the ratio of V to I for each pair of potential difference V and current I. Figure 11.2 Electric circuit for studying Ohm s law Number of cells | Current through Potential difference V/I used in the the nichrome across the (volt/ampere) circuit wire, I nichrome (ampere) wire, V (volt) Plot a graph between V and I, and observe the nature of the graph. Electricity 175 Reprint 2025-26 2 = & Q0 iS 2) i) Potential difference (V) > o oS In this Activity, you will find that approximately the same value for V/I is obtained in each case. Thus the V-I graph is a straight line that passes through the origin of the graph, as shown in Fig. 11.3. Thus, V/Iis a constant ratio. In 1827, a German physicist Georg Simon Ohm (1787-1854) found out the relationship between the current I, flowing in a metallic wire and the potential difference across its terminals. The potential difference, V, across the ends of a given metallic wire in an electric circuit is directly proportional to the current flowing through it, provided its eee ( ya temperature remains the same. This is called Ohm s law. In other words Figure 11.3 V-I graph for a nichrome wire. A Vel (11.4) straight line plot shows that as the or V/I = constant current through a wire increases, the = R potential difference across the wire or V = JR (11.5) increases linearly this is Ohm s law. In Eq. (11.4), Ris a constant for the given metallic wire at a given temperature and is called its resistance. It is the property of a conductor to resist the flow of charges through it. Its SI unit is ohm, represented by the Greek letter Q. According to Ohm s law, R=V/I (11.6) If the potential difference across the two ends of a conductor is 1 V and the current through it is 1 A, then the