Ohm s law. In Eq. (11.4), Ris a constant for the given metallic wire at a given temperature and is called its resistance. It is the property of a conductor to resist the flow of charges through it. Its SI unit is ohm, represented by the Greek letter Q. According to Ohm s law, R=V/I (11.6) If the potential difference across the two ends of a conductor is 1 V and the current through it is 1 A, then the resistance R, of the conductor 1 volt is 1 Q. Thatis, 1 ohm = 1 ampere Also from Eq. (11.5) we get I=V/R (11.7) It is obvious from Eq. (11.7) that the current through a resistor is inversely proportional to its resistance. If the resistance is doubled the current gets halved. In many practical cases it is necessary to increase or decrease the current in an electric circuit. A component used to regulate current without changing the voltage source is called variable resistance. In an electric circuit, a device called rheostat is often used to change the resistance in the circuit. We will now study about electrical resistance of a conductor with the help of following Activity. Take a nichrome wire, a torch bulb, a 10 W bulb and an ammeter (0 5 A range), a plug key and some connecting wires. Set up the circuit by connecting four dry cells of 1.5 V each in series with the ammeter leaving a gap XY in the circuit, as shown in Fig. 11.4. Science Reprint 2025-26 et 10 W bulb = Torch bulb Nichrome wire HHH# Figure 11.4 = Complete the circuit by connecting the nichrome wire in the gap XY. Plug the key. Note down the ammeter reading. Take out the key from the plug. [Note: Always take out the key from the plug after measuring the current through the circuit.] = Replace the nichrome wire with the torch bulb in the circuit and find the current through it by measuring the reading of the ammeter. = Now repeat the above step with the 10 W bulb in the gap XY. = Are the ammeter readings different for different components connected in the gap XY? What do the above observations indicate? = You may repeat this Activity by keeping any material component in the gap. Observe the ammeter readings in each case. Analyse the observations. In this Activity we observe that the current is different for different components. Why do they differ? Certain components offer an easy path for the flow of electric current while the others resist the flow. We know that motion of electrons in an electric circuit constitutes an electric current. The electrons, however, are not completely free to move within a conductor. They are restrained by the attraction of the atoms among which they move. Thus, motion of electrons through a conductor is retarded by its resistance. A component of a given size that offers a low resistance is a good conductor. A conductor having some