of joining the resistors together. Figure 11.6 shows an electric circuit in which three resistors having resistances R_, R, and R,, respectively, are joined end to end. Here the resistors are said to be connected in series. HHH - Figure 11.6 Resistors in series Electricity 181 Reprint 2025-26 Figure 11.7 shows a combination of resistors in which three resistors are connected together between points X and Y. Here, the resistors are said to be connected in parallel. Figure 11.7 Resistors in parallel 11.6.1 Resistors in Series What happens to the value of current when a number of resistors are connected in series in a circuit? What would be their equivalent resistance? Let us try to understand these with the help of the following activities. Join three resistors of different values in series. Connect them with a battery, an ammeter and a plug key, as shown in Fig. 11.6. You may use the resistors of values like 1 Q, 2 Q, 3 Q etc., anda battery of 6 V for performing this Activity. = Plug the key. Note the ammeter reading. = Change the position of ammeter to anywhere in between the resistors. Note the ammeter reading each time. = Do you find any change in the value of current through the ammeter? You will observe that the value of the current in the ammeter is the same, independent of its position in the electric circuit. It means that in a series combination of resistors the current is the same in every part of the circuit or the same current through each resistor. 182 Science Reprint 2025-26 = In Activity 11.4, insert a voltmeter across the ends X and Y of the series combination of three resistors, as shown in Fig. 11.6. = Plug the key in the circuit and note the voltmeter reading. It gives the potential difference across the series combination of resistors. Let it be V. Now measure the potential difference across the two terminals of the battery. Compare the two values. = Take out the plug key and disconnect the voltmeter. Now insert the voltmeter across the ends X and P of the first resistor, as shown in Fig. 11.8. HHHH Figure 11.8 = Plug the key and measure the potential difference across the first resistor. Let it be V,. = Similarly, measure the potential difference across the other two resistors, separately. Let these values be V, and V,, respectively. = Deduce a relationship between V, V,, V, and V.,. You will observe that the potential difference Vis equal to the sum of potential differences V,, V,, and V,. That is the total potential difference across a combination of resistors in series is equal to the sum of potential difference across the individual resistors. That is, V=V,+V, +V, (11.11) In the electric circuit shown in Fig. 11.8, let Ibe the current through the circuit. The current through each resistor is also I. It is possible to replace the three resistors joined in series by an equivalent single