circuit divides the current through the electrical gadgets. The total resistance in a parallel circuit is decreased as per Eq. (11.18). This is helpful particularly when each gadget has different resistance and requires different current to operate properly. Electricity Reprint 2025-26 Figure 11.12 An electric circuit showing the combination of series and parallel resistors Q U ES TION S Judge the equivalent resistance when the following are connected in parallel - (a) 1 Q and 10% Q, (b) 1 Q and 10 Q, and 10 Q. An electric lamp of 100 Q, a toaster of resistance 50 , and a water filter of resistance 500 are connected in parallel to a 220 V source. What is the resistance of an electric iron connected to the same source that takes as much current as all three appliances, and what is the current through it? What are the advantages of connecting electrical devices in parallel with the battery instead of connecting them in series? How can three resistors of resistances 2 Q, 3 Q, and 6 be connected to give a total resistance of (a) 4 Q, (b) 1 Q? What is (a) the highest, (b) the lowest total resistance that can be secured by combinations of four coils of resistance 4 Q, 8 Q, 12 Q, 24 Q? 11.7 HEATING EFFECT OF ELECTRIC CURRENT We know that a battery or a cell is a source of electrical energy. The chemical reaction within the cell generates the potential difference between its two terminals that sets the electrons in motion to flow the current through a resistor or a system of resistors connected to the battery. We have also seen, in Section 11.2, that to maintain the current, the source has to keep expending its energy. Where does this energy go? A part of the source energy in maintaining the current may be consumed into useful work (like in rotating the blades of an electric fan). Rest of the source energy may be expended in heat to raise the temperature of gadget. We often observe this in our everyday life. For example, an electric fan becomes warm if used continuously for longer time etc. On the other hand, if the electric circuit is purely resistive, that is, a configuration of resistors only connected to a battery; the source energy continually gets dissipated entirely in the form of heat. This is known as the heating effect of electric current. This effect is utilised in devices such as electric heater, electric iron etc. Consider a current I flowing through a resistor of resistance R. Let the potential difference across it be V (Fig. 11.13). Let tbe the time during which a charge @Q flows across. The work done in moving the charge Q through a potential difference Vis VQ. Therefore, the source must supply energy equal to VQ in time t. Hence the power input to the circuit by the source is paveevi (11.19) Or the energy supplied to the circuit by the source in