you noticed fine sand collecting on riverbeds or in lakes? This sand is formed when rock pebbles, soil, and sediments are broken down and moved from one location to another by natural forces like wind and flowing water. This process is called erosion. Erosion during a landslide is an example of a physical change. River rocks and pebbles often appear smoother due to the constant erosion caused by the flowing water. When the speed of the water or wind decreases, such as in an ocean or a lake, the material transported during erosion settles down at the bottom. These sediments harden over time and become new rocks. Most of these changes take place over thousands of years and cannot be reversed. In a Nutshell ADA) + A physical change is one in which a substance or object undergoes a change in its physical properties and no new substance is formed. >, ~ A chemical change is one in which one or more new substances are formed. It involves a chemical reaction and can be represented by a chemical equation. >, ~ Combustion, cooking, and rusting are examples of chemical changes. >, ~ Substances that undergo combustion are combustible substances. Heat and/or light are given out during combustion. >, ~ The lowest temperature at which a substance can catch fire is called its ignition temperature. >, ~ Some changes can be reversed and some cannot. >, ~ Some changes are desirable and some are not. Rocks undergo physical and chemical changes due to weathering to form soil. >, ~ >, ~ Erosion caused by flowing water and wind is a physical change. Chapter 5.indd 68 4/3/2025 4:52:55 PM nn Let Us Enhance Our Learning (WLLL Lahde 1. Which of the following statements are the characteristics of a physical change? (i) The state of the substance may or may not change. (ii) A substance with different properties is formed. (iii) No new substance is formed. (iv) The substance undergoes a chemical reaction. (a) (@) and (ii) (b) Gi) and (iii) (c) G@) and (iii) ~ (dd) (ii) and (iv) 2. Predict which of the following changes can be reversed and which cannot be reversed. If you are not sure, you may write that down. Why are you not sure about these? (i) Stitching cloth to a shirt (ii) Twisting of straight string Changes Around Us: Physical and Chemical (iii) Making idlis from a batter (iv) Dissolving sugar in water (v) Drawing water from a well (vi) Ripening of fruits (vii) Boiling water in an open pan (viii) Rolling up a mat (ix) Grinding wheat grains to flour (x) Forming of soil from rocks 3. State whether the following statements are True or False. In case a statement is False, write the correct statement. (i) Melting of wax is necessary for burning a candle. (True/False) (ii) Collecting water vapour by condensing involves a chemical change. (True/False) (iii) The process of converting leaves into compost is a chemical change. (True/False) (iv) Mixing baking soda