such as the paper, the rubber sheet of the balloon, and the chalk, remained the same, though their appearances (shape or size) may have changed. You may also recall from the Grade 6 Science textbook Curiosity that water can exist in different states (solid, liquid, and gas), and can change from one state to another. In all these cases, although we observe a change in the appearance, no new substance is formed. Such changes in which only physical properties like shape, size, and state of substances change are called physical changes. Let us explore a different type of change. Chapter 5.indd 59 4/3/2025 4:52:46 PM 5.2 A Substance May Change in Appearance and Not Remain the Same! CPD ehhh hihi lala disAalidadeeddhadadldihdladgihd ladehd edad had dda) | Activity 5.3: Let us explore | + Take two glass tumblers or small transparent bottles. Mark them A and B. Fill one-fourth of glass tumbler A with tap water and one-fourth of glass tumbler B with lime water. >, ~ + Now, blow air (exhale) into each glass tumbler, one at a time, using separate straws (Fig. 5.2) and observe them. /\ Caution Do not suck the water or lime water while doing this. Straw Straw Glass tumbler containing lime water Glass tumbler containing tap water Fig. 5.2: Blowing air in (a) tap water; (b) lime water Do you notice any changes? In glass tumbler A, blowing air into water creates bubbles only, and there is no change in the appearance of the water. In glass tumbler B, blowing air into lime water creates bubbles, and turns the lime water milky (or cloudy). If we leave it for some time, a white substance settles at the bottom of the glass tumbler, indicating something new has formed. Such changes, in which one or more new substances are formed, are called chemical changes. New substances are formed through a process called chemical reaction. In this case, carbon dioxide from the air you breathe out (exhale) reacts with lime water, and forms a new white-coloured substance (calcium carbonate) that is insoluble in water. Therefore, the liquid in the bottle appears milky. Along with this a small amount of water is also formed. This formation of a new substance indicates a chemical change. The chemical reaction involved in this change can be represented in short form as a chemical equation. ir Chapter 5.indd 60 4/3/2025 4:52:47 PM Ss oO cS iC) ao 13) < uu n a] =) x . a = > U7) A) ss] = o Chapter 5.indd 61 Calcium hydroxide + Carbon dioxide Calcium carbonate + Water (Lime water) (Insoluble substance) The turning of lime water milky is also used as a test for carbon dioxide. Let us explore this with another activity using some substances from our kitchen. | Activity 5.4: Let us experiment | Take a teaspoonful of vinegar or lemon juice in a test tube. Add a pinch of baking soda (sodium hydrogen carbonate) to it. What do you observe? You