in an open pan (viii) Rolling up a mat (ix) Grinding wheat grains to flour (x) Forming of soil from rocks 3. State whether the following statements are True or False. In case a statement is False, write the correct statement. (i) Melting of wax is necessary for burning a candle. (True/False) (ii) Collecting water vapour by condensing involves a chemical change. (True/False) (iii) The process of converting leaves into compost is a chemical change. (True/False) (iv) Mixing baking soda with lemon juice is a chemical change. (True/False) Chapter 5.indd 69 4/3/2025 4:52:55 PM 4. Fill in the blanks in the following statements: (i) Nalini observed that the handle of her cycle has got brown deposits. The brown deposits are due to , and this is a change. (ii) Folding a handkerchief is a change and can be (iii) A chemical process in which a substance reacts with oxygen with evolution of heat is called , and this isa change. (iv) Magnesium, when burnt in air, produces a substance called . The substance formed is in nature. Burning of magnesium is a change. 5. Are the changes of water to ice and water to steam, physical or chemical? Explain. . Is curdling of milk a physical or chemical change? Justify your statement. . Natural factors, such as wind, rain, etc., help in the formation of soil from rocks. Is this change physical or chemical and why? . Read the following story titled Eco-friendly Prithvi , and tick the most appropriate option(s) given in the brackets. Provide a suitable title of your choice for the story. Prithviis preparing a mealinthe kitchen. Hechops vegetables, peels potatoes, and cuts fruits (physical changes/chemical changes). He collects the seeds, fruits, and vegetable peels into a clay pot (physical change/chemical change). The fruits, vegetable peels, and other materials begin to decompose due to the action of bacteria and fungi, forming compost (physical change/chemical change). He decides to plant seeds in the compost and water them regularly. After a few days, he notices that the seeds begin to germinate and small plants start to grow, eventually blooming into colourful flowers (physical change/chemical change). His efforts are appreciated by all his family members. . Some changes are given here. Write physical changes in the area marked A and chemical changes in the area marked B . Enter the changes which are both physical and chemical in the area marked C . Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 Chapter 5.indd 70 4/3/2025 4:52:56 PM aa Process of burning a candle; Tearing of paper; Rusting; Curdling of milk; Ripening of fruits; Melting of ice; Folding of clothes; Burning of magnesium and Mixing baking soda S with vinegar. F 10. The experiments shown in Fig. 5.11a, b, c, and d were S performed. Find out in which case(s) did lime water turn 3 milky and why? & s ES Vinegar and Lemon juice and < baking soda vinegar Lime water Lime water > < (a) (b) 8 q wn