of the ratios sin A, cos A and tan A. BC BC ac _ sinA cosA Also, observe that tan A = AB. AB cos A and cot A= sinA . AC So, the trigonometric ratios of an acute angle in a right triangle express the relationship between the angle and the length of its sides. Why don t you try to define the trigonometric ratios for angle C in the right triangle? (See Fig. 8.5) Reprint 2025-26 116 MATHEMATICS The first use of the idea of sine in the way we use it today was in the work Aryabhatiyam by Aryabhata, in A.D. 500. Aryabhata used the word ardha-jya for the half-chord, which was shortened to jya or jiva in due course. When the Aryabhatiyam was translated into Arabic, the word jiva was retained as it is. The word jiva was translated into sinus, which means curve, when the Arabic version was translated into Latin. Soon the word sinus, also used as sine, became common in mathematical texts throughout Europe. An English Professor of astronomy Edmund Gunter (1581-1626), first used the abbreviated Aryabhata notation sin . C.E. 476- 550 The origin of the terms cosine and tangent was much later. The cosine function arose from the need to compute the sine of the complementary angle. Aryabhatta called it kotijya. The name cosinus originated with Edmund Gunter. In 1674, the English Mathematician Sir Jonas Moore first used the abbreviated notation cos . Remark : Note that the symbol sin A is used as an abbreviation for the sine of the angle A . sin A is not the product of sin and A. sin separated from A has no meaning. Similarly, cos A is not the product of cos and A. Similar interpretations follow for other P trigonometric ratios also. . in ) Now, if we take a point P on the hypotenuse Hypotenuse AC or a point Q on AC extended, of the right triangle ABC and draw PM perpendicular to AB and QN A 3 perpendicular to AB extended (see Fig. 8.6), how M BN will the trigonometric ratios of Z A in A PAM differ from those of Z Ain A CAB or from those of Z Ain Fig. 8.6 A QAN? To answer this, first look at these triangles. Is A PAM similar to A CAB? From Chapter 6, recall the AA similarity criterion. Using the criterion, you will see that the triangles PAM and CAB are similar. Therefore, by the property of similar triangles, the corresponding sides of the triangles are proportional. AM AP _ MP AB AC. BC So, we have Reprint 2025-26 INTRODUCTION TO TRIGONOMETRY 117 From thi find MP BCL sin A rom this, we fin AP ~ AC . ., AM _ AB MP BC Similarly, = = cosA, = = tan A and so on. AP AC AM AB This shows that the trigonometric ratios of angle A in A PAM not differ from those of angle A in A