to be pushed along a straight road to give ita speed of 1 ms, which is sufficient to start its engine. If one or two persons give a sudden push (unbalanced force) to it, it hardly starts. But a continuous push over some time results in a gradual acceleration of the car to this speed. It means that the change of momentum of the car is not only determined by the magnitude of the force but also by the time during which the force is exerted. It may then also be concluded that the force necessary to change the momentum of an object depends on the time rate at which the momentum is changed. The second law of motion states that the rate of change of momentum of an object is proportional to the applied unbalanced force in the direction of force. 8.4.1 MATHEMATICAL FORMULATION OF SECOND LAW OF MOTION Suppose an object of mass, mis moving along a straight line with an initial velocity, u. It is uniformly accelerated to velocity, vin time, t by the application of a constant force, F throughout the time, . The initial and final momentum of the object will be, p, = muand Pp, = mv respectively. The change in momentum oe p,-Dp, oc mv -mu o mx(v u). mx(v-u) t The rate of change of momentum Or, the applied force, Fe mx(v-u) t km _ F= ee (8.2) = kma (8.3) Here a = [(v u)/? ] is the acceleration, which is the rate of change of velocity. The quantity, kis a constant of proportionality. The SI units of mass and acceleration are kg and m s* respectively. The unit of force is so chosen that the value of the constant, k becomes one. For this, one unit of force is defined as the amount that produces an acceleration of 1 ms? in an object of 1 kg mass. That is, 1 unit of force = k x (1 kg) x (1 ms). Thus, the value of kbecomes 1. From Eq. (8.3) F=ma (8.4) The unit of force is kg m s? or newton, which has the symbol N. The second law of SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 motion gives us a method to measure the force acting on an object as a product of its mass and acceleration. The second law of motion is often seen in action in our everyday life. Have you noticed that while catching a fast moving cricket ball, a fielder in the ground gradually pulls his hands backwards with the moving ball? In doing so, the fielder increases the time during which the high velocity of the moving ball decreases to zero. Thus, the acceleration of the ball is decreased and therefore the impact of catching the fast moving ball (Fig. 8.8) is also reduced. If the ball is stopped suddenly then its high velocity decreases to zero ina very short interval of time. Thus, the rate of change of momentum of the ball will be large. Therefore,