Thus, u=20cms'; v= 0Ocm s! and t= 10s. Since the velocity-time graph is a straight line, it is clear that the ball moves with a constant acceleration. The acceleration a is v-Uu t =(Ocms!-20cms'})/10s =-2cms?=-0.02 ms . a= SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 The force exerted on the ball Fis, F= ma= (20/1000) kg x (- 0.02 m s ) = 0.0004 N. The negative sign implies that the frictional force exerted by the table is opposite to the direction of motion of the ball. 8.5 Third Law of Motion The first two laws of motion tell us how an applied force changes the motion and provide us with a method of determining the force. The third law of motion states that when one object exerts a force on another object, the second object instantaneously exerts a force back on the first. These two forces are always equal in magnitude but opposite in direction. These forces act on different objects and never on the same object. In the game of football sometimes we, while looking at the football and trying to kick it with a greater force, collide with a player of the opposite team. Both feel hurt because each applies a force to the other. In other words, there is a pair of forces and not just one force. The two opposing forces are also known as action and reaction forces. Let us consider two spring balances connected together as shown in Fig. 8.10. The fixed end of balance B is attached with a rigid support, like a wall. When a force is applied through the free end of spring balance A, it is observed that both the spring balances show the same readings on their scales. It means that the force exerted by spring balance A on balance B is equal but opposite in direction to the force exerted by the balance B on balance A. Any of these two forces can be called as action and the other as reaction. This gives us an alternative statement of the third law of motion i.e., to every action there is an equal and opposite reaction. However, it must be remembered that the action and reaction always act on two different objects, simultaneously. FORCE AND Laws OF Motion LOQOOOOX) I Fig. 8.10: Action and reaction forces are equal and opposite. Suppose you are standing at rest and intend to start walking on a road. You must accelerate, and this requires a force in accordance with the second law of motion. Which is this force? Is it the muscular effort you exert on the road? Is it in the direction we intend to move? No, you push the road below backwards. The road exerts an equal and opposite force on your feet to make you move forward. It is important to note that even though the action and reaction forces are always equal in magnitude, these forces may not produce accelerations of equal magnitudes. This is because each force acts on a different