this force? Is it the muscular effort you exert on the road? Is it in the direction we intend to move? No, you push the road below backwards. The road exerts an equal and opposite force on your feet to make you move forward. It is important to note that even though the action and reaction forces are always equal in magnitude, these forces may not produce accelerations of equal magnitudes. This is because each force acts on a different object that may have a different mass. When a gun is fired, it exerts a forward force on the bullet. The bullet exerts an equal and opposite force on the gun. This results in the recoil of the gun (Fig. 8.11). Since the gun has a much greater mass than the bullet, the acceleration of the gun is much less than the acceleration of the bullet. The third law of motion can also be illustrated when a sailor jumps out of a rowing boat. As the sailor jumps forward, the force on the boat moves it backwards (Fig. 8.12). Accelerating force on the bullet Recoil force on the gun Fig. 8.11: A forward force on the bullet and recoil of the gun. Reprint 2025-26 Fig. 8.12: As the sailor jumps in forward direction, the boat moves backwards. Activity _8.4 Fig. 8.13 e Request two children to stand on two Now, place two children on one cart and separate carts as shown in Fig. 8.13. one on another cart. The second law of motion e Give them a bag full of sand or some can be seen, as this arrangement would show other heavy object. Ask them to play a different accelerations for the same force. game of catch with the bag. e Does each of them experience an instantaneous force as a result of throwing the sand bag? The cart shown in this activity can be constructed by using a 12 mm or 18 mm thick plywood board of about 50 cm x 100 cm with e You can paint a white line on two pairs of hard ball-bearing wheels (skate cartwheels to observe the motion of the wheels are good to use). Skateboards are not two carts when the children throw the as effective because it is difficult to maintain bag towards each other. straight-line motion. you have learnt e First law of motion: An object continues to be in a state of rest or of uniform motion along a straight line unless acted upon by an unbalanced force. The natural tendency of objects to resist a change in their state of rest or of uniform motion is called inertia. The mass of an object is a measure of its inertia. Its SI unit is kilogram (kg). Force of friction always opposes motion of objects. Second law of motion: The rate of change of momentum of an object is proportional to the applied unbalanced force in the direction of the force. 96 SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 FORCE AND Laws OF