the card shoots away, allowing the coin to fall vertically into the glass tumbler due to its inertia. e The inertia of the coin tries to maintain its state of rest even when the card flows off. EN oo NE \y Fig. 8.7: When the card is flicked with the finger the coin placed over it falls in the tumbler. Activity e Place a water-filled tumbler on a tray. e Hold the tray and turn around as fast as you can. e We observe that the water spills. Why? Observe that a groove is provided in a saucer for placing the tea cup. It prevents the cup from toppling over in case of sudden jerks. 8.3 Inertia and Mass All the examples and activities given so far illustrate that there is a resistance offered by an object to change its state of motion. If it is at rest it tends to remain at rest; if it is moving it tends to keep moving. This property of an object is called its inertia. Do all bodies have the same inertia? We know that it is easier to push an empty box than a box full of books. Similarly, if we kick a football it flies away. But if we kick a stone of the same size with equal force, it hardly moves. We may, in fact, get an injury in our foot while doing so! Similarly, in activity 8.2, instead of a FORCE AND Laws OF Motion five-rupees coin if we use a one-rupee coin, we find that a lesser force is required to perform the activity. A force that is just enough to cause a small cart to pick up a large velocity will produce a negligible change in the motion ofa train. This is because, in comparison to the cart the train has a much lesser tendency to change its state of motion. Accordingly, we say that the train has more inertia than the cart. Clearly, heavier or more massive objects offer larger inertia. Quantitatively, the inertia of an object is measured by its mass. We may thus relate inertia and mass as follows: Inertia is the natural tendency of an object to resist a change in its state of motion or of rest. The mass of an object is a measure of its inertia. uestions 1. Which of the following has more inertia: (a) a rubber ball and a stone.of the same size? (b) a bicycle and a train? (c) a fiverupees coin and a one-rupee coin? 2. In the following example, try to identify the number of times the velocity of the ball changes: A football player kicks a football to another player of his team who kicks the football towards the goal. The goalkeeper of the opposite team collects the football and kicks it towards a player of his own team . Also identify the agent supplying the force in each case. 3. Explain why some of the leaves may get detached from a tree if