riding in a motorcar that was moving with a high velocity on an expressway when an insect hit the windshield and got stuck on the windscreen. Akhtar and Kiran started pondering over the situation. Kiran suggested that the insect suffered a greater change in momentum as compared to the change in momentum of the motorcar (because the change in the velocity of the insect was much more than that of the motorcar). Akhtar said that since the motorcar was moving with a larger velocity, it exerted a larger force on the insect. And as a result the insect died. Rahul while putting an entirely new explanation SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 17. said that both the motorcar and the insect experienced the same force and a change in their momentum. Comment on these suggestions. How much momentum will a dumb-bell of mass 10 kg transfer to the floor if it falls from a height of 80 cm? Take its downward acceleration to be 10 m s . ME = Additional Exercises FORCE AND Laws OF Motion Al. A2. AS. Ad. The following is the distance-time table of an object in motion: Time in seconds Distance in metres 0) 0) 8 64 216 7 343 (a) What conclusion can you draw about the acceleration? Is it constant, increasing, decreasing, or zero? Our WN eH (b) What do you infer about the forces acting on the object? Two persons manage to push a motorcar of mass 1200 kg at a uniform velocity along a level road. The same motorcar can be pushed by three persons to produce an acceleration of 0.2 m s?. With what force does each person push the motorcar? (Assume that all persons push the motorcar with the same muscular effort.) A hammer of mass 500 g, moving at 50 m s" , strikes a nail. The nail stops the hammer in a very short time of 0.01 s. What is the force of the nail on the hammer? A motorcar of mass 1200 kg is moving along a straight line with a uniform velocity of 90 km/h. Its velocity is slowed down to 18 km/h in 4 s by an unbalanced external force. Calculate the acceleration and change in momentum. Also calculate the magnitude of the force required. Reprint 2025-26