first pendulum clock. In his book Starry Messenger on his astronomical discoveries, Galileo claimed to have seen mountains on the moon, the milky way made up of tiny stars, and four small bodies orbiting Jupiter. In his books Discourse on Floating Bodies and Letters on the Sunspots , he disclosed his observations of sunspots. Using his own telescopes and through his observations on Saturn and Venus, Galileo argued that all the planets must orbit the Sun and not the earth, contrary to what was believed at that time. Galileo G. (1564 - 1642) or collision with the panels in front. Safety belts are worn to prevent such accidents. Safety belts exert a force on our body to make the forward motion slower. An opposite experience is encountered when we are standing in a bus and the bus begins to move suddenly. Now we tend to fall backwards. This is because the sudden start of the bus brings motion to the bus as well as to our feet in contact with the floor of the bus. But the rest of our body opposes this motion because of its inertia. When a motorcar makes a sharp turn ata high speed, we tend to get thrown to one side. This can again be explained on the basis of the law of inertia. We tend to continue in our straight-line motion. When an unbalanced force is applied by the engine to change the direction of motion of the motorcar, we slip to one side of the seat due to the inertia of our body. The fact that a body will remain at rest unless acted upon by an unbalanced force can be _ illustrated through the following activities: Activity __ 8.1 e Make a pile of similar carom coins on a table, as shown in Fig. 8.6. e Attempt a sharp horizontal hit at the bottom of the pile using another carom coin or the striker. If the hit is strong enough, the bottom coin moves out quickly. Once the lowest coin is removed, the inertia of the other coins makes them fall vertically on the table. Fig. 8.6: Only the carom coin at the bottom ofa pile is removed when a fast moving carom coin (or striker) hits it. SCIENCE Reprint 2025-26 Activity e Set a five-rupee coin on a stiff card covering an empty glass tumbler standing on a table as shown in Fig. 8.7. e Give the card a sharp horizontal flick with a finger. If we do it fast then the card shoots away, allowing the coin to fall vertically into the glass tumbler due to its inertia. e The inertia of the coin tries to maintain its state of rest even when the card flows off. EN oo NE \y Fig. 8.7: When the card is flicked with the finger the coin placed over it falls in the tumbler. Activity e Place a water-filled tumbler on a tray. e Hold the tray and turn around as fast as you