me join Karate classes. It will be great self defence. List of Interests Why do they find these interesting? we SN Ce sme 2. Workin pairs. Imagine you are Sunita. You are trying to convince your father to let you join the Karate classes. You can use the given clues for the conversation. Take turns to be Sunita and her father. Want to learn Karate Girls to stay at home Friends are into sport Who will help mother? eM rs) B08) WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1 MEMS MEMS HE HSM SMS SHS HS M5 HES 4 S45 HE HEM SMe M1644 Felt out of place not doing School work may suffer anything sporty Decided to take up Karate Going out may be unsafe Keep me physically fit No real benefits, expenses Class in the next society May be called unfeminine Great self defence, you can see Oh, that s nice, my daughter these videos will be no less. You can write the conversation here. Papa, I have a desire to learn Karate. No, that can t be. Girls must stay home. Or] Writine 1. Given below is some information about Saina Nehwal @\ and Sania Mirza. You can visit your school library and search the Internet to collect more information and to find out if it is correct. Write a short motivational article a for your school magazine using these details. The article S) can aim towards encouraging girls to take up sports. Q @ Inv G), ly Ay Unit 7 S 5 Q Coe Nea MeMa Mea Matata ahaa tlaWatatatatatiatiatatabah| From Hisar in Haryana Indian professional tennis player Her family shifted to Born in Mumbai Hyderabad when she was very young. First trained with Nani Family moved to Hyderabad Prasad, stadium was 25 | some time after her birth. kms away from home Then coached by S.M. Started learning lawn tennis Arif, Vimal Kumar and from her father at the age of P. Gopichand six. Professional badminton Started participating in the singles player ITF tournaments in 2001. World no. 2 in 2009, Won three titles in 2002 to formerly world no. 1 in be identified as an upcoming 2015 player. Right-handed player with | Turned professional in many international titles | 2003, and won several titles including the Girls Doubles title at Wimbledon. Has seen both ups and Has been injured and downs recovered. First Indian woman to Won several doubles titles win an Olympic medal in WTA. Formerly ranked as India s no. 1 doubles player by WTA. Rajiv Gandhi Khel Ratna | Times Magazine s 2016 award, Arjuna award, list Sania one of the most has received the Padma influential people in the Bhushan in 2016 world. Has been awarded the Arjuna Award and the Padma Shree. 3. The chapter Reach for the Top , Part I ends with the sentence Santosh collected and brought down 500 kilograms of garbage from the Himalayas. QW You may have visited different tourist places and picnic KO) spots. However, the beauty