owe O (COTTKS) Nee MaMa Wa Ra Wawa] HIAMeaMahaiakbiahiaWiatabliahiaial alae! S @ Vk) 3 LIsTENING amputate: cut off (a limb) by surgical operation frostbite: injury to body tissues caused by exposure to extreme old, typically affecting the nose, fingers, or toes prosthesis: an artificial body part, such as a limb tinkering: an act of attempting to repair something eM O QO Ps (UT ATS) Your teacher or a classmate will read the excerpt given below. Listen to it carefully and answer the questions. Harvard-MIT researcher, Hugh Herr, is familiar with the obstacles faced by amputees. A world-class mountain climber at the age of 17, Herr and a friend were trapped in a snowstorm while ascending New Hampshire s Mount Washington in 1982. After three days without food or camping gear, the two were rescued, but frostbite cost Herr both his legs, which were amputated just below the knee. Herr was fitted with prostheses, but he soon discovered that they were developed for walking on flat surfaces, and not for taking on advanced functions like climbing or running. With the same determination that he once applied to climbing, he set out to create a better prosthetic leg. He worked with an engineering shop to fashion his own prostheses, tinkering with customised sockets and lighter materials. He even designed artificial feet specially made for climbing rock (built flat and narrow for getting a toehold in cracks and ice featuring sharp spikes). I experienced a tremendous amount of pain from prosthetic limbs at first , Herr says. So I decided to go back to school and learn about physics and engineering to try to solve these problems. Herr obtained a Master s degree in mechanical engineering from MIT in 1993 and a doctorate in biophysics from Harvard five years later. After struggling for a decade to come up with a better prosthetic limb, just getting the knee to market will be a personal triumph for Herr yet another mountain conquered. It s been a long road , he says. But I think I m finally in a position to make a difference. (Adapted from Born to Run , Evan Ratliff, Span, Sep. Oct. 2002, Steps to English, Workbook for Class X, NCERT, 2003, p. 43) 1. What happened to Hugh Herr at the age of 17? WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1] MEMS MEMS HE HSM SMS SHS HS M5 HES 4 S45 HE HEM SMe M1644 2. What happened to both of his legs? a What's the difference? Although . . Although+subject+verb 3. What were the two things he was unable to do with the Example: prostheses? a Although it rained a lot, we went to the park. In spite of In spite of+noun/pronoun v it Db)-i 4. Why did he decide to go back to school? a a Example: In spite of the traffic, I got to work on time. Despite 5. What degrees did he get from MIT and Harvard? We can also use despite to replace in spite of. Example: Despite