for itself. While it may be said that some expatriate: a person who of his Davis Cup victories were achieved because he was _ lives outside their native playing on his favourite surface, grass and enjoyed home country support. But at Atlanta, Paes had none of these advantages except his coach, close family members and the expatriates. While Davis Cup victories bring in good cash rewards and ATP (Association of Tennis Professionals) points, there he was playing for just a medal. Paes explains it all when he says, When I am playing for my country I don t expect anything. That straightaway sets him apart. He succeeds because of his willingness to take his chances, swift reflexes and mental strength, and the fact that he does not accept defeat easily. (Source: http://www.jhs.ac.in/pdf/Cbse-qp/Grade-9/English/5.pdf) 1. Leander s victory at Atlanta is significant because G\ S 2. His father s Olympic triumph in 1972 was different from his own because it was iG} ry *) oo eS Unit 7 @ oe 6G (COTTKS) Nee MaMa Wa Ra Wawa] HIAMeaMahaiakbiahiaWiatabliahiaial alae! S = @ Fun fact PV 4 = Commonly misspelt Leander gave credit to his coach and his teammate in doubles for his victory. How did they help him? words Incorrect Correct Posession Possession Recieve Receive Seperate Separate Supercede Supersede tnteeeon, lnteecee If you are required to sum up Leander s qualities as a mmorseen tmoreseen player, which one would you like to highlight and why? 5. In India, while registering his victories in Davis Cup one could say that he won because 6. At Atlanta he won because Read the following poem and answer the questions that follow. Text II WHERE THE Minp 1s WITHOUT FEAR Where the mind is without fear and the head is held high; Where knowledge is free; Where the world has not been broken up into fragments OW By narrow domestic walls; Where words come out from the depth of truth; rey) Where tireless striving stretches its arms towards (>) perfection; By i.) r*) Where the clear stream of reason has not lost its way (9, Samy rs) B Fey WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1 Cary SS MEMS MEMS HE HSM SMS SHS HS M5 HES 4 S45 HE HEM SMe M1644 Into the dreary desert sand of dead habits; Where the mind is led forward by thee Into ever-widening thought and action; Into that heaven of freedom, my Father, let my country awake Rabindranath Tagore 1. Given here are certain ideas from the poem Where the mind is without fear by Rabindranath Tagore. Identify the lines from the poem that refer to these and write the lines in the space given below. (a) Everybody should be able to learn. ia Spelling Error It is calendar , not (b) There ought not be a division among people on the Galena, basis of caste, class, creed, religion or any other such basis. (c) People should be honest and speak out their heart. (d) Actions should stem from logic and