is without fear by Rabindranath Tagore. Identify the lines from the poem that refer to these and write the lines in the space given below. (a) Everybody should be able to learn. ia Spelling Error It is calendar , not (b) There ought not be a division among people on the Galena, basis of caste, class, creed, religion or any other such basis. (c) People should be honest and speak out their heart. (d) Actions should stem from logic and not superstitions and beliefs, leading to progress. (e) People to be free of fear and oppression. a Gj eo OIOX LS Unit 7 99 Je 3 SO Nea MeMa Mea Matata ahaa tlaWatatatatatiatiatatabah| (f) The poet is addressing so that 2. This poem was written by Rabindranath Tagore much before India attained freedom. What, do you think, is the significance of these lines in the context of his time? NV 4 = Fun fact Every cloud has a silver lining. 3 VocABULARY There is some good hidden in bad things also. 1. Suggest a word for each sentence/phrase correctly. Refer to the chapter Reach for the Top, Part I given in your textbook, Beehive. The paragraph numbers where these words are used, are given in brackets. (a) A state of happiness and satisfaction. (2) (b) An action or way of behaving that is usual in tradition. (3) (c) A word or statement that expresses agreement or confirmation. (5) (d) The ability to withstand hardship or adversity. (7) (e) Final stage of something you ve been working towards. C7) 2. Fillin the blanks using the words given in the box. These words are taken from the chapter Reach for the Top of your textbook, Beehive. You can refer to a dictionary to find out the meanings of these words. s Yay J prevails, positive, apology, affluent, expedition, culmination (a) She wears expensive dresses and jewellery. It seems y IG) (o) od she belongs to an family. ane. r+) 5100) WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1 Cam we MEMS MEMS HE HSM SMS SHS HS M5 HES 4 S45 HE HEM SMe M1644 (b) At present, political turmoil in most parts of the world. (c) Mr Khanna admitted his mistake by writing a letter of to the Head of the Department. (d) The Director was quite while addressing his employees. (e) The result that you see today is a of years of hardwork and dedication. (f) School children went on a weeklong during their summer holidays. 3. Playing with the words: How many words can you make from the words given below? Vocabulary 4. An idiomatic expression is a group of words with a special meaning. The individual words in the expression do not mean what they otherwise stand for. Example: Maria Sharapova cannot be pigeon-holed or categorised. Her talent, unwavering desire to succeed and readiness to sacrifice have lifted her to the top of the world. Here pigeon-holed does not mean that there is a hole for the pigeon to its nest. But