\ Lf LJ 1 i i 1 i i I LJ 1 1 U 976CHOS You have read about Santosh Yadav, the youngest woman in the world to have conquered Mount Everest in 1992. You must have heard or read about Poorna, who at the age of 13 years 11 months, became the youngest girl in the world to have scaled the Mount Everest in 2014, with sheer determination and willpower. You would have also read about Maria Sharapova who bagged the Women s Singles crown at Wimbledon in 2004. She was determined, tough, competitive, hard-working with unwavering desire. Both of them had big dreams from the very young age. 1. Do you have the passion to do something other than your studies like these two icons have? (Be it music, dance, theatre, trekking, watersport, painting, football, cricket, etc.) 2. Do you find any difficulty in pursuing your passion? 3. Who gives you support and encouragement to go ahead with your passion? See eee eee ee eee eB ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee ee eee * *) 3 REapING COMPREHENSION Read the following passage carefully. Based on your reading, answer the following questions in the space provided. On 3 August 1996, Leander Paes became the first Indian to win an individual medal in 44 years when he defeated gusto: enjoyment and Fernando Meligeni of Brazil in an exciting match in the enthusiasm Centennial Olympic Games at Atlanta. Paes ranked 31 places below the Brazilian, played with gusto and determination against a player who has two ATP tour titles under his belt, and clinched the bronze medal. He was given a standing Reprint 2025-26 Unit 7.indd 96 20-02-2023 09:25:57 ovation when Paes raised his hand in triumph and said a silent prayer. Leander s father had won a bronze medal in the Munich Olympics 1972 as a member of the Indian hockey team. It is creditable to Leander Paes as he got it in an individual event. Later he dedicated the medal to his coach and his doubles teammate. They have helped me out and given me advice and kept me in good frame of mind. This medal doesn t just show my efforts; it shows the efforts of the whole team. Paes was recognised as a prodigy by Vijay Amritraj in prodigy: a young person the 80s. Even so, Paes true mentor has been Naresh Kumar, __ With exceptional qualities or the former Indian Davis Cup Captain. His incredible Davis abilities Cup record speaks for itself. While it may be said that some expatriate: a person who of his Davis Cup victories were achieved because he was _ lives outside their native playing on his favourite surface, grass and enjoyed home country support. But at Atlanta, Paes had none of these advantages except his coach, close family members and the expatriates. While Davis Cup victories bring in good cash rewards and ATP (Association of Tennis Professionals) points, there he was playing for just a