can you make from the words given below? Vocabulary 4. An idiomatic expression is a group of words with a special meaning. The individual words in the expression do not mean what they otherwise stand for. Example: Maria Sharapova cannot be pigeon-holed or categorised. Her talent, unwavering desire to succeed and readiness to sacrifice have lifted her to the top of the world. Here pigeon-holed does not mean that there is a hole for the pigeon to its nest. But it means that someone or something belongs to a particular type or group; is categorised, especially without knowing much about them. Now, consult a dictionary and match the following idiomatic expressions given in Column A with their meanings in Column B . Unir 7 we W Fun fact Contradictory proverbs Doubt is the beginning of wisdom. but Faith will move mountains. Great starts make great finishes. but It isn t over till it s over. Wise men think alike. but Fools seldom differ. \e S e A S *) oo eS iG) Ss eZ: O (OTT) @ Nea MeMa Mea Matata ahaa tlaWatatatatatiatiatatabah| money for little effort behaves wait and be patient bull in a china a keen and enthusiastic person who works shop very hard hold your horses | an unofficial court or meeting that disregards current laws and conducts unfair trials re) 3 GRAMMAR In the chapter Reach for the Top in Beehive, you have read that two clauses in a sentence have their own subject and verb or verb phrase. One part of the sentence (or one clause) x tells us why or when something happened. Some words that do not e Tread Sherlock Holmes while I was on holiday. have a plural form It was raining heavily when I got home in the evening. Sheep Furniture Jewellery I will phone you when I go to the clinic. Can I borrow your book when you have finished it? Moose 1. _ Match each of the sentence halves given below to make Shrimp meaningful sentences. He was found guilty of driving | when she tripped over. I get a pain in my knee when the mother left. The boy started to cry I switched on the emergency light. Rainy was walking along the | when you cross my house. footpath When the lights went out, while he was under the influence of alcohol. You will see the river when I walk up the stairs. 2. Make one sentence combining the two statements given below. Example: It s getting dark. Let s go home before that. om Let s go home before it gets dark. ee? rs) 102) WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1 MEMS MEMS HE HSM SMS SHS HS M5 HES 4 S45 HE HEM SMe M1644 (b) (d) Unir 7 She must clean the room. I won t enter the room until this is done. I will do the cooking. Then I will come to your house. I will go to the library. Then I will issue the