were the two things he was unable to do with the Example: prostheses? a Although it rained a lot, we went to the park. In spite of In spite of+noun/pronoun v it Db)-i 4. Why did he decide to go back to school? a a Example: In spite of the traffic, I got to work on time. Despite 5. What degrees did he get from MIT and Harvard? We can also use despite to replace in spite of. Example: Despite the bad traffic, I got to work on time. Ok] 3 SPEAKING 1. Ina group of three, read aloud the dialogues. You are Kiran and your two partners are Sunita and Sarita. Then fill in the table given below. Sunita : What kind of things do you like to do in your free time? Kiran : I like playing basketball. I play on a city team every Saturday afternoon. It helps me stay fit and happy. I have made some good friends! Sarita : I didn t know that. How long have you been playing? Kiran : For about a year now. But it s not the only thing I like to do. Ialso enjoy GY Gj painting. It s great for relieving stress. S Sunita : Really? Are you good at it? S| Kiran : Not too bad. But I m not a Picasso or Rembrandt. How about you guys? Dr \ What do you like to do in free time? @ LS p07) Unit 7 is] fe) Q SO Nea MeMa Mea Matata ahaa tlaWatatatatatiatiatatabah| Sarita : Well, a couple of times a month I go up to Widow Mountain with some buddies and go hang gliding. Sunita : No way! You do? That sounds dangerous! Aren t you scared? Sarita : Not at all. It s fascinating. It s so beautiful up there. I feel as free as a bird. You should try it sometime. Sunita : It sounds awesome, but I think I m too much of a scared cat to try it. Kiran : Wow! I might want to try it sometime. Do you think I could? Sarita : Sure, how about this Saturday? I'll let you know the details later. Kiran : Sounds great! I can t believe m going to do it. Sunita, by the way, you never told us what you do in your spare time. Sunita : Well, uh, I like to knit...And you know I can t go very far... But I am going to convince my parents to let me join Karate classes. It will be great self defence. List of Interests Why do they find these interesting? we SN Ce sme 2. Workin pairs. Imagine you are Sunita. You are trying to convince your father to let you join the Karate classes. You can use the given clues for the conversation. Take turns to be Sunita and her father. Want to learn Karate Girls to stay at home Friends are into sport Who will help mother? eM rs)