dark. Let s go home before that. om Let s go home before it gets dark. ee? rs) 102) WORDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1 MEMS MEMS HE HSM SMS SHS HS M5 HES 4 S45 HE HEM SMe M1644 (b) (d) Unir 7 She must clean the room. I won t enter the room until this is done. I will do the cooking. Then I will come to your house. I will go to the library. Then I will issue the book for you. Evening came. They rested. The salesman came. Rita was eating her breakfast. We went to see the play with grandfather. Do you remember? until after when when while when 8 Fun fact) a bowl of soup a tub of margarine a bar of soap a carton of milk S S G) *) oo eS A103 iG) Ss owWs: OO (OTT) S Zz @ Nea MeMa Mea Matata ahaa tlaWatatatatatiatiatatabah| Ck) @3 Epitine 1. In each of the following sentences you have to remove or add a word or a phrase to make the sentence grammatically correct. Write the correct sentences in the space given below. (a) Maria Sharapova likes to be dancing, singing and fashion. ave Fun fact ff Nouns that are always singular (b) She has love for pancakes with chocolate spread Belongings and fizzy orange drinks. Congratulations Outskirts Savings Surroundings Thanks (c) Maria had to be leave her mother behind in Siberia at age of nine. (d) She put with insults and humiliation in order to realise dream of becoming a tennis star. (e) Her dream was to be number one world tennis. i) OW Sane B Fa] WorDS AND EXPRESSIONS 1 oO Ws Gye MEMS MEMS HE HSM SMS SHS HS M5 HES 4 S45 HE HEM SMe M1644 2. There are spelling errors in the paragraph given here. Correct the spelling errors and rewrite the paragraph with appropriate punctuation marks in the given space. Savitribai Phule Awake Arise, and Educate. Smash traditions-Liberate First female teacher of Indias first womens school, founder of the modern Marathi poetry at a time when womens potential and celibre were underrestimmated she worked for the uplifftment and educasion of females in the country with her husbands help. she opened a school for untouchable girls Orrthodox individuals from the upper cast used to mock at her eforts and throw stones and dung on her neverttheless she continued with her teaching the British govenment honoured her contribution to eduction later on. G\ a A *) oo eS Unit 7 & owe O (COTTKS) Nee MaMa Wa Ra Wawa] HIAMeaMahaiakbiahiaWiatabliahiaial alae! S @ Vk) 3 LIsTENING amputate: cut off (a limb) by surgical operation frostbite: injury to body tissues caused by exposure to extreme old, typically affecting the nose, fingers, or toes prosthesis: an artificial body part, such as a limb tinkering: an act of attempting to repair something eM O QO Ps (UT ATS) Your teacher or a classmate will read the excerpt given below. Listen to it carefully and