shops stand on its outer edge: many of these are owned by Tibetan immigrants; felt bags, Tibetan prints and silver jewellery can be bought here. There are no crowds: this is a haven of haven: a safe place quietness in the busy streets around. Kathmandu is vivid, mercenary, religious, with small shrines to flower-adorned deities along the narrowest and busiest streets; with fruit sellers, flute sellers, hawkers of postcards; shops selling Western cosmetics, film rolls and chocolate; or copper utensils and Nepalese antiques. Film songs blare out from the radios, car horns sound, bicycle bells ring, stray cows low questioningly at motorcycles, vendors shout out their wares. I indulge Tee ee er it we a = a The Baudhnath Stupa, Kathmandu s 100 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 vk e myself mindlessly: buy a bar of marzipan, a corn- marzipan: a sweet on-the-cob roasted in a charcoal brazier on the made with grated pavement (rubbed with salt, chilli powder and brazier open stove lemon); a couple of love story comics, and even a : Reader's Digest. All this I wash down with Coca Cola and a nauseating orange drink, and feel much the auseating: sickening better for it. 5. I consider what route I should take back home. If I were propelled by enthusiasm for travel per se, per-se: by itself I would go by bus and train to Patna, then sail up the Ganges past Benaras to Allahabad, then up the Yamuna, past Agra to Delhi. But I am too exhausted and homesick; today is the last day of August. Go home, I tell myself: move directly towards home. I enter a Nepal Airlines office and buy a ticket for tomorrow s flight. 6. I look at the flute seller standing in a corner of the square near the hotel. In his hand is a pole with an attachment at the top from which fifty or sixty bansuris protrude in all directions, like the quills of a porcupine. They are of bamboo: there are crossflutes and recorders. From time to time he stands the pole on the ground, selects a flute and plays for a few minutes. The sound rises clearly above the noise of the traffic and the hawkers cries. He plays slowly, meditatively, without excessive meditatively. display. He does not shout out his wares. oughtfully Occasionally he makes a sale, but in a curiously offhanded way as if this were incidental to his offhanded: casual; enterprise. Sometimes he breaks off playing to talk t showing much to the fruit seller. I imagine that this has been the interest in something pattern of his life for years. 7. I find it difficult to tear myself away from the square. Flute music always does this to me: it is at once the most universal and most particular of sounds. There is no culture that does not have its flute the reed neh, the recorder, the Japanese shakuhachi, the deep bansuri of Hindustani classical music, the clear or breathy flutes of