Bw ViruL =: Rohit CSCS SC(pllay) the flute. MaAHESH : __sSsSSS. (D0) hee alco act ? VIPUL : No, he ______+__ .: (compose) music. ManesH : That s wonderful! & og Speaking 1. Discuss in class the shrines you have visited or know about. Speak about one of them. 2. Imagine you are giving an eyewitness account or a running commentary of one of the following: (i) a game of football, cricket or hockey, or some sports event (ii) a parade (e.g. Republic Day) or some other national event Speak a few sentences narrating what you see and hear. Use the simple present and the present continuous tenses. For example: e He passes the ball but Ben gets in the way... e These brave soldiers guard our frontiers. They display their skills here... % og Writing Diary entry for a travelogue I. The text you read is a travelogue where the author, Vikram Seth, talks about his visit to two sacred places in Kathmandu. Imagine that you were with Vikram Seth on his visit to Pashupatinath temple, and you were noting down all that you saw and did there, so that you could write a travelogue later. Record in point form e what you see when you reach the Pashupatinath temple e what you see happening inside the temple e what you do when inside the temple e what you see outside the temple e what your impressions are about the place. II. Here is your diary entry when you visited Agra. Read the points and try to write a travelogue describing your visit to Agra and the Taj Mahal. You may add more details. January 2003 rise before dawn take the Shatabdi Express at 6.15 a.m. from Delhi meet a newly-married couple on train talk about Himachal Pradesh get off the train enter the once-grand city, Agra twisted alleys traffic dense rickshaws, cars, people vendors selling religious artifacts, plastic toys, spices and sweets go to the Taj Mahal constructed entirely of white marble magical quality colour changes with varying of light and shadow marble with gemstones inside reflection of the Taj Mahal in the pond school-children, tourists tourist guides following people. & 106 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 4" A Slumber Did My Spirit Seal This poem is about the death of a loved one. How does the poet feel when he thinks about her death? How does he imagine her to be, after death? A slumber did my spirit seal I had no human fears. She seemed a thing that could not feel The touch of earthly years. No motion has she now, no force She neither hears nor sees, Rolled round in earth s diurnal course With rocks and stones and trees. WILLIAM WORDSWORTH GLOSSARY diurnal: daily ( Earth s diurnal course is earth s daily rotation on its axis.) & Thinking about the Poem 1. 2. A slumber did my spirit seal, says the poet. That is, a deep sleep closed off his soul (or mind). How