1. 2. me * 8. Kathmandu = s8 O959CHIO Before You READ e Do you like travelling? The writer, Vikram Seth, enjoys it very much. In his book, Heaven Lake, he describes a long journey from China to India, via Tibet and Nepal. e Have you heard of places like Ajmer Sharif, Madurai, Sanchi, Varanasi, Sarnath, or Halebid? Can you name some other places like these? What do the surroundings of a holy place in your city look like? Think about it as you read Vikram Seth's description of Kathmandu. I Gert a cheap room in the centre of town and sleep for hours. The next morning, with Mr Shah s son and nephew, I visit the two temples in Kathmandu that are most sacred to Hindus and Buddhists. At Pashupatinath (outside which a _ sign proclaims Entrance for the Hindus only ) there is proclaim: make an atmosphere of febrile confusion . Priests, known publicly or hawkers, devotees, tourists, cows, monkeys, pigeons cially and dogs roam through the grounds. We offer a few febrile confusion: flowers. There are so many worshippers that some Tied activity; . . ; . complete chaos people trying to get the priest s attention are elbowed aside by others pushing their way to the front. A princess of the Nepalese royal house appears; everyone bows and makes way. By the main gate, a party of saffron-clad Westerners struggle for permission to enter. The policeman is not convinced that they are the Hindus (only Hindus are allowed to enter the temple). A fight breaks out between two monkeys. One chases the other, who jumps onto a shivalinga, then runs screaming around the temples and down to the river, the holy Bagmati, Reprint 2025-26 cannes eB Uae oS! Se 8a ite =e i. si | . < ee, - | Vi Mili Gee FR Pashupatinath Temple, Kathmandu that flows below. A corpse is being cremated on its banks; washerwomen are at their work and children bathe. From a balcony a basket of flowers and leaves, old offerings now wilted, is dropped into the river. A small shrine half protrudes from the stone shrine: a place of platform on the river bank. When it emerges fully, Worship the goddess inside will escape, and the evil period of the Kaliyug will end on earth. Kathmandu / 99 @& Reprint 2025-26 3. At the Baudhnath stupa, the Buddhist shrine of Kathmandu, there is, in contrast, a sense of stillness. Its immense white dome is ringed by a road. Small shops stand on its outer edge: many of these are owned by Tibetan immigrants; felt bags, Tibetan prints and silver jewellery can be bought here. There are no crowds: this is a haven of haven: a safe place quietness in the busy streets around. Kathmandu is vivid, mercenary, religious, with small shrines to flower-adorned deities along the narrowest and busiest streets; with fruit sellers, flute sellers, hawkers of postcards; shops selling Western cosmetics, film rolls and chocolate; or copper utensils