fruit seller. I imagine that this has been the interest in something pattern of his life for years. 7. I find it difficult to tear myself away from the square. Flute music always does this to me: it is at once the most universal and most particular of sounds. There is no culture that does not have its flute the reed neh, the recorder, the Japanese shakuhachi, the deep bansuri of Hindustani classical music, the clear or breathy flutes of South America, Kathmandu / 101 # Reprint 2025-26 the high-pitched Chinese flutes. Each has its specific fingering and compass. It weaves its own fingering way of associations. Yet to hear any flute is, it seems to Placing the fingers to me, to be drawn into the commonality of all Ply tilerentnotes mankind, to be moved by music closest in its phrases and sentences to the human voice. Its motive force too is living breath: it too needs to pause and breathe before it can go on. 8. That I can be so affected by a few familiar phrases on the bansuri, surprises me at first, for on the previous occasions that I have returned home after a long absence abroad, I have hardly noticed such details, and certainly have not invested them with the significance I now do. compass: here, range VIKRAM SETH [an extract from Heaven Lake] % &% Thinking about the Text Activity 1. On the following map mark out the route, which the author thought of but did not take, to Delhi. Jammu, & Kashmir o . Government of India Copyright, 2003 2. Find out the possible routes (by rail, road or air) from Kathmandu to New Delhi/Mumbai/Kolkata/Chennai. & 102 / Beehive Reprint 2025-26 vk e I. Answer these questions in one or two words or in short phrases. 1. Name the two temples the author visited in Kathmandu. 2. The writer says, All this I wash down with Coca Cola. What does all this refer to? 3. What does Vikram Seth compare to the quills of a porcupine? 4. Name five kinds of flutes. II. Answer each question in a short paragraph. 1. What difference does the author note between the flute seller and the other hawkers? 2. What is the belief at Pashupatinath about the end of Kaliyug? 3. The author has drawn powerful images and pictures. Pick out three examples each of (i) the atmosphere of febrile confusion outside the temple of Pashupatinath (for example: some people trying to get the priest s attention are elbowed aside...) (ii) the things he sees (iii) the sounds he hears Ill. Answer the following questions in not more than 100-150 words each. 1. Compare and contrast the atmosphere in and around the Baudhnath shrine with the Pashupatinath temple. 2. How does the author describe Kathmandu s busiest streets? To hear any flute is to be drawn into the commonality of all mankind. Why does the author say this? % Thinking about Language I. Read the following sentences