O. Now turn the transparent shape in the clockwise direction. How many times do the shapes coincide in one full round? What is the order of rotational symmetry? The point where we have the pin is the centre of rotation. It is the intersecting point of the diagonals in this case. Every object has a rotational symmetry of order 1, as it occupies same position after a rotation of 360 (1.e., one complete revolution). Such cases have no interest for us. You have around you many shapes, which possess rotational symmetry (Fig 12.17). Road sign (ii) Fig 12.17 For example, when you slice certain fruits, the cross-sections are shapes with rotational symmetry. This might surprise you when you notice them [Fig 12.17(i)]. Then there are many road signs that exhibit rotational symmetry. Next time when you walk along a busy road, try to identify such road signs and find about the order of rotational symmetry [Fig 12.17(ii)]. Think of some more examples for rotational symmetry. Discuss in each case: (i) thecentreofrotation (ii) the angle of rotation (ii) the direction in which the rotation is affected and (iv) the order of the rotational symmetry. Try THESE Give the order of the rotational symmetry of the given figures about the point marked x (Fig 12.17). (i) (ii) (iii) Fig 12.18 2024-25 SYMMETRY iE EXERCISE12.2 1. Which of the following figures have rotational symmetry of order more than 1: (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) 2. Give the order of rotational symmetry for each figure: (a 0) () @ (f) (g) 12.4 Line SYMMETRY AND ROTATIONAL SYMMETRY You have been observing many shapes and their symmetries so far. By now you would have understood that some shapes have only line symmetry, some have only rotational symmetry and some have both line symmetry and rotational symmetry. For example, consider the square shape (Fig 12.19). How many lines of symmetry does it have? Does it have any rotational symmetry? If yes , what is the order of the rotational symmetry? Think about it. The circle is the most perfect symmetrical figure, because it can be rotated around its centre through any angle and at the same time it has unlimited number of lines of symmetry. Observe any circle pattern. Every line through the centre (that is every diameter) forms a line of (reflectional) symmetry and it has rotational symmetry around the centre for every angle. 2024-25 EE CE VT HeMatics Some of the English alphabets have fascinating symmetrical structures.Which capital letters have just one line of symmetry (like E)? Which capital letters have a rotational symmetry of order 2 (like I)? By attempting to think on such lines, you will be able to fill in the following table: Alphabet Line |Number of Lines of | Rotational | Order of Rotational Letters | Symmetry Symmetry Symmetry Symmetry Pz [| No fo a ee ee Pp oH | ves | ee PoE | ves | | ON a aa _ pc | | AN EXERCISE 12.3 1.