0756CH14 Chapter 12 Symmetry is an important geometrical concept, commonly exhibited in nature and is used almost in every field of activity. Artists, professionals, designers of clothing or jewellery, car manufacturers, architects and many others make use of the idea of symmetry. The beehives, the flowers, the tree-leaves, religious symbols, rugs, and handkerchiefs everywhere you find symmetrical designs. Nature Architecture Engineering You have already had a feel of line symmetry in your previous class. A figure has a line symmetry, if there is a line about which the figure may be folded so that the two parts of the figure will coincide. You might like to recall these ideas. Here are some activities to help you. SS Compose a picture-album Create some colourful Make some symmetrical showing symmetry. Ink-dot devils paper-cut designs. 2024-25 SYMMETRY Enjoy identifying lines (also called axes) of symmetry in the designs you collect. Let us now strengthen our ideas on symmetry further. Study the following figures in which the lines of symmetry are marked with dotted lines. [Fig 12.1 (i) to (iv)] I I (i) (ii) (iil) Fig 12.1 12.2 LINES oF SYMMETRY FOR REGULAR POLYGONS You know that a polygon is a closed figure made of several line segments. The polygon made up of the least number of line segments is the triangle. (Can there be a polygon that you can draw with still fewer line segments? Think about it). A polygon is said to be regular if all its sides are of equal length and all its angles are of equal measure. Thus, an equilateral triangle is a regular polygon of three sides. Can you name the regular polygon of four sides? An equilateral triangle is regular because each of its sides has same length and each of its angles measures 60 (Fig 12.2). Fig 12.2 A square is also regular because all its sides are of equal length and each of its angles is aright angle (1.e., 90 ). Its diagonals are seen to be perpendicular bisectors of one another (Fig 12.3). S 77 x Ss Fig 12.3 2024-25 (iv) MATHEMATICS If a pentagon is regular, naturally, its sides should have equal length. You will, later on, learn that the measure of each of its angles is 108 (Fig 12.4). \7 Wi (| Fig 12.4 Fig 12.5 Aregular hexagon has all its sides equal and each of its angles measures 120 . You will learn more of these figures later (Fig 12.5). The regular polygons are symmetrical figures and hence their lines of symmetry are quite interesting, Each regular polygon has as many lines of symmetry as it has sides [Fig 12.6 (i) - (iv)]. We say, they have multiple lines of symmetry. three lines of four lines of five lines of six lines of symmetry symmetry symmetry symmetry Equilateral Triangle Square Regular Pentagon Regular Hexagon 1 ii ill iv (i) (ii) Fig 12.6 (ili) (iv) Perhaps, you might like to investigate this by paper folding. Go ahead! The concept of line symmetry