of symmetry (like E)? Which capital letters have a rotational symmetry of order 2 (like I)? By attempting to think on such lines, you will be able to fill in the following table: Alphabet Line |Number of Lines of | Rotational | Order of Rotational Letters | Symmetry Symmetry Symmetry Symmetry Pz [| No fo a ee ee Pp oH | ves | ee PoE | ves | | ON a aa _ pc | | AN EXERCISE 12.3 1. Name any two figures that have both line symmetry and rotational symmetry. 2. Draw, wherever possible, a rough sketch of (i) atriangle with both line and rotational symmetries of order more than 1. (ii) atriangle with only line symmetry and no rotational symmetry of order more than 1. (ii) a quadrilateral with a rotational symmetry of order more than 1 but not a line symmetry. (iv) aquadrilateral with line symmetry but nota rotational symmetry of order more than 1. 3. Ifafigure has two or more lines of symmetry, should it have rotational symmetry of order more than 1? 4. Fillin the blanks: Centre of Rotation | Order of Rotation | Angle of Rotation a a A Rion Equilateral a a ee Regular Hexagon Circle sma [| 2024-25 SYMMETRY . Name the quadrilaterals which have both line and rotational symmetry of order more than 1. . After rotating by 60 about a centre, a figure looks exactly the same as its original position. At what other angles will this happen for the figure? . Can we have arotational symmetry of order more than 1 whose angle of rotation is (i) 45 ? (i) 17 ? WHuaT HAVE WE DISCUSSED? . Afigure has line symmetry, if there is a line about which the figure may be folded so that the two parts of the figure will coincide. . Regular polygons have equal sides and equal angles. They have multiple (i.e., more than one) lines of symmetry. . Eachregular polygon has as many lines of symmetry as it has sides. Regular Regular Regular Square Equilateral Polygon hexagon pentagon triangle seein: Number of lines 5 4 of symmetry . Mirror reflection leads to symmetry, under which the left-right orientation have to be taken care of. . Rotation turns an object about a fixed point. This fixed point is the centre of rotation. The angle by which the object rotates is the angle of rotation. A half-turn means rotation by 180 ; a quarter-turn means rotation by 90 . Rotation may be clockwise or anticlockwise. . If, after a rotation, an object looks exactly the same, we say that it has a rotational symmetry. . Inacomplete turn (of 360 ), the number of times an object looks exactly the same is called the order of rotational symmetry. The order of symmetry of a square, for example, is 4 while, for an equilateral triangle, it is 3. . Some shapes have only one line of symmetry, like the letter E; some have only rotational symmetry, like