line of symmetry and shade a few more squares to make the figure symmetric about a diagonal. Is there more than one way to do that? Will the figure be symmetric about both the diagonals? 6. Copy the diagram and complete each shape to be symmetric about the mirror line(s): (a) b) ) State the number of lines of symmetry for the following figures: (a) Anequilateral triangle (b) An isosceles triangle (c) Ascalene triangle (d) Asquare (e) Arectangle (f) Arhombus (g) Aparallelogram (h) A quadrilateral (i) Aregular hexagon (j) Acircle What letters of the English alphabet have reflectional symmetry (1.e., symmetry related to mirror reflection) about. (a) avertical mirror (b) ahorizontal mirror (c) both horizontal and vertical mirrors Give three examples of shapes with no line of symmetry. What other name can you give to the line of symmetry of (a) anisosceles triangle? (b) acircle? 12.3. RotTaTIONAL SYMMETRY What do you say when the hands of a clock go round? about a fixed point, the centre of the clock-face. rotation; otherwise it is said to be anticlockwise. You say that they rotate. The hands of a clock rotate in only one direction, Rotation, like movement of the hands of a clock, is called a clockwise 2024-25 EE a VT HeMarics What can you say about the rotation of the blades of a ceiling fan? Do they rotate clockwise or anticlockwise? Or do they rotate both ways? If you spin the wheel of a bicycle, it rotates. It can rotate in either way: both clockwise and anticlockwise. Give three examples each for (1) a clockwise rotation and (ii) anticlockwise rotation. When an object rotates, its shape and size do not change. The rotation turns an object about a fixed point. This fixed point is the centre of rotation. What is the centre of rotation of the hands of a clock? Think about it. The angle of turning during rotation is called the angle of rotation. A full turn, you know, means a rotation of 360 . What is the degree measure of the angle of rotation for (1) a half-turn? (ii) a quarter-turn? A half-turn means rotation by 180 ; a quarter-turn is rotation by 90 . When it is 12 O clock, the hands of a clock are together. By 3 O clock, the minute hand would have made three complete turns; but the hour hand would have made only a quarter-turn. What can you say about their positions at 6 O'clock? Have you ever made a paper windmill? The Paper windmill in the picture looks symmetrical (Fig 12.11); but you do not find any line of symmetry. No folding can help you to have coincident halves. However if you rotate it by 90 about the fixed point, the windmill will look exactly the same. We say the windmill has a rotational symmetry. Fig 12.11 D C B A D ae rape afte rp ae 90 90 90 90 Fig 12.12 In a full turn, there are precisely four positions