symmetry are quite interesting, Each regular polygon has as many lines of symmetry as it has sides [Fig 12.6 (i) - (iv)]. We say, they have multiple lines of symmetry. three lines of four lines of five lines of six lines of symmetry symmetry symmetry symmetry Equilateral Triangle Square Regular Pentagon Regular Hexagon 1 ii ill iv (i) (ii) Fig 12.6 (ili) (iv) Perhaps, you might like to investigate this by paper folding. Go ahead! The concept of line symmetry is closely related to mirror reflection. A shape has line symmetry when one half of it is the mirror image of the other half (Fig 12.7). A mirror line, thus, helps to visualise a line of symmetry (Fig 12.8). Fig 12.7 Is the dotted line a mirror line? No. Is the dotted line a mirror line? Yes. Fig 12.8 2024-25 SYMMETRY [it While dealing with mirror reflection, care is needed to note down the left-right changes in the orientation, as seen in the figure here (Fig 12.9). _ Fig 12.9 The shape is same, but the other way round! Play this punching game! , RS Fold a sheet into two halves Punch a hole two holes about the symmetric fold. Fig 12.10 The fold is a line (or axis) of symmetry. Study about punches at different locations on the folded paper and the corresponding lines of symmetry (Fig 12.10). EXERCISE 12.1 1. Copy the figures with punched holes and find the axes of symmetry for the following: | (b) (c) (d) (f) (g) (h) 2024-25 EE a is emarics ie) /\ ey ie) (i (i) (k) (D) 2. Given the line(s) of symmetry, find the other hole(s): (b) (c) (d) (e) 3. Inthe following figures, the mirror line (i.e., the line of symmetry) is given as a dotted line. Complete each figure performing reflection in the dotted (mirror) line. (You might perhaps place a mirror along the dotted line and look into the mirror for the image). Are you able to recall the name of the figure you complete? l l l I I l (a) (a) (b) ( ) (d) (e) (f) 4. The following figures have more than one line of symmetry. Such figures are said to have multiple lines of symmetry. (a) (b) ) Identify multiple lines of symmetry, if any, in each of the following figures: > [I A (a) (b) (c) 2024-25 7. 9. 10. SYMMETRY iE) o> NS (e) (f) (g) (h) 5. Copy the figure given here. Take any one diagonal as a line of symmetry and shade a few more squares to make the figure symmetric about a diagonal. Is there more than one way to do that? Will the figure be symmetric about both the diagonals? 6. Copy the diagram and complete each shape to be symmetric about the mirror line(s): (a) b) ) State the number of lines of symmetry for the following figures: (a) Anequilateral triangle (b) An isosceles triangle (c) Ascalene triangle (d) Asquare (e) Arectangle (f) Arhombus