of water and minerals All living beings need water to grow. Plants use water in the process of photosynthesis. Water, along with minerals present in the soil, is taken up by the roots ofa plant. Minerals are important nutrients for the growth of plants. How do water and minerals taken up by the roots move to all parts of the plant? We can study water transport in plants by carrying out an activity. For this activity, we require two glass tumblers, some water, red ink, and twigs of two similar tender plants, preferably with white-coloured flowers (for example, white sadabahar, balsam), as shown in Fig. 10.7. Chapter 10.indd 147 4/3/2025 4:55:54 PM Activity 10.7: Let us experiment Take two tumblers and label them A and B. Fill one-third of each tumbler with water. Add a few drops of red ink to tumbler B. Obliquely cut the stems of both plants at their base while keeping them inside the water and 2) immediately place one plant in each tumbler, >, >, >, >, we 1 eo Oe as shown in Fig. 10.7a and Fig. 10.7b. + Observe these plants the next day. What do you notice? Compare the plant stems placed in the tumblers. Do you observe red colour in the stem, leaves, and flowers of the plant from Tumbler B? Fig. 10.7c and Fig. 10.7d show the plants after one day. Compare the plant in Fig. 10.7c with that in Fig. 10.7d. A red colour is visible in the stem, leaves, and flowers of the plant in Fig. 10.7d. How did different parts of the plant acquire this red colour? Cut the stem from the upper part of the plant _ 2&8 that is not immersed in the red-coloured water. () With water (d) With coloured water Ob orve the cut stem using a magnifying glass. Do plant twigs after one day you spot the red colour in the stem (Fig. 10.7e)? How does the red colour ink move upwards? This Phloem jg due to the thin tube-like structure called the Xylem xylem present in the stem, branches, and leaves of plants. Just like red ink, minerals dissolved in water also move up the stem through the xylem. Now, we know that water and minerals are transported to the leaves and other parts of = A > 3 > 4 (a) With water (b) With coloured water plant twigs placed in water with different treatments (e) Enlarged view of cut end of the twig P i 7 EXP erimenit to check for plants through the xylem (Fig. 10.8). The water P P transported through the xylem is used to perform Food transport various functions. How does food get transported through phloem to other parts of a plant? 10.3.2 Transport of food We know that leaves are the primary site for photosynthesis. The food prepared by plants in the leaves is transported to all parts of the plant. This food is transported through another set of thin tube-like structures called the