sketch of the leaves to record the location of the green and the non-green patches on them with the help of a tracing paper. After that, he performed an iodine test (as shown in Activity 10.2) on the leaves. Bhaskar recorded his observations in Table 10.2. Chapter 10.indd 141 4/3/2025 4:55:49 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 Chapter 10.indd 142 Table 10.2: Presence of starch in green and non-green parts of the leaves of plants S.No. Light conditions for Initial colours Final colours after potted plant before iodine test iodine test 1. Green 2. Plantkeptinsunlight Green and al 3. non-green patches of leaf turned blue-black patches on the leaf non-green colour patches on the leaf Green and i No change in In Table 10.2, Bhaskar recorded a blue-black colour (indicating the presence of starch) on the green patches of the leaf obtained from the plant placed in sunlight. Bhaskar also recorded that the leaf obtained from the plant kept in the dark does not show a blue-black colour, even on the green patches, indicating that no starch has been produced. Non-green patches of the leaf obtained from the plant placed in sunlight do not turn blue-black. Does it indicate that there is no chlorophyll present in those patches? The non-green patches may not have sufficient chlorophyll to prepare enough starch to be detected using the iodine test. FASCINATING FACTS Some plant leaves appear red, violet, or brown because they contain more of these coloured pigments than the green-coloured chlorophyll. This hides the green colour. Some of these pigments also help in photosynthesis. You can use an iodine test to check for the presence of starch in these leaves, indicating that photosynthesis has indeed taken place. 4/3/2025 4:55:50 PM What do we infer from the observations listed in Table 10.2? As we know, leaves are mostly green because of the presence of chlorophyll. We have also seen that the starch is produced where green patches of the leaf are present. We can infer that chlorophyll helps in preparing starch in the presence of sunlight. In fact, it is essential for the preparation of starch. Hence, the leaves are also called food factories of plants. What else is essential for the preparation of food in plants? Let us find out. 10.2.2 Role of air in the preparation of food While reading contributions of scientists in plant nutrition, my sister = told me that air plays a role in the process of food preparation in plants. Which gas from the air is essential in the process of food preparation in plants? Activity 10.4: Let us experiment (demonstration activity) The teacher may demonstrate this activity. + Take a potted green plant and keep it in the dark fortwotothree days to allowittodestarch (i.e., lose any stored starch). Then, locate one leaf of this plant for this experiment. Take a wide-mouthed bottle and pour some caustic soda (sodium hydroxide) into it (caustic soda absorbs carbon dioxide from the air). >, ~ (a) The