Z are three different components of the process. What do X, Y, and Z stand for? 4/3/2025 4:55:56 PM 6. Krishna set-up an experiment with two potted plants of same size and placed one of them in sunlight and the other in a dark room, as shown in Fig. 10.10. Answer the following questions (i) What idea might she be testing through this experiment? (ii) What are the visible differences in plants in both the conditions? (iii) According to you, leaves of which plants confirm the iodine test for (a) Sunlight (b) Complete dark , the presence of starch? Fig. 10.10: Experimental pots 7. Vani believes that carbon dioxide is essential for photosynthesis . She puts an experimental set-up, as shown in Fig. 10.11, to collect evidence to support or reject her idea. (a) Sunlight with (b) Sunlight (c) Dark with (a) Dark without carbon dioxide without carbon carbon dioxide carbon dioxide dioxide Fig. 10.11: A potted plant with sufficient water is placed under the prescribed conditions Life Processes in Plants Answer the following questions (i) In which plant(s) in the above set-up(s) will starch a be formed? (ii) In which plant(s) in the above set-up(s) will starch not be formed? (iii) In which plant(s) in the above set-up(s) will oxygen be generated? (iv) In which plant(s) in the above set-up(s) will oxygen yer not be generated? / Snail 8. Ananya took four test tubes and filled three-fourth of A each test tube with water. She labelled them A,B,C,and == > D (Fig. 10.12). In test tube A, she kept a snail; in test tube B, | she kept a water plant; in test tube C, she kept both a snail and a plant. In test tube D, she kept only water. Ananya added a carbon dioxide indicator to all the test tubes. She recorded the initial colour of water and observed if there derail : are any colour changes in the test tubes after 2-3 hours. Water Water What do you think she wants to find out? How will she plant know if she is correct? C Fig. 10.12: Experimental set-up Chapter 10.indd 151 4/3/2025 4:55:58 PM History Geography Technology Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 7 9. Design an experiment to observe if water transportation in plants is quicker in warm or cold conditions. 10. Photosynthesis and respiration are essential to maintain balance in nature. Discuss. Exploratory Projects bes eee * Develop a bottle garden by planting a growing plant like spider plant or jade plant in a large transparent bottle (Fig. 10.13). After growing the plant properly for some time, seal the mouth of the bottle. Society Observe the growth of the Fig. 10.13: Bottle garden plant. If the plant is growing well that means the plant is maintaining the exchange of gases, that is, carbon dioxide produced in the process of respiration of the plant is utilised Economy for performing photosynthesis, and oxygen generated in photosynthesis is utilised in respiration by the plant inside the