(Fig. 10.1c). + Observe the plants for two weeks! and record changes in their height, number of leaves, colour of leaves, and any other changes that may appear. + Record your observations in Table 10.1. Table 10.1: Effect of sunlight and water on plant growth 2) < Ss a & wn ) 7) wn @ 12) + a ") = a wy yey: Height of plant Number of Colour of Pots kept Availability of (cm) leaves leaves under (Green/Yellow) different conditions Sunlight Water Day1 ae Day 1 Se weeks weeks Pot A: In direct sunlight, with water Pot B: In direct sunlight, without water Pot C: In the dark, with water + What differences did you observe between the plants in the three pots? + Which pot has the plant with the maximum growth? + Which pot has the plant with the least growth? Analyse the observations recorded in Table 10.1, and discuss them with your teacher and friends. You are likely to find that the plant in Pot A, kept in direct sunlight with adequate water, grows better than the plant in Pot C, which gets adequate water but no sunlight. The plant in Pot B may have died as it did not get water even though it received adequate sunlight. What do you infer from the observations made in this activity? The results indicate that plants require both sunlight and water for their growth. 1 This experiment will need two weeks. Teachers can plan this activity accordingly. Chapter 10.indd 139 4/3/2025 4:55:47 PM FASCINATING FACTS HeaHP THAIS AAT MATA AAA HAA AA: | Trees do not produce fruits and flowers merely because they are planted. This line is from an ancient Indian text named Vrikshayurveda. It records useful observations about plant growth, soil, and agricultural practices to help improve crop health, growth and production. The knowledge in the text seems to be based on practical experiences and patterns seen over \@ time. These ideas were then systematically documented to guide farming @ yo! practices. For instance, there are references to different methods of organic manure preparation, such as mixing water, barley, and various seeds, like green, black, and horse grams. 10.2 How Do Plants Get Food for their Growth? Oa hhh hhh abel thle hh hadishr de hhada gly We know that animals get their food from plants, either directly by eating plants or indirectly by eating animals that in turn eat plants for their nutrition and growth. But how do plants obtain the food they need to grow? Unlike animals, plants do not eat food. 10.2.1 Leaves: the food factories of plants Plants store food in the form of starch, a type of carbohydrate. This starch is produced in the leaves of a plant which, by design, are generally broad and flat. These are mostly green because of the presence of a green pigment called chlorophyll, that helps in capturing sunlight efficiently. Let us find out the role chlorophyll plays in the preparation of food in the