air is essential in the process of food preparation in plants? Activity 10.4: Let us experiment (demonstration activity) The teacher may demonstrate this activity. + Take a potted green plant and keep it in the dark fortwotothree days to allowittodestarch (i.e., lose any stored starch). Then, locate one leaf of this plant for this experiment. Take a wide-mouthed bottle and pour some caustic soda (sodium hydroxide) into it (caustic soda absorbs carbon dioxide from the air). >, ~ (a) The set-up J\ Caution Caustic soda is a strong chemical that can Chapter 10.indd 143 cause skin burns; only teachers should handle it. + Insert half of the destarched leaf into the bottle through a split cork, leaving the other wn Cd < S a wn wn wn o 12] i a ") = a Destarched plant Sodium hydroxide solution half of the leaf outside, and place the bottle as (b) Iodine test on the leaf shown in Fig. 10.3a. chlorophyll and air Fig. 10.3: Testing the role of 4/3/2025 4:55:51 PM + Place the set-up in sunlight for a few hours. + Observe and record the availability of water, sunlight, chlorophyll, and carbon dioxide in Table 10.3. + Remove the leaf and test it for starch using the iodine test, as was done in Activity 10.2. + Record your observations in Table 10.3. | Table 10.3: Role of air in the preparation of starch by plants | Availability of Starch Part of the present leaf Water Sunlight Chlorophyll 7P " (yes/No) Part of the leaf inside the bottle Part of the leaf outside the bottle We notice that the part of the leaf that was outside the bottle turns blue-black, indicating the presence of starch. However, the part of the leaf inside the bottle does not turn blue-black in colour, indicating that food is not made in that part of the leaf. This is because the caustic soda solution inside the flask absorbs the carbon dioxide present in the air. What does this experiment show? This experiment shows that carbon dioxide present in the air is essential for plants to prepare starch. Based on Activities 10.3 and 10.4, what do you conclude? Which part of the plant is involved in the synthesis of starch? Based on our learnings so far, we have found that sunlight, water, chlorophyll and carbon dioxide are essential for the synthesis of food in plants. This process by which plants prepare food in the presence of sunlight and chlorophyll is called photosynthesis. A leaf is the primary site for photosynthesis. Do other green parts of the plant also perform photosynthesis? Yes, other parts of the plants which have chlorophyll also perform photosynthesis. So far, we have learnt that plants take in carbon dioxide from the air and water, and use sunlight to prepare their food by the process of photosynthesis. But have you ever thought about what more happens during this process? Do plants only take in a SAY Ss) | i) cS rT) oa 13)