Now all directions at that place Fig. 4.6: A magnetic are as indicated on the dial. compass How can we make our own magnetic compass? Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:20:26 PM Activity 4.4: Let us construct SS @ Collect a few materials like a cork piece, iron sewing needle, a permanent bar magnet, a glass bowl, and water. Place the iron sewing needle on a wooden table. Then keep any one pole of the magnet at one end of oa the needle. Move the magnet over the needle a along its length as shown in Fig. 4.7a.Whenit reaches the other end of the needle, lift it up. Bring the same pole of the magnet you started Fig. 4.7(a): Making an iron with to the same end of the sewing needle from needle a magnet which you began, and repeat the previous step. Repeat this process at least 30 to 40 times. Bring some iron filings or steel pins near the needle. If the pins or iron filings get attracted to the needle, then that means that the needle has become a magnet. @ Pass this needle through the cork horizontally. Float the cork in a glass bow! filled with water, such that the needle always remains above the level of water as shown in Fig. 4.7b. @ When the needle comes to rest, your magnetic compass is ready for use. Note the direction in which either side of the needle points. @ Rotate the cork gently and wait till it stops rotating. Repeat this a few more times. Do the ends of the needle always point in the same direction? Fig. 4.7(b): A compass needle in a bowl of water What happens when we bring two magnets closer to each other? Exploring Magnets Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 4.indd 67 10/4/2024 3:20:34 PM ZT 4 4 Attraction and Repulsion between Magnets Activity 4.5: Let us experiment ee Take a pair of bar magnets on which North and South poles have been marked. Mark the two bar magnets as A and B. @ Place the longer side of magnet A over 5-6 round shaped pencils as shown in Fig. 4.8a. @ Nowbring one end of magnet B near the end of magnet A placed on the pencils. Make sure that the two magnets do not touch each other. Observe what happens. @ Next, bring the other end of magnet B near the same end of magnet A (Fig. 4.8b). Does the magnet A on the pencils begin to move? Does it always move in the direction of the approaching magnet? What do these observations suggest? Magnet A Magnet A & Magnet B Magnet B (a) (b) Fig. 4.8: Interaction between two bar magnets You will see that unlike poles of two magnets, that is, the North pole of one magnet and the South pole of another magnet, attract each other. The like poles, that is, either the North poles or the South poles of both magnets, repel ra | each other. Curiosity | Textbook