Fig. 4.5. You may need to adjust the position of the string till the magnet is balanced horizontally. @ Now rotate the magnet gently in the horizontal direction and let it come to rest. @ Mark the position corresponding to the ends of the magnet on the ground (or on a piece of paper stuck to the ground). Join these two points on the ground with a line. This line indicates the direction along which the magnet comes to rest. al @ Now again rotate the magnet by giving a gentle push at its one end and wait till it comes to rest. Does the magnet rest along the same line? Fig. 4.5: A freely suspended bar magnet If we have noticed the direction where the Sun rises or sets, we have an approximate idea of where East or West is. Hence, we can locate the direction along which the magnet rests. Exploring Magnets Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 4.indd 65 10/4/2024 3:19:56 PM Chapter 4.indd 66 Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 More to know! A freely suspended magnet comes to rest along the north-south direction. The end of the magnet that points towards north direction is called the North-seeking pole or the North pole of the magnet. The other end that points towards the South direction is called the South-seeking pole or the South pole of the magnet. A freely suspended magnet rests along the north-south direction because our Earth itself behaves like a giant magnet. Repeat this activity with a small iron bar in place of the bar magnet. What do you observe? Does it always rest along north-south direction? It does not. It can rest along any direction. This implies that only magnets rest along north-south direction. This activity provides us with a way to test whether a piece of metal is a magnet or not. The property of a freely suspended magnet to always rest along the north-south direction is used to find directions. Based on this, a small device called a magnetic compass was developed in olden days for finding directions. It has a magnet in the shape of a needle which can rotate freely (Fig. 4.6). The needle of a magnetic compass indicates the north-south direction. The compass is kept at the place where we wish to know the directions. After some time, the needle comes to rest in the north-south direction. The compass box is then gently rotated until the north and south marked on the dial are aligned with the needle. Now all directions at that place Fig. 4.6: A magnetic are as indicated on the dial. compass How can we make our own magnetic compass? Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:20:26 PM Activity 4.4: Let us construct SS @ Collect a few materials like a cork piece, iron sewing needle, a permanent bar magnet, a glass bowl, and water. Place the iron sewing needle on a wooden table. Then keep any one pole of the magnet at one end of oa the