your observations in Table 4.1. Table 4.1: Identifying the materials attracted by a magnet Pencil Wood Eraser Rubber Exploring Magnets Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 4.indd 63 10/4/2024 3:19:31 PM Was your prediction correct for all objects? Which materials stuck to the magnet? What conclusion can you draw? Through this activity, we found out that some of the objects were attracted to the magnet and stuck to it, while others were not. The materials which are attracted towards a magnet are called magnetic materials. The metal iron is a magnetic material. Do all parts of a Nickel and cobalt are other metals that are magnet attract also magnetic. Some of their combinations magnetic with other metals are also attracted materials io towards magnets. The materials which are equally? e not attracted towards a magnet are called non-magnetic materials. Which materials listed in Table 4.1 were found to be non-magnetic? Is 4 2 Poles of Magnet Activity 4.2: Let us investigate ae @ Spread some iron filings (very small pieces of iron) ona sheet of paper. @ Place a bar magnet over them. Tap the paper and observe carefully what happens to the iron filings. Do you observe anything special about the way they stick to the magnet? Do the iron filings stick all over the magnet uniformly? Or do the iron filings stick more at some places? We find that maximum iron filings stick near the ends of the bar magnet, as shown in Fig. 4.4, while a very few iron filings stick at the remaining part of the magnet. If we repeat this activity with magnets of other shapes, do we get the same result? Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 Fig. 4.4: Iron filings sticking to a bar magnet Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 4.indd 64 10/4/2024 3:19:54 PM These ends of the magnet are called the Can we find two poles of the magnet the North pole and a magnet the South pole. Most of the iron filings stick with a to the poles of a magnet of any shape. It is not possible to obtain a magnet with a single pole. If a magnet is broken into smaller pieces, North and South poles always exist in pairs even in the smallest piece of the magnet. A single North pole or a South pole cannot exist. single pole? @ mum 4.3 Finding Directions Activity 4.3: Let us experiment aaaaaeerrzxneeee?eeeeecmc ND On) @ Suspend a bar magnet with a thread tied to the middle of the magnet as shown in Fig. 4.5. You may need to adjust the position of the string till the magnet is balanced horizontally. @ Now rotate the magnet gently in the horizontal direction and let it come to rest. @ Mark the position corresponding to the ends of the magnet on the ground (or on a piece of paper stuck to the ground). Join these two points on the ground with a line. This line indicates the direction along which the magnet comes to rest.