Chapter 4.indd 61 Reshma lives in a coastal town of Kerala and is very fond of writing short stories. Her grandmother loves listening to her stories, so Reshma was writing a new story to share with her grandmother on her 60th birthday. The story was based ona ship carrying spices from Kerala for trade in the olden days. Reshma was aware that in those days, * the sailors used stars to find | directions at night. But in her story, a situation arose wherein the sailors got caught ina storm with an overcast sky and stars were not visible. Reshma could not take her story forward as she could not think of a way for sailors to find directions. She searched for information on the internet and her school library. She learnt that the travellers used a device, known as a magnetic compass, for finding directions. Reshma had seen pencil boxes and purses which had magnets to keep them closed. A writing board in her school also had a duster with a magnet. But she had never looked at those carefully. She now became curious to learn more about magnets and magnetic compasses. Reprint 2025-26 ir: = 0677CHO4 [=] F 10/4/2024 3:16:10 PM Fig. 4.1: Some common items that have magnets attached to them The magnets used by sailors in the olden days were based on naturally occurring magnets, known as lodestones which were discovered in ancient times. Later on, people found out that magnets could also be made from pieces of iron. Nowadays, we have magnets made of different materials. The magnets that you find in your school laboratory and those used in pencil boxes, stickers, toys are all artificial magnets (Fig. 4.1). The magnets can be of various shapes, some of which are shown in Fig. 4.2. Do magnets stick to objects made of certain io materials only? e Bar U-shaped Ring magnet magnet magnet Fig. 4.2: Magnets of different shapes Tn es 4 | Vagnetic and Non-magnetic Materials Activity 4.1: Let us explore ee @ Collect a few objects made of different materials and also a magnet. @ Predict which of the objects will stick to the magnet. Write your prediction in Table 4.1. @ Now hold a magnet in your hand and bring it near the objects one by one (Fig. 4.3). Observe which of the objects stick to the magnet. Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grad Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 4.indd 62 10/4/2024 3:16:52 PM Fig. 4.3: Identifying the materials attracted by a magnet Record your observations in Table 4.1. Table 4.1: Identifying the materials attracted by a magnet Pencil Wood Eraser Rubber Exploring Magnets Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 4.indd 63 10/4/2024 3:19:31 PM Was your prediction correct for all objects? Which materials stuck to the magnet? What conclusion can you draw? Through this activity, we found out that some of the objects were attracted to the magnet and stuck to it, while others were not. The materials which are attracted towards a magnet are called