11:07:36 AM Curiosity | Textbook of Science | Grade 6 V7) Chapter 4.indd 74 A magnet has two poles the North pole and the South pole. The poles of a magnet always exist in pairs. A single North pole or a single South pole cannot exist. Magnetic materials are the materials that are attracted towards a magnet. Non-magnetic materials are the materials that are not attracted towards a magnet. A freely suspended magnet rests along the north-south direction. The needle of a magnetic compass indicates the north-south direction. When two magnets are brought close to each other, like poles (North-North, South-South) repel each other while unlike poles (North-South) attract each other. <wily Let us enhance our learning Fill in the blanks (i) Unlike poles of two magnets -_.-.....--.---.- each other, whereas like poles ____._-._-..--.-- each other. (ii) The materials that are attracted towards a magnet are called -_---.-----------. (iii) The needle of a magnetic compass rests along the : Ge, eee direction. (iv) A magnet always has -_--------------- poles. State whether the following statements are True (T) or False (F). (i) A magnet can be broken into pieces to obtain a single pole. (ii) Similar poles of a magnet repel each other. (iii) Iron filings mostly stick in the middle of a bar magnet when it is brought near them. [ ] (iv) A freely suspended bar magnet always aligns with the north-south direction. [ ] Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:22:44 PM 3. Column I shows different positions in which one pole of a magnet is placed near that of the other. Column II indicates the resulting interaction between them for different situations. Fill in the blanks. ono enn eee en ene ee -$ Repulsion 4. Atharv performed an experiment in which he took a bar magnet and rolled it over a heap of steel U-clips (Fig. 4.15). According to you, which of the options given in Table 4.3 is likely to be his observation? Fig. 4.15: Bar magnet and heap of steel U-clips Table 4.3: Number of pins attracted by the magnet at its various positions 10 Ah 10 @) (ii) 10 10 D (iii) 2 10 10 (iv) 10 10 10 5. Reshma bought three identical metal bars from the market. Out of these bars, two were magnets and one was just a piece of iron. How will she identify which two amongst the three could be magnets (without using any other material)? Exploring Magnets 6. You are given a magnet which does not have the poles marked. How can you find its poles with the help of another magnet which has its poles marked? Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 4.indd 75 10/4/2024 3:22:46 PM 7. A bar magnet has no markings to indicate its poles. How would you find out near which end its North pole is located without using another magnet? 8. Ifthe earth is itself a magnet, can you guess the poles of earth s magnet by looking at the direction of the magnetic compass? 9. While a