accounts report considerable cruelty in extracting revenue from the land. The Mughal administrative framework Aiming at greater control and efficiency, Akbar reorganised his administrative machinery. The Diwan took care of the finances, while the Mir Bakhshi looked after military matters and the Khan-i-Saman was in charge of public works, trade, industry and agriculture, besides the royal household. The Sadr was responsible for justice, religious and educational matters. Such ministers were assigned to each of the empire s twelve provinces (subahs), which were further subdivided, with effective checks and balances enforced between the government officials. At the village level, traditional structures of self-governance continued more or less undisturbed. 2 - Reshaping India s Political Map Tapestry of the Past 05-07-2025 16:55:48 Chapter 2.indd 54 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Fig. 2.28. Manuscript painting of Abul Fazl, seated ona terrace with his completed chronicles before him Akbar also _ instituted the mansabdari system. As Abul Fazl recorded in his Ain-i-Akbari, which describes Akbar s administration, mansabdars (officers) according to their mansab (rank) were expected to maintain a precise number of elephants, horses, camels as well as troops for the state. This made it possible to assemble an army at a short notice without having to maintain a permanent centralised army. Regular inspections were carried out to ensure compliance. Mansabdars were generally __ paid by being assigned land (jagirs) and were therefore also known as jagirdars. Despite Akbar s growing tolerance for different faiths, non-Muslims were kept in a minority in the higher echelons of the administration; for instance, the total percentage of nonMuslim officials in his administration rarely exceeded one-third of the total and was often much less. Even among Muslim officials, those of foreign origin were generally favoured over those of Indian origin. 05-07-2025 16:55:48 Chapter 2.indd 55 Todar Mal, Akbar s finance minister, introduced an efficient revenue system. He made detailed surveys for crop yields and prices, and determined prices for each crop on the basis of that information. He also initiated a systematic survey of the land in the entire empire which boosted revenue collection and strengthened the state apparatus. We will see a different kind of administration, that of the Marathas, in the next chapter. PEOPLE S LIVES Despite shifting political powers between the 13" and 17" centuries, India witnessed vibrant economic activity, thanks to its agrarian foundations, thriving artisanal industries, community-based and temple-based economies, and extensive trade networks. Building on decentralised economic and social systems such as Shrenis (guilds), jatis (professionally defined communities), and systems for credit the Subcontinent remained one of _ the wealthiest regions in the world. The Sultanate period saw some progress in infrastructural works, especially roads in north India, bridges, a few canals and other irrigation works, apart from the creation of new cities, all of which expanded considerably during the Mughal period. Coins in_ several metals and denominations were introduced as currency. The Mughals will use a different system, with a rupaya of Fig. 2.29. A Persian