mid-14" century, was absorbed into the a Fig. 2.9 The Hoysalas built magnificent temples, for Vijayanagara Empire instance those of Belur (this picture) and Halebidu. ci, DON'T MISS OUT Rana: A title often used for Rajput kings further south (see below). The sculpture in Fig. 2.9 narrates the story behind the Hoysalas emblem. Kannada folklore recounts the story of Sala, a young man who fought a lion to save his guru, giving the dynasty its name Hoy (strike)! Sala . The Delhi Sultanate also faced rebellions from the emergence of several independent regional Sultanates. The Bahmani Sultanate, for instance, rose in the mid-14" century and controlled much of the Deccan for a while. Powerful Sultanates also emerged in Gujarat, Bengal and other regions, leading to a complex interplay of alliances and frequent wars. Parts of Rajasthan also remained beyond the reach of the Delhi Sultanate; in the 15" century, it faced stiff resistance from Rana Kumbha, the ruler of the Mewar kingdom, who also successfully repelled invasions from these later sultanates. Fig. 2.10. A view of the Kumbhalgarh Fort in the Aravalli hills ~) DON'T MISS OUT | Kumbhalgarh Fort (Fig. 2.10) was built by Rana Kumbha in the 15" century in the Aravalli hills and served as a stronghold for the rulers of Mewar, a prominent Rajput kingdom (in the central and southern parts of today s Rajasthan). Surrounded by forests and steep slopes, it is famous for its massive 36-kilometre-long wall, one of the longest continuous walls in the world. LET'S EXPLORE Why do you think such locations were chosen for many of f the medieval forts? Discuss pros and cons. (Hint: think of \ 5 issues of strategy, security, vulnerability, etc.) THE VIJAYANAGARA EMPIRE While the Delhi Sultanate grew politically more unstable, a new centre of power emerged in the south. In the 14" century, two brothers, Harihara and Bukka, who had initially served as governors under Muhammad bin Tughlagq, eventually rejected Delhi s authority, and established an independent kingdom that became a significant force in southern India and grew into the Vijayanagara Empire. 2 - Reshaping India s Political Map Tapestry of the Past Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 gp ee Fig. 2.11. A section of the ruins of Vijayanagara city (present-day Hampi). The large building is the Viripaksha temple. According to popular folklore, Harihara and Bukka witnessed a remarkable sight at Hampi (in present-day Karnataka) a hare turning around and chasing a pack of hounds, symbolising unexpected strength and courage. When they recounted this incident to their guru, Vidyaranya, he interpreted it as a symbol of resilience and bravery, and advised them to establish their capital at that very spot. To the north of the Vijayanagara Empire (see Fig. 2.12), the Bahmani Sultanate was a major rival; it eventually fragmented into five independent states called the Deccan Sultanates Bijapur, Golconda, Berar, Ahmednagar, and Bidar each ruled by former governors or tarafdars who declared autonomy. The Vijayanagara rulers battled with the