front of him (17*-century painting). Some scholars argue that Aurangzeb s motives were primarily political, that is, to establish and strengthen his empire s dominance; they also give examples of grants and assurances of protection he gave to some temples. While politics did play a part in his decisions, Aurangzeb s own farmans (or firmans, i.e., edicts) make his personal religious motive clear too. In 1669, for instance, he ordered governors of all provinces to demolish schools and temples of the infidels and put down their teachings and religious practices. Temples at Banaras (present-day Varanasi), Mathura, Somnath, among many others, were destroyed, as well as Jain temples and Sikh gurudwaras. This aspect of Aurangzeb was also visible in his persecution of Muslims of other sects, including Sufis, and of Zoroastrians (the religion of Parsis in India, originally from Persia). 05-07-2025 16:55:45 LET'S EXPLORE In his last letters to two of his sons, Aurangzeb wrote, I came alone and am going away alone. I know not who! am and what I have been doing. ... 1 have not done well for the country and the people, and of the future there is no hope. I was helpless [in life] and I am departing helpless. What do these words tell us about Aurangzeb? How do you feel about them? y THINK ABOUT IT Some of the invaders and rulers mentioned above committed terrible deeds and atrocities. Many more could have been mentioned. As the Note on History s Darker Chapters on page 20 makes clear, we must keep in mind that this is about people in the past, not people of today. We need to know the facts of the past, and the victims of these atrocities deserve our respect and remembrance. But it is important to keep in mind that we, today, bear no responsibility for actions of individuals hundreds of years ago. RESISTANCE TO THE MUGHALS Let us survey some of the major rebellions that ended up eroding the Mughal power (keeping the special case of the Marathas for the next chapter). Over the centuries, many peasant communities rebelled against harsh exploitation. One such case, in the 17" century, involves the Jat peasantry (in present-day western Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and eastern Rajasthan), who managed to kill an oppressive officer of the Mughal administration. In a subsequent battle, 20,000 men confronted the Mughal army and fought valiantly, but their Jat leader was killed and the rebellion suppressed. Many tribal groups the Bhils, the Gonds, the Santhals, the Kochs, for instance also fought back against attempts to annex their territory or impose taxes on them. While some of these groups were subdued or gradually integrated into the 2 - Reshaping India s Political Map Tapestry of the Past Delhi Sultanate or the Mughal Empire, others especially those inhabiting forested, hilly, or remote regions managed to maintain some degree of independence. Rani Durgavati is remembered as a valiant queen of the Garha kingdom (one of the Gond kingdoms in central India). From all