pillars ! 05-07-2025 16:55:39 _- DON'T MISS OUT Foreign travellers visited Vijayanagara for trade. Portuguese travellers, in particular, were very well treated, as they came to sell horses and the king did not want them to go and sell those precious horses to enemy kingdoms! One of them, Domingo Paes, left a long and detailed record of his stay in the Vijayanagara capital. An excerpt: This city ... seemed to me as large as Rome, and very beautiful to the sight; there are many groves of trees within it, in the gardens of the houses, and many conduits of water which flow into the midst of it, and in places there are lakes... The people in this city are countless in number... This is the best provided city in the world... The streets and markets are full of laden oxen ... you could find in great abundance everything that you wanted. Fig. 2.14. A panel from the Vitthala temple LET'S EXPLORE In Fig. 2.14, what elements do you observe? What do they tell you about life then? (Hint: observe the weapons, the animals, the activities.) 2 - Reshaping India s Political Map Tapestry of the Past Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Chapter 2.indd 36 After winning many wars against his _ neighbours, Krishnadevaraya died of illness in 1529. In 1565, the Deccan Sultanates formed a coalition and defeated the Vijayanagara forces led by Ramaraya, Krishnadevaraya s son-in-law, at the Battle of Talikota. The city was sacked over several months; houses, shops, buildings, palaces and most of its temples were destroyed, and much of its civilian population massacred; it was left in ruins. After this, the empire got fragmented into smaller regions ruled by Nayakas, who were former military governors; the empire came to an end in the mid-17 century. THE MUGHALS While the Delhi Sultanate weakened, Babur, a TurkicMongol ruler and military strategist who, having been thrown out of Samarkand (modern-day Uzbekistan), turned his sights to India. A descendant of Timur, Babur defeated Ibrahim Lodi at Panipat in 1526, which will later be called the First Battle of Panipat ; it relied heavily on gunpowder, field artillery, and matchlock guns, which had recently been introduced in warfare in India. That defeat put a final end to the Delhi Sultanate and laid the foundation of the Mughal Empire, as Babur assumed control of the Delhi throne. Fig. 2.15. The battle of Panipat as depicted in a copy of the Baburnama. Note the use of cannons. 05-07-2025 16:55:41 Babur and India Babur left a candid autobiography of great historical value, Baburnama ( Babur s Memoirs ). In it, he comes out as cultured and intellectually curious, with a keen appreciation for architecture, poetry, animals (birds in particular, many of which he lists in some detail) and flora (fruit trees especially). But he was also a brutal and ruthless conqueror, slaughtering entire populations of cities, enslaving women and children, and taking pride in erecting towers of skulls made