the control of the Delhi Sultanate, neighbouring kingdoms, such as the Eastern Gangas in the east and the Hoysalas in the south resisted its advance (Fig. 2.3) and also emerged as thriving centres of art, culture, and administration. The city of Delhi also assumed a bigger role in the political landscape of northern India. The Sultanate period was marked by political instability combined with efforts at territorial expansion. This resulted in military campaigns that raided villages and cities, and plundered Sultanate: A territory ruled by a Sultan atitle that some Muslim rulers adopted. 2 - Reshaping India s Political Map Tapestry of the Past 05-07-2025 16:55:34 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Ala-ud-din : _ Ag - 10.7 gms me Khilji a Fig. 2.6. A coin minted by Ala-ud-din Khilji, which bears the inscription Sikander Sani or the second Alexander in Persian. LET'S EXPLORE and destroyed temples and seats of learning. Successions (the appointments of new sultans) were often violent: almost two sultans out of three seized power by eliminating their predecessor, so that a sultan s average reign was _ hardly more than nine years! Looking at Fig. 2.6, why do you think Ala-ud-din Khilji called himself the second Alexander ? At the turn of the 14" century, Ala-ud-din Khilji conducted military campaigns over large areas of north and central India, sacking and plundering many cities; at the same time, he also repelled several invasions by Mongol forces, who were trying to add India to the vast Mongol Empire (it covered most of Asia at the time). His slave-general Malik Kafur expanded the Sultanate s reach southward, conquering several kingdoms on the way; their plundered wealth helped finance the Sultanate s enormous military apparatus. He also attacked a number of Hindu centres such as Srirangam, Madurai, Chidambaram, and possibly Rameswaram. LET US EXPLORE What kind of resources do you think were needed to maintain an army and wage war in those days? Discuss in groups the various types of expenditure involved, from weapons or food for soldiers to animals used in warfare, road construction, etc. A few decades later, Muhammad bin Tughlag (or Tughluq ) ruled Delhi and expanded the Delhi Sultanate s territories further. For the first time since the Mauryan Empire, most of Chapter 2.indd 27 the Subcontinent was now under one ruler. Although this dominance was significant, it proved to be short-lived. Muhammad bin Tughlag had ambitious schemes, but they were often poorly executed. One such was moving his capital from Delhi to Daulatabad (then called Devagiri , near present-day Sambhaji Nagar); perhaps he thought its more central location would offer better control of the empire. The people were forced to travel over 1,000 km, and a few years later, as his plan misfired, he shifted the capital back to Delhi; both transfers resulted in great loss of life according to some sources. Another instance was the introduction of token currency , where cheap copper coins were Fig. 2.7. A 19"-century painting