to Daulatabad (then called Devagiri , near present-day Sambhaji Nagar); perhaps he thought its more central location would offer better control of the empire. The people were forced to travel over 1,000 km, and a few years later, as his plan misfired, he shifted the capital back to Delhi; both transfers resulted in great loss of life according to some sources. Another instance was the introduction of token currency , where cheap copper coins were Fig. 2.7. A 19"-century painting depicting Muhammad bin Tughlag in his court declared to be tokens and have the value of silver or gold coins although this was a progressive idea (most of our currency today is actually token ), at the time this created confusion in the trade and encouraged people to counterfeit copper coins, all of which caused the economy to decline. The sultans and their court elite lived in luxurious palaces, enjoying elaborate clothing, jewelled ornaments and fine food. This wealth was largely derived from plunder from their military campaigns, taxes levied on common people and conquered regions, and engagement in slave trade (as enslaved people 2 - Reshaping India s Political Map Tapestry of the Past 05-07-2025 16:55:34 re Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Iconoclasm: The rejection or destruction of icons or ligious images considered idolatrous. provided free labour or were sent away to distant Central Asia to be sold). But plunder, in turn, affected trade networks and agricultural production. This period also witnessed numerous attacks on sacred or revered images in Buddhist, Jain and Hindu temples; such destruction was motivated not just by plunder but also by iconoclasm. Y THINK ABOUT IT Infidel: Literally, someone who does not share the faith (of a given religion). For medieval Christianity, infidels were Muslims or Pagans; for medieval Islam, infidels were Christians or, in the context of India, Hindus, Buddhists or Jains. Why do we use the term image rather than common terms like idol or icon ? The latter two terms are considered pejorative in the context of Judaism, Christianity and Islam, whose orthodox sects condemn idolatry or the worship of idols or icons . India s classical texts used words like murti, vigraha, pratima, rupa, etc., to designate images, often statues, used for worship in temples or homes. In English, image is a neutral term. Some of the sultans also imposed the jizya, a tax on nonMuslim subjects to grant them protection and exemption from military service. In practice, depending on the ruler, this discriminatory tax would be a source of economic burden and public humiliation, and formed a financial and social incentive for subjects to convert to Islam. At the end of the 14" century, Timur, a brutal Turkic-Mongol conqueror from central Asia, invaded northwest India and launched a devastating attack on Delhi, then a thriving city. As he wrote in his memoirs, his two-fold objective was to wage war with the infidels and to gain something by plundering the wealth of the infidels. Large