at times, though some rulers were more broad-minded than others. > Agriculture and trade expanded, enhancing India s wealth and connectivity with the wider world. Yet the economic condition of the common subjects generally remained harsh. > Indian society showed adaptability and resilience in rebuilding towns, cities, temples, and other aspects of the economy. At the same time, it found ways to preserve cultural traditions and blend indigenous and foreign elements to create new cultural expressions. Many forms of art and culture, including architecture, music and painting, flourished. Chapter 2.indd 59 Questions and activities 1. Compare the political strategies of the Delhi Sultanate and the Mughals. What similarities and differences existed between them? Why did kingdoms like the Vijayanagara Empire and the Ahom Kingdom manage to resist conquest for a longer time compared to others? What geographical, military, and social factors contributed to their success? Imagine you are a scholar in the court of Akbar or Krishnadevaraya. Write a letter to a friend describing the politics, trade, culture, and society you are witnessing. How come Akbar, a ruthless conqueror in his young days, grew tolerant and benevolent after some years? What could have led to such a change? What might have happened if the Vijayanagara Empire had won the Battle of Talikota? Imagine and describe how it could have changed the political and cultural history of south India. Many values promoted by early Sikhism, including equality, seva, and justice, remain relevant today. Select one of these values and discuss how it remains relevant in contemporary society. Imagine you are a trader in a port city (Surat, Calicut or Hooghly). Describe the scenes you see as regards goods, people you trade with, movement of ships, etc. 2 - Reshaping India s Political Map Tapestry of the Past 05-07-2025 16:55:49 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 * Noodles is our abbreviation for Notes and Doodles ! 2 | Chapter 2.indd 60 05-07-2025 16:55:49