alternative spellings in peopies, . .. eyes anguages, parentheses here and there. For instance, Khalji or Khilji and cultures are the same. Similarly, we use here the nowstandard spelling historically ; . . , ; associated of Mughal spelling, but alternatives such as Mughul or with a vast Moghul are still sometimes used. region stretching A new era in India s journey began in the early 11 century. across Central Asia, Invasions from beyond the Hindu Kush mountains reshaped all the way to India s political map. No doubt, India had seen much warfare in Turkey and earlier periods, but the spate of invasions by people from outside Siberia. the Indian subcontinent during this period was unprecedented. Many of these invaders were Central Asian Turkic or Afghan. They were drawn to India not only for her reputed riches and for territorial ambitions, but also often to spread, by force of violence if necessary, their own versions of their religion. 2 - Reshaping India s Political Map Tapestry of the Past Let us now explore in this chapter the ever-changing landscape of India from the 13" century onward. Chapter 2.indd 23 05-07-2025 16:55:31 Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 30 N 20 N 10 N 70 E 80 E 90 E LEGEND )) Eastern Ganga Territory under Narasimhadeva (1264) IN) Hoysala Territories (1300) (I1]] Extent of Tughlaq Dynasty (1335) > Extent of Lodi Dynasty (1479) @ Important cities 70 E 80 E 90 E Fig. 2.3. A comparison of the territories under the Tughlaqs and the Lodis (13 to 15" centuries), and regional powers in the south and east. 40 N 30 N 20 N 10 N Chapter 2.indd 25 Fig. 2.4. The Qutub Minar. Fig. 2.5. A section of the Quwwat-ul-Islam (Might of Islam ) mosque in Delhi s Qutub Minar complex; its construction began in Qutub-ud-din Aibak s time (early 13 century) and was completed by later sultans. An inscription states that materials from 27 destroyed Hindu and Jain temples were used in the construction, some of which can be seen here. RISE AND FALL OF THE DELHI SULTANATE We begin our journey here with the Delhi Sultanate, formed after the defeat in 1192 of King Prithviraj Chauhan, who ruled over parts of northwestern India. This Sultanate saw the rule of five successive foreign dynasties of Turkic-Afghan origin the Mamluks (or Slave dynasty ), the Khiljis (or Khaljis), the Tughlagqs, the Sayyids, and the Lodis (or Lodhis). While certain parts of northern India came under the control of the Delhi Sultanate, neighbouring kingdoms, such as the Eastern Gangas in the east and the Hoysalas in the south resisted its advance (Fig. 2.3) and also emerged as thriving centres of art, culture, and administration. The city of Delhi also assumed a bigger role in the political landscape of northern India. The Sultanate period was marked by political instability combined with efforts at territorial expansion. This resulted in military campaigns that raided villages and cities, and plundered