Rama chasing the golden deer. We mentioned earlier the frequent violent successions during the Sultanate period; this was repeated during the succession of Shah Jahan, who fell ill in 1657. He wished the throne to go to Dara Shikoh, his eldest son, but Dara s younger brother 05-07-2025 16:55:44 Aurangzeb defeated him in a series of battles and eventually executed him, presenting his severed head to their father. Aurangzeb also removed his two other brothers he had one arrested and executed, and drove the second into exile. To prevent further challenge to his rule, Aurangzeb imprisoned his father Shah Jahan in the Agra Fort, where he remained until his death. Aurangzeb crowned himself emperor in 1658 and named himself Alamgir or conqueror of the world ; he ruled for almost 49 years. Y THINK ABOUT IT We saw above that Delhi sultans average reign lasted about nine years. This figure becomes 27 years in the case of Mughal emperors up to Aurangzeb; and 16 years if we consider all Mughal rulers, up to the end of the empire in the 19" century. What do you make of these numbers of years of reign? Aurangzeb, skilled in military matters, conducted many campaigns, conquering parts of the South in particular. Under his reign the Mughal empire reached its greatest expansion (see Fig. 2.16), though constantly faced with significant rebellions, some of which we will turn to in the next section. Aurangzeb had to spend the last 25 years of his life fighting war after war in the Deccan. Maintaining large armies for those campaigns depleted the empire s treasury and put a great strain on the administration; indeed, this is often considered one of key factors in the rapid decline of Mughal power after Aurangzeb s death in 1707. Aurangzeb, who belonged to Islam s Sunni sect, was deeply religious; he led an austere life, and, unlike Akbar, observed all religious rituals and occasions. He gradually banned practices he regarded as un-Islamic, such as music and dance in his court, and reimposed the jizya tax on non-Muslims as well as a pilgrimage tax on Hindus travelling to their sacred places (both of which had been abolished by Akbar). 2 - Reshaping India s Political Map Tapestry of the Past Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Chapter 2.indd 44 & Pa 3 $F i y Hy bP 3 af, a z geet e Sh, Fig. 2.20. Aurangzeb in court, holding a hawk, with one of his sons standing in front of him (17*-century painting). Some scholars argue that Aurangzeb s motives were primarily political, that is, to establish and strengthen his empire s dominance; they also give examples of grants and assurances of protection he gave to some temples. While politics did play a part in his decisions, Aurangzeb s own farmans (or firmans, i.e., edicts) make his personal religious motive clear too. In 1669, for instance, he ordered governors of all provinces to demolish schools and temples of