would be a source of economic burden and public humiliation, and formed a financial and social incentive for subjects to convert to Islam. At the end of the 14" century, Timur, a brutal Turkic-Mongol conqueror from central Asia, invaded northwest India and launched a devastating attack on Delhi, then a thriving city. As he wrote in his memoirs, his two-fold objective was to wage war with the infidels and to gain something by plundering the wealth of the infidels. Large numbers were killed or enslaved, and the city was left in ruins. Timur soon withdrew from India with huge plunder, leaving chaos behind. In the aftermath, the Lodis emerged and established the last dynasty of the Delhi Sultanate. By then, however, its territory had shrunk considerably in the face of increasing resistance from other states and kingdoms from within India (see Fig. 2.3). Resistance to the Delhi Sultanate Throughout its rule, the Delhi Sultanate faced resistance from many quarters. While many kingdoms fell into its net, it failed to subdue the Eastern Ganga kingdom (see Fig. 2.3) of Kalinga, which included present-day Odisha and parts of Bengal and Andhra Pradesh. One of its rulers in the mid-13" century, Narasimhadeva I (also spelt Narasingha Deva I), was noted for the military strength and cultural brilliance he brought to the kingdom. Apart from repelling multiple inroads of the Sultanate, he defeated the Delhi Sultanate s governor of Bengal. Partlytocommemorate Lig * these victories, he built the mw) famed Suryatemple at Konark Fig. 2.8. A statue depicting Narasimhadeva I seated (present-day Odisha). on his throne, surrounded by attendants and musicians. Y THINK ABOUT IT During the time of the Tughlaqs, the Musunuri Nayakas, Telugu chieftains, rallied over 75 more chieftains of the region, formed a confederacy that defeated smaller provinces, formed a confederacy that defeated the Delhi Sultanate forces, and expelled Muhammad bin Tughlaq s army from Warangal (present-day Telangana) around 1330-1336. Do you think it would have been an easy task to bring together 75 leaders in those days? 2 - Reshaping India s Political Map Tapestry of the Past Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 We mentioned earlier Alaud-din s push to the South, attracted by its renowned wealth. At the time, the Hoysalas ruled parts of southern India (mostly present-day Karnataka, see Fig. 2.3) and fended off several attacks from the Delhi Sultanate, remaining the only independent kingdom in the south. However, weakened by these attacks and internal conflicts, the Hoysala kingdom declined and, in the mid-14" century, was absorbed into the a Fig. 2.9 The Hoysalas built magnificent temples, for Vijayanagara Empire instance those of Belur (this picture) and Halebidu. ci, DON'T MISS OUT Rana: A title often used for Rajput kings further south (see below). The sculpture in Fig. 2.9 narrates the story behind the Hoysalas emblem. Kannada folklore recounts the story of Sala, a young man who fought a lion to save his guru, giving the dynasty its name Hoy (strike)! Sala .