in knowledge, I was overwhelmed with shame. Not being a Muslim myself, it was unmeet [i.e., inappropriate] to force others to become such. What constancy is to be expected from proselytes [i.e., converted people] on compulsion? His long reign lasted almost 50 years (1556 to his death in 1605); while its middle period was relatively peaceful, the final 15 years involved fresh military campaigns in Kashmir, Sindh, the Deccan, and Afghanistan. Fig. 2.17. Painting showing Akbar in his court receiving scholars, including two Jesuits (dressed in black). Why do you think Akbar employed different strategies to expand his empire, while the earlier rulers of Delhi relied mostly on military might? LET'S EXPLORE Compare the maps in Figs. 2.3, 2.12 and 2.16. What differences do you notice? What is the reshaping that has occurred? Fig. 2.18. The five-storied Panch Mahal at Fatehpur Sikri, a city built by Akbar near present-day Agra Despite being illiterate, Akbar became keen to explore Persian and Indian texts, and showed great interest in classical Indian thought and often invited scholars to his court (Fig. 2.17). He established a house of translation at Fatehpur Sikri where he had major Sanskrit texts translated into Persian, including the Mahabharata (Razmnama in Persian, or the Book of War ), the Ramayana (with 176 beautiful miniature paintings), the Bhagavad Gita, and the Pafichatantra. Akbar s son Jahangir shared with his father a love for art and architecture and tried to expand the empire into the Deccan. His son Shah Jahan fought several rebellions andis best remembered 2 - Reshaping India s Political Map Tapestry of the Past Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Chapter 2.indd 42 j E . DIEU Dy pn eo elo if wah | None ase Per Herdasinge fpisy bunilen : lear) Naor pea bat bala esa ite sesh rh ister ea rink, of! 4 {i Aurangzeb Rpphesennatoi | | \ Sie ian hess PL Deca: iis Vlnssrcsoetag as the builder of the Taj Mahal at Agra. The Taj Mahal is even today recognized as one of the great architectural marvels of the world. This period formed the peak of an immense flowering of art and architecture, which included the building of Humayun s tomb in Delhi and the Red Forts in Delhi and Agra. Other classical arts and music of India also flourished during this period, as also remarkable works of calligraphy and miniature painting. Fig. 2.19. A miniature painting illustrating the Persian translation of the Ramayana and depicting the well-known episode of Rama chasing the golden deer. We mentioned earlier the frequent violent successions during the Sultanate period; this was repeated during the succession of Shah Jahan, who fell ill in 1657. He wished the throne to go to Dara Shikoh, his eldest son, but Dara s younger brother 05-07-2025 16:55:44 Aurangzeb defeated him in a series of battles and eventually executed him, presenting his severed head to their father. Aurangzeb also removed his two other brothers he had one arrested and