fought back against attempts to annex their territory or impose taxes on them. While some of these groups were subdued or gradually integrated into the 2 - Reshaping India s Political Map Tapestry of the Past Delhi Sultanate or the Mughal Empire, others especially those inhabiting forested, hilly, or remote regions managed to maintain some degree of independence. Rani Durgavati is remembered as a valiant queen of the Garha kingdom (one of the Gond kingdoms in central India). From all accounts, she ruled wisely and made her kingdom AS {eS prosperous. She kept an army of y XIE me Sains," 20,000 soldiers and 1,000 elephants, SPS with which she repelled several eid attempted invasions. When a general sent by Akbar attacked her kingdom in 1564, despite being outnumbered and outmatched in weaponry, she led her troops and fought bravely. Wounded, she took her own life on the battlefield to avoid capture. She was only 40. Her sacrifice became a symbol of regional pride and resistance, and she is still revered as a heroic figure in Indian history. Fig. 2.21. An artist s impression of Rani Durgavati. Surge of the Rajputs Because of their location in northwest India and the proud traditions they inherited from earlier dynasties (such as the Pratiharas, who had resisted the Arab invasions of Sindh a few centuries earlier), the Rajputs were often battling the invading forces from beyond the Subcontinent. They had rebuilt their | kingdoms after the Khiljis conquest, two major clans emerged in this process, in the Mewar and Marwar regions. Inspirational stories of their heroic deeds are still told today, in particular through popular ballads. Among the valorous rulers those clans produced, we met Rana Kumbha earlier. Rana Sanga (early 16" Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Chapter 2.indd 46 05-07-2025 16:55:45 Chapter 2.indd 47 Fig. 2.23. An artist s impression of the Battle of Haldighati (from Udaipur palace) century) unified several Rajput clans, won many battles against sultans, ultimately meeting defeat against Babur at the Battle of Khanwa. Although he inherited a wounded kingdom from _ his predecessors, Mewar s ruler Maharana Pratap refused to accept Mughal suzerainty and became the face of Rajput resistance. A confrontation took place at the Haldighati pass in the Aravallis in 1576 (Fig. 2.23), and although the Mughal army had the upper hand, Maharana Pratap escaped and pursued for years guerrilla warfare against the Mughals from the Aravalli hills, living in harsh conditions but firm on his independence. It is noteworthy that Maharana Pratap received strong support from the Bhils, who not only joined his troops as archers but also contributed their knowledge of the terrain; their service (on other occasions too) earned them arespected place in Mewar s military tradition, as the Mewar emblem shows (Fig. 2.22). Guerrilla warfare: A style of fighting where small groups with knowledge of the terrain carry out surprise attacks and ambushes to defeat bigger armies. 2 - Reshaping India s Political Map Tapestry of the