Reshaping India s Political Map CHAPTER Fig. 2.1. An aerial view of the Qutub Minar complex, Delhi 1. How did foreign invasions and the rise of new dynasties reshape India s political boundaries during this period? The Big ; Questions @ 0881CHO2 2. How did Indian society respond to invasions? How did India s economy adapt during times of political instability? 3. What impact did this period have on the lives of the people? 1498: Arrival of the 1336: Establishment of Portuquese in India the Vijayanagara Empire 1206: Establishment of 1398: Timur the Delhi Sultanate attacks Delhi t 1347: Establishment of the Bahmani Sultanate 1326: Re-establishment of the Mewar Kingdom The period in this chapter and the next is often called the latter part of the medieval period of Indian history. The term medieval (i.e., between two ages ) was originally applied to European history, roughly from the fall of the Roman Empire (5" century CE) to the Renaissance (Europe s cultural revival in the 14-16" centuries, nurtured by the rediscovery of Greek and Roman art and literature). It was once thought to mark a dark age before the development of modern science; but, of course, Europe s and India s histories are very different, so applying the same term medieval to both is not ideal, and historians do not always agree on which period it covers in India. We will sometimes have to use the term medieval but for us it simply means the period from the 11" to the 17" centuries. In Tapestry of the Past chapters, we have tried to keep as few dates as possible only those that mark important reference points. You will find it helpful to keep revisiting the timelines in those chapters. Revisit the maps too, as they will help you visualise the geography that was traversed by armies, common people, traders, scholars or spiritual figures. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Chapter 2.indd 22 05-07-2025 16:55:31 1556: Second Battle of Panipat; Akbar s decisive victory ie pate 1799: Establishment aldighati; Maharana . : of the Sikh Empire 1699: Formation of Pp Pratap forced to retreat the Khalsa by Guru Gobind Singh 1565: Battle of Talikota, destruction 1754: Beginning of Vijayanagara city of Maratha 1671: Battle of control of Delhi Saraighat; the Ahoms 1526: First Battle defeat the Mughals of Panipat; Babur's victory establishes the Mughal Empire Spellings, spellings ... Turkic: Because of difficulties in transcribing the Persian script in Refers to the Roman script, you will find some alternative spellings in peopies, . .. eyes anguages, parentheses here and there. For instance, Khalji or Khilji and cultures are the same. Similarly, we use here the nowstandard spelling historically ; . . , ; associated of Mughal spelling, but alternatives such as Mughul or with a vast Moghul are still sometimes used. region stretching A new era in India s journey began in the early 11 century. across Central Asia, Invasions from beyond the Hindu Kush mountains reshaped all