the fort finally breached, died fighting in large numbers, while hundreds of women committed jauhar (see box). Akbar ordered the massacre of some 30,000 civilians, and the surviving women and children were enslaved. Akbar was 25 at the time, and he sent a message of victory which read, We have succeeded in occupying a number of forts and towns belonging to the infidels and have established Islam there. With the help of our bloodthirsty sword, we have erased the signs of infidelity from their minds and have destroyed temples in those places and also all over Hindustan. Akbar followed his predecessors What is jauhar? in this thought of his: A monarch should be ever intent on conquest, otherwise his enemies rise in arms against him. As his empire grew (Fig. 2.16), he increasingly used political strategies to stabilise it; he entered into marriage alliances with princesses of neighbouring kingdoms, welcomed _ Rajput and regional leaders into his court, abolished the jizya, and promoted the doctrine of sulh-ikul literally, peace with all or tolerance of all faiths. Through interfaith dialogues, appointment When invading Turkic or Mughal armies conquered a territory, they often took the women as slaves or abused them. There are historical examples of Rajput women jumping into mass fires to avoid being captured and enslaved; this jauhar was considered a_ heroic act of final resistance and a means of preserving one s honour. Thus, when Akbar finally broke into the Chittorgarh Fort, hundreds of Rajput women, led by their queens and noblewomen, committed jauhar. Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 SS Chapter 2.indd 38 05-07-2025 16:55:41 30 N 20 N 10 N 70 E 80 E 90 E a Cuttack Hh BAY OF Machilipatnam BENGAL Mumbai ARABIAN SEA LEGEND Mughal Empire under Akbar (1605) Mughal expansion under Aurangzeb (1700) _ Rajput Territories (1751) 250 500km i , [lig Ahom Kingdom (1826) Sikh Empire (1839) Kanchipuram | INDIAN @ Important cities 70 E 80 E 90 E Fig. 2.16. The Mughals and the rise of regional powers at different periods. of Hindu officials in high positions and other bold reforms, Akbar expanded and stabilised his empire, even gaining the support of many Rajput rulers. His court historian and biographer Abul Fazl recorded him as stating, Formerly I persecuted men into conformity with my faith and deemed it Islam. 10 N 20 N 2 - Reshaping India s Political Map Tapestry of the Past Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 As I grew in knowledge, I was overwhelmed with shame. Not being a Muslim myself, it was unmeet [i.e., inappropriate] to force others to become such. What constancy is to be expected from proselytes [i.e., converted people] on compulsion? His long reign lasted almost 50 years (1556 to his death in 1605); while its middle period was relatively peaceful, the final 15 years involved fresh military campaigns in Kashmir, Sindh, the Deccan, and Afghanistan. Fig. 2.17. Painting showing Akbar in his court receiving