When they recounted this incident to their guru, Vidyaranya, he interpreted it as a symbol of resilience and bravery, and advised them to establish their capital at that very spot. To the north of the Vijayanagara Empire (see Fig. 2.12), the Bahmani Sultanate was a major rival; it eventually fragmented into five independent states called the Deccan Sultanates Bijapur, Golconda, Berar, Ahmednagar, and Bidar each ruled by former governors or tarafdars who declared autonomy. The Vijayanagara rulers battled with the first two, as well as with the Gajapati rulers of Odisha in the east. Y THINK ABOUT IT Have you noticed the term pati in titles like Gajapati ? Pati means lord or master and was commonly used by many ruling dynasties of this period to signify power and stature. The Vijayanagara kings were called Narapati , the BahmaniSultanate rulers Ashwapati , and the Maratha rulers Chhatrapati each title reflecting different aspects of kingship and power. Can you guess what these three terms might mean? 25 N 20 N 15 N 10 N (Kozhikode) ; =" . . PAN AY IE fi % zy 2 a ~~ 5, ae Fe 4 a4 \ % (O- %G is Berar (Achalpur) Ahmednagar Bijapur (Vijayapura) Vijayanagara (Hampi) Calicut LEGEND []] Gajapati Kingdom (1458) | Bahmani Sultanate (1477) Vijayanagara Empire (1509) Vijayanagara Empire under CL] Krishnadevaraya (1529) @ Important cities 80 E 85 E Fig. 2.12. Kingdoms in the Deccan and the Vijayanagara Empire N02 NOL 2 - Reshaping India s Political Map Tapestry of the Past Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Chapter 2.indd 34 Krishnadevaraya In the 16" century, the Vijayanagara Empire reached its peak under its celebrated ruler, Krishnadevaraya, who expanded and secured the empire s dominance over the Deccan. Under his rule, the empire achieved both military power and cultural renaissance. He patronised poets and scholars in Sanskrit, Telugu and Kannada; he himself composed an epic poem in Telugu, Amuktamdlyada, on the story of the Tamil poet-saint Andal; one section of the work is a Rdjaniti ( royal policy ) where he expounded his ideas of good governance. Krishnadevaraya provided grants to many temples, including Tirupati in Andhra Pradesh and the Vitthala temple in his own capital Vijayanagara, which displayed many grand temples, palaces and other buildings. Fig. 2.13. The mahamandapa (great hall) of the Vitthala temple; note the grandeur and intricacy of the architecture, in particular the finely sculpted monolithic pillars; when struck, their smaller columns give out different musical notes hence their name musical pillars ! 05-07-2025 16:55:39 _- DON'T MISS OUT Foreign travellers visited Vijayanagara for trade. Portuguese travellers, in particular, were very well treated, as they came to sell horses and the king did not want them to go and sell those precious horses to enemy kingdoms! One of them, Domingo Paes, left a long and detailed record of his stay in the Vijayanagara capital. An excerpt: This city ... seemed to me as large as Rome, and very beautiful to the