in Chandni Chowk the famous shopping area in Delhi signifies? In Sikhism, a gurudwara is a place of worship. This one marks the site where Guru Tegh Bahadur, the ninth Sikh Guru, was beheaded by Aurangzeb in 1675. This historic Gurdwara is uniquely honoured by the Sikh Regiment, which has saluted it before the President in the Republic Day parade each year since 1979. It stands as a powerful symbol of faith and sacrifice in Indian history. 2 - Reshaping India s Political Map Tapestry of the Past Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 Y THINK ABOUT IT > Why do you think Guru Tegh Bahadur endured torture rather than convert? Why did he think his sacrifice would make a difference? > What values did the Sikh Gurus and the Khalsa embody? > Howare they relevant in today s world? As the Mughal Empire declined, especially under the onslaughts of the Marathas (see next chapter), several Sikh confederacies emerged in the Punjab region; they were ultimately unified through the efforts of Maharaja Ranjit Singh at the turn of the 19" century. Ranjit Singh s military acumen, diplomatic skill and religious tolerance allowed him to establish a strong, centralised Eastern Ganga Rajputs Kingdom Fig. 2.27. This graphic sums up the chief dynasties involved in this chapter, witha rough indication of their geographical locations. Chapter 2.indd 53 Sikh Empire which spanned much of the Northwest, including parts of Kashmir. Till the mid-19" century, this empire resisted both Mughal remnants and later British expansion. ADMINISTERING INDIA Administration under the Delhi Sultanate The Delhi Sultanate introduced a political system centred on the sultan, who possessed absolute authority as the political and military head, and whose duties, according to contemporary chronicles, included defending the territories of Islam against possible aggression, collecting fees and taxes and keeping in touch with public affairs and the condition of the people by personal contact. The sultan was however assisted by a council of ministers who were in charge of the various departments of the Sultanate. One instrument of the administration was the igta system, in which territories were assigned to nobles (iqtadars) to collect taxes which, minus expenses, were supposed to go to the Sultan s treasury; they were needed, in particular, to maintain the army. The system created a network of local administrators loyal to the central authority, but their posts were not hereditary. While taxes were levied on trade at every stage, the burden fell most heavily on the peasantry, and some contemporary accounts report considerable cruelty in extracting revenue from the land. The Mughal administrative framework Aiming at greater control and efficiency, Akbar reorganised his administrative machinery. The Diwan took care of the finances, while the Mir Bakhshi looked after military matters and the Khan-i-Saman was in charge of public works, trade, industry and agriculture, besides the royal household. The Sadr was responsible for justice, religious and educational matters. Such ministers were assigned to each of the empire s twelve provinces (subahs),