in digging trenches, and in wielding guns and cannons. I have not seen such specimens of versatility in any other part of India. LET'S EXPLORE How did the Ahoms use the rivers, hills and forests of Assam to their advantage? Can you think of ways in which the geography helped them build defences and fight wars? Fig. 2.24. A plaque commemorating the Battle of Saraighat, with an Ahom boat in the foreground (Saraighat War Memorial Park). Fig. 2.25. Statues depicting Ahom warriors during the Battle of Saraighat. 2 - Reshaping India s Political Map Tapestry of the Past Exploring Society: India and Beyond | Grade 8 Part 1 The Rise of the Sikhs In 15" century Punjab, Guru Nanak spread the message of equality, compassion, and the oneness of God (Ik Onkar); his followers came to be known as Sikhs. Although Sikhism began purely as a spiritual movement, the later Sikh Gurus had to respond to the growing intolerance and persecution under some Mughal rulers. When Emperor Jahangir found out that Guru Arjan had supported his rebellious son, he had Guru Arjan tortured to death. This prompted Guru Arjan s son and successor, Guru Hargobind, to introduce martial training and form a Sikh army, which fought several battles against the Mughal forces. e DON'T MISS OUT In the context of this chapter, Punjab refers to the vast region now split across India and Pakistan. The Sikhs sacred text, Guru Granth Sahib, was first compiled by Guru Arjan; Guru Tegh Bahadur s hymns were added later. It stresses that there is one God for all (who established the earth as a home for Dharma ) and enjoins Sikhs to practise truthfulness, compassion, humility and self-control, among other values. An example: Truth is high but higher still is truthful living. In 1675, a group of Kashmiri Pandits approached Guru Tegh Bahadur seeking protection from religious persecution. The Guru decided to stand with them and court martyrdom; arrested, Aurangzeb ordered him to convert to Islam. Despite torture, and despite witnessing two of his disciples being tortured to death, the Guru refused; on Aurangzeb s orders, he was publicly beheaded in Chandni Chowk, Delhi. In response, his son Guru Gobind Singh the 10" and last Guru established the Khalsa a martial brotherhood committed to justice, equality and defence of the faith, which frequently clashed with the Mughal forces, at great cost of life. Fig. 2.26. Miniature painting of Guru Gobind Singh <4, DON'T MISS OUT Do you know what the Gurudwara Sis Gunj Sahib in Chandni Chowk the famous shopping area in Delhi signifies? In Sikhism, a gurudwara is a place of worship. This one marks the site where Guru Tegh Bahadur, the ninth Sikh Guru, was beheaded by Aurangzeb in 1675. This historic Gurdwara is uniquely honoured by the Sikh Regiment, which has saluted it before the President in the Republic Day parade each year since 1979. It stands as a powerful symbol of faith and sacrifice in Indian history. 2 - Reshaping