@ Repeat the above steps for measuring the temperatures of your friends. Table 7.1: Body temperatures of 10 persons ~~ < v > g 1. g Re vs s S & s = v a : B 10. (127 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 7.indd 127 10/4/2024 3:14:52 PM The normal temperature ofa healthy human body is taken to be 37.0 C. But in this activity, did you find that the normal temperature of every person was 37.0 C? Or did you find the temperature slightly higher or lower for some people? The temperature of every person may not be 37.0 C. What we call normal temperature is the average body temperature of a large >? number of healthy people. A_ perfectly e healthy person may, therefore, have a normal temperature slightly different from 37.0 C. The body temperature is influenced by several factors, such as age, time of the day and activity level. Do small children generally have slightly higher body temperatures as compared to adults? Do old people, even You may try measuring your own when healthy, generally temperature at different times of the day and have lower body e on different days. Record the thermometer temperatures than young adults? readings in your notebook. After a month, analyse your temperature record and see if there are any variations. If yes, try to think what might be the reasons for that. The temperature of human beings does not normally go below 35 C or above 42 C. For measuring the body temperature of small children or old people, the digital thermometer can also be placed in the armpit. The temperature measured this way is about 0.5 C to 1 C lower than the actual body temperature. There is another scale of temperature known as Fahrenheit scale. On this scale, the unit oftemperature is degree Fahrenheit and is denoted by F. A temperature measured as 37.0 C on Celsius scale is equivalent to 98.6 F on Fahrenheit scale. The Fahrenheit scale is not used in most scientific studies anymore. In scientific work, there is another scale of temperature known as Kelvin scale. On this scale, the unit for temperature is kelvin and is denoted by K. The SI unit of temperature is kelvin. hat is the . re for this differen a ce? Curiosity | Textbook of Science| Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 7.indd 128 10/4/2024 3:14:52 PM All three temperature scales, Celsius, Fahrenheit and Kelvin are named in honour of the scientists who We can easily convert the temperature from Celsius scale to Kelvin scale by using: Temperature in Kelvin developed these scales. scale = Temperature in Celsius scale + 273.15 More to The names of temperature scales Celsius scale, know! Fahrenheit scale and Kelvin scale start with a capital letter. For the units for temperature, degree Celsius and degree Fahrenheit, the word degree starts with a lower-case letter while Celsius and Fahrenheit start with a Capital letter. The unit kelvin starts with a lower-case letter. The symbols of all units