The difference in temperature between the two bodies tells us how hot a body is in comparison to another body. A device that measures temperature is called a thermometer. There are two kinds of thermometers that you are likely to come _ across clinical thermometers and laboratory thermometers. Clinical thermometers are used to measure human body temperatures whereas laboratory thermometers are used for many other purposes. Let us now learn more about thermometers and how to use them to measure temperature. 7.3 Measuring Temperature 7.3.1 Clinical thermometer You might be familiar with a thermometer, like that shown in Fig. 7.2, which is used for measuring our body temperature. It is called a clinical thermometer. Such thermometers show temperatures digitally. These are also known as digital clinical thermometers and run on batteries. These measure Tip Fig.7.2: A digital clinical thermometer Reprint 2025-26 Temperature and its Measurement 10/4/2024 3:14:48 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science| Grade 6 Chapter 7.indd 126 temperature when the thermometer is placed in contact with a person s body. For measuring temperature, the clinical thermometers generally use a scale called the Celsius scale. On this scale, the unit of temperature is degree Celsius and is denoted by C. They are non-contact thermometers, also called infrared thermometers. Such thermometers can measure temperature without touching a person s body and thus reduce the risk of spreading disease. Reprint 2025-26 10/4/2024 3:14:51 PM Activity 7.2: Let us measure Letusnowusea digital clinicalthermometer A to measure body temperature. You may measure your own temperature as well as Precautions the temperature of some of your friends. iolyatelenwitile Talk to your friends to find out who would using a digital clinical be willing to get their body temperatures thermometer measured by you. To be used after reading the Wash your hands and the tip of the instruction manual of the digital thermometer with soap and thermometer. water. * Tip of the thermometer to @ Reset the thermometer by pressing the be washed with soap and reset button. water before and after use. @ Place the thermometer under the * While washing, care to be tongue and close your mouth. EL @) U3) ne eee portion such as the display @ Wait till the thermometer makes a out of water. beeping sound or flashes a light. Do Yothold thethermometer Take it out from the mouth and read by the tip. the temperature on the digital display. Record the temperature in Table 7.1. @ Clean the tip of the thermometer with soap and water, and dry it. @ Repeat the above steps for measuring the temperatures of your friends. Table 7.1: Body temperatures of 10 persons ~~ < v > g 1. g Re vs s S & s = v a : B 10. (127 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 7.indd 127 10/4/2024 3:14:52 PM The normal temperature ofa healthy human body is taken to be 37.0 C. But in this activity, did you find that the normal temperature of every person was 37.0 C? Or did you