Chapter 7.indd 123 Lambok and his elder sister Phiban live in Shillong. One day they came home from school. Their parents were away at work and Lambok complained that he was feeling feverish. Phiban touched his forehead and felt that he might be having a fever. To confirm this, she took out the thermometer kept in the almirah. She washed its tip with soap and water, and measured Lambok s temperature. To her relief, she found that his temperature was normal. She washed the thermometer tip again, dried it and put it back. She then asked Lambok to change his school uniform, eat his lunch, and rest for some time. We know from experience that some bodies are hotter than others. For example, during summers, the tap water may be hotter than the cold water from a matka (earthen pot) or a Reprint 2025-26 0677CHO7 10/4/2024 3:14:46 PM refrigerator. We can realise this by merely touching the two samples of water. But can we always rely upon our sense of touch? Let us find out. Activity 7.1: Let us investigate Se @ Take three large containers and label them A, B and C, as shown in Fig. 7.1. Pour warm water in container A, tap water in B and icecold water in C. @ We will conduct this activity in two parts prediction and observation. Firstly, predict what will you feel if you dip your right hand in A and left hand in C and keep them there for 1-2 minutes. take out your hands from containers A and C, and place both hands simultaneously in B. Fig. 7.1: Feeling hotness or coldness of water by dipping hands @ Write down your predictions. What will my right hand feel on dipping it in B? What will my left hand feel on dipping it in B? Curiosity | Textbook of Science| Grade 6 Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 7.indd 124 10/4/2024 3:14:47 PM Chapter 7.indd 125 Compare whether your observations match with your predictions. Did your right hand feel that the water in container B is cool, while your left hand felt that the same water is warm? What do you infer from these observations? We cannot always rely upon our sense of touch to decide correctly whether a body is hot or cold. Then how do we find out how hot or cold a body is? 7.2. Temperature A reliable measure of hotness (or coldness) of a body is its temperature. A hotter body has a higher temperature than a colder body. The difference in temperature between the two bodies tells us how hot a body is in comparison to another body. A device that measures temperature is called a thermometer. There are two kinds of thermometers that you are likely to come _ across clinical thermometers and laboratory thermometers. Clinical thermometers are used to measure human body temperatures whereas laboratory thermometers are used for many other purposes. Let us now learn more about thermometers and how to use them to measure