scale to Kelvin scale by using: Temperature in Kelvin developed these scales. scale = Temperature in Celsius scale + 273.15 More to The names of temperature scales Celsius scale, know! Fahrenheit scale and Kelvin scale start with a capital letter. For the units for temperature, degree Celsius and degree Fahrenheit, the word degree starts with a lower-case letter while Celsius and Fahrenheit start with a Capital letter. The unit kelvin starts with a lower-case letter. The symbols of all units ( C, F, K) are capital letters. Note that degree sign ( ) is not written with K, A full stop is not written after the symbol, except at the end of a sentence. While writing the temperature, a space is left between the number and the unit. For temperatures more than one degree, use the plural of degree , that is, degrees , while writing the full form of the unit. How was fever detected before Can a clinical thermometers were developed? Fever thermometer be ? affects the pulse rate of a person. This used for measuring @ was known even in olden days the temperature of in India. However, apart from boiling water? Or 4 fever, some other situations for measuring the 2 also affect the pulse rate. 5-9) , temperature of ce! Hence, pulse rate alone is not te yor a reliable indicator of fever. now: No, the temperatures of boiling water and How can we measure temperatures beyond the range of a clinical thermometer? ice are outside the range of a clinical thermometer. Temperature and its Measurement Reprint 2025-26 Chapter 7.indd 129 10/4/2024 3:14:56 PM Curiosity | Textbook of Science| Grade 6 Chapter 7.indd 130 Bulb Fig.7.3(a): A laboratory thermometer 7.3.2 Laboratory thermometer There are many types of laboratory thermometers but the one that might be available in your school laboratory may look like the one shown in Fig. 7.3a. It consists of a long, narrow, uniform glass tube which is sealed. At one end of the tube is a bulb which contains a liquid. Outside the bulb, in the tube, a narrow column of liquid can be seen. There is a Celsius scale marked along the tube. The liquid column rises or falls with change in temperature. The mark of the Celsius scale with which the top level of the liquid column coincides is the temperature reading. Do you know? Activity 7.3: Let us observe Let us try to find the temperature range ofa given laboratory thermometer. @ Take a laboratory A thermometer and observe it carefully. Precautions @ Note down the following: to be taken while using a laboratory What is the lowest thermometer temperature it can measure? e Handle with care. If it hits against some hard object, it can What is the highest break. temperature it * Donot hold it by the can measure? bulb. So, the range of this thermometer is __________-_--____ Now look at the thermometer shown in Fig. 7.3a carefully. Can you tell its range? Its range is from