20 mL of this solution in a test tube and add a pinch of yeast granules to it. Put a cotton plug on the mouth of the test tube and keep it in a warm place. After 1 or 2 hours, put a small drop of yeast culture from the test tube on a slide and cover it with a coverslip. Observe the slide under a microscope. = Wet a slice of bread, and keep it in a cool, moist and dark place. = Observe the surface of the slice with a magnifying glass. = Record your observations for a week. Compare and contrast the ways in which yeast grows in the first case, and how mould grows in the second. Having discussed the context in which reproductive processes work, let us now examine how different organisms actually reproduce. The modes by which various organisms reproduce depend on the body design of the organisms. 7.2.1 Fission For unicellular organisms, cell division, or fission, leads to the creation of new individuals. Many different patterns of fission have been observed. Many bacteria and protozoa simply split into two equal halves during cell division. In organisms such as Amoeba, the splitting of the two cells during division can take place in any plane. SI = Observe a permanent slide of Amoeba under a microscope. = Similarly observe another Figure 7.1(a) Binary fission in Amoeba permanent slide of Amoeba showing binary fission. = Now, compare the observations of both the slides. However, some unicellular organisms show somewhat more organisation of their bodies, such as is seen in Leishmania (which cause kala-azar), which have a whip-like structure at one end of the cell. In such organisms, binary fission occurs in a definite orientation in relation to (a) (b) (c) (d) (e) ti) Figure 7.1(b) Binary fission in Leishmania How do Organisms Reproduce? 115 Reprint 2025-26 Figure 7.2 Multiple fission in Plasmodium these structures. Other single-celled organisms, such as the malarial parasite, Plasmodium, divide into many daughter cells simultaneously by multiple fission. Yeast, on the other hand, can put out small buds that separate and grow further, as we saw in Activity 7.1. 7.2.2 Fragmentation = Collect water from a lake or pond that appears dark green and contains filamentous structures. Put one or two filaments on a slide. Put a drop of glycerine on these filaments and cover it with a coverslip. Observe the slide under a microscope. Can you identify different tissues in the Spirogyra filaments? In multi-cellular organisms with relatively simple body organisation, simple reproductive methods can still work. Spirogyra, for example, simply breaks up into smaller pieces upon maturation. These pieces or fragments grow into new individuals. Can we work out the reason for this, based on what we saw in Activity 7.4? This is not true for all multi-cellular organisms. They cannot simply divide cell-by-cell. The reason is that many multi-cellular organisms, as we have seen, are not simply a random collection of cells. Specialised cells are organised as tissues, and