improve everybody s standard of living. However, if inequality in society is the main reason for poor standards of living for many people, the size of the population is relatively unimportant. If we look around us, what can we identify as the most important reason(s) for poor living standards? How do Organisms Reproduce? Reprint 2025-26 Q U ES TION S How is the process of pollination different from fertilisation? What is the role of the seminal vesicles and the prostate gland? What are the changes seen in girls at the time of puberty? How does the embryo get nourishment inside the mother s body? If a woman is using a copper-T, will it help in protecting her from sexually transmitted diseases? What you have learnt Reproduction, unlike other life processes, is not essential to maintain the life of an individual organism. Reproduction involves creation of a DNA copy and additional cellular apparatus by the cell involved in the process. Various organisms use different modes of reproduction depending on their body design. In fission, many bacteria and protozoa simply divide into two or more daughter cells. Organisms such as hydra can regenerate if they are broken into pieces. They can also give out buds which mature into new individuals. Roots, stems and leaves of some plants develop into new plants through vegetative propagation. These are examples of asexual reproduction where new generations are created from a single individual. Sexual reproduction involves two individuals for the creation of a new individual. DNA copying mechanisms creates variations which are useful for ensuring the survival of the species. Modes of sexual reproduction allow for greater variation to be generated. Reproduction in flowering plants involves transfer of pollen grains from the anther to the stigma which is referred to as pollination. This is followed by fertilisation. Changes in the body at puberty, such as increase in breast size in girls and new facial hair growth in boys, are signs of sexual maturation. The male reproductive system in human beings consists of testes which produce sperms, vas deferens, seminal vesicles, prostate gland, urethra and penis. The female reproductive system in human beings consists of ovaries, fallopian tubes, uterus and vagina. Sexual reproduction in human beings involves the introduction of sperm in the vagina of the female. Fertilisation occurs in the fallopian tube. Contraception to avoid pregnancy can be achieved by the use of condoms, oral pills, copper-T and other methods. 126 Science Reprint 2025-26 . Asexual reproduction takes place through budding in (a) Amoeba. (b) Yeast. (c) Plasmodium. (d) Leishmania. . Which of the following is not a part of the female reproductive system in human beings? (a) Ovary (b) Uterus (c) Vas deferens (d) Fallopian tube . The anther contains (a) _ sepals. (b) ovules. (c) _ pistil. (d) pollen grains. . What are the advantages of sexual reproduction over asexual reproduction? . What are the functions performed by the testis in human beings? . Why does menstruation occur? Draw a labelled diagram of the