parts like the root, stem and leaves develop into new plants under appropriate conditions. Unlike in most animals, plants can indeed use such a mode for reproduction. This property of vegetative propagation is used in methods such as layering or grafting to grow many plants like sugarcane, roses, or grapes for agricultural purposes. Plants raised by vegetative propagation can bear flowers and fruits earlier than those produced from seeds. Such methods also make possible the propagation of plants such as banana, orange, rose and jasmine that have lost the capacity to produce seeds. Another advantage of vegetative propagation is that all plants produced are genetically similar enough to the parent plant to have all its characteristics. How do Organisms Reproduce? Reprint 2025-26 Figure 7.5 Leaf of Bryophyllum with buds O O Figure 7.6 Spore formation in Rhizopus = Take a potato and observe its surface. Can notches be seen? = Cut the potato into small pieces such that some pieces contain a notch or bud and some do not. = Spread some cotton on a tray and wet it. Place the potato pieces on this cotton. Note where the pieces with the buds are placed. = Observe changes taking place in these potato pieces over the next few days. Make sure that the cotton is kept moistened. = Which are the potato pieces that give rise to fresh green shoots and roots? Buds Similarly buds produced in the notches along the leaf margin of Bryophyllum fall on the soil and develop into new plants (Fig. 7.5). = Select a money-plant. = Cut some pieces such that they contain at least one leaf. = Cut out some other portions between two leaves. = Dip one end of all the pieces in water and observe over the next few days. = Which ones grow and give rise to fresh leaves? = What can you conclude from your observations? Oo OQQOqgoQgoOOD D OO O OOD O OO OO O O O O O DM Snes 7.2.6 Spore Formation Even in many simple multi-cellular organisms, specific reproductive parts can be identified. The thread-like structures that developed on the bread in Activity 7.2 above are the hyphae of the bread mould (Rhizopus). They are not reproductive parts. On the other hand, the tiny blob-on-a-stick structures are involved in reproduction. The blobs are sporangia, which contain cells, or spores, that can eventually develop into new Rhizopus individuals (Fig. 7.6). The spores are covered by thick walls that protect them until they come into contact with another moist surface and can begin to grow. Science Reprint 2025-26 All the modes of reproduction that we have discussed so far allow new generations to be created from a single individual. This is known as asexual reproduction. Q U ES TION S How does binary fission differ from multiple fission? How will an organism be benefited if it reproduces through spores? Can you think of reasons why more complex organisms cannot give rise to new individuals through regeneration? Why is