space and solids in the space around them, an abstract geometrical notion of a solid object was developed. A solid has shape, size, position, and can be moved from one place to another. Its boundaries are called surfaces. They separate one part of the space from another, and are said to have no thickness. The boundaries of the surfaces are curves or straight lines. These lines end in points. Consider the three steps from solids to points (solids-surfaces-lines-points). In each step we lose one extension, also called a dimension. So, a solid has three dimensions, a surface has two, a line has one and a point has none. Euclid summarised these statements as definitions. He began his exposition by listing 23 definitions in Book 1 of the Elements . A few of them are given below : 1. A point is that which has no part. A line is breadthless length. The ends of a line are points. A straight line is a line which lies evenly with the points on itself. A surface is that which has length and breadth only. The edges of a surface are lines. Na MF YS A plane surface is a surface which lies evenly with the straight lines on itself. If you carefully study these definitions, you find that some of the terms like part, breadth, length, evenly, etc. need to be further explained clearly. For example, consider his definition of a point. In this definition, a part needs to be defined. Suppose if you define a part to be that which occupies area , again an area needs to be defined. So, to define one thing, you need to define many other things, and you may get a long chain of definitions without an end. For such reasons, mathematicians agree to leave Reprint 2025-26 INTRODUCTION TO EUCLID S GEOMETRY 63 some geometric terms undefined. However, we do have a intuitive feeling for the geometric concept of a point than what the definition above gives us. So, we represent a point as a dot, even though a dot has some dimension. A similar problem arises in Definition 2 above, since it refers to breadth and length, neither of which has been defined. Because of this, a few terms are kept undefined while developing any course of study. So, in geometry, we take a point, a line and a plane (in Euclid s words a plane surface) as undefined terms. The only thing is that we can represent them intuitively, or explain them with the help of physical models . Starting with his definitions, Euclid assumed certain properties, which were not to be proved. These assumptions are actually obvious universal truths . He divided them into two types: axioms and postulates. He used the term postulate for the assumptions that were specific to geometry. Common notions (often called axioms), on the other hand, were assumptions used throughout mathematics and not specifically linked to geometry. For details about axioms and postulates, refer to Appendix 1.