there cannot be more than one such line. However, in his work, Euclid has frequently assumed, without mentioning, that there is a unique line joining two distinct points. We state this result in the form of an axiom as follows: Axiom 5.1 : Given two distinct points, there is a unique line that passes through them. How many lines passing through P also pass through Q (see Fig. 5.4)? Only one, that is, the line PQ. How many lines passing through Q also pass through P? Only one, that is, the line PQ. Thus, the statement above is self-evident, and so is taken as an axiom. Fig. 5.4 Postulate 2 : A terminated line can be produced indefinitely. Note that what we call a line segment now-a-days 1s what Euclid called a terminated line. So, according to the present day terms, the second postulate says that a line segment can be extended on either side to form a line (see Fig. 5.5). Fig. 5.5 Postulate 3 : A circle can be drawn with any centre and any radius. Postulate 4 : All right angles are equal to one another. Postulate 5 : Ifa straight line falling on two straight lines makes the interior angles on the same side of it taken together less than two right angles, then the two straight lines, if produced indefinitely, meet on that side on which the sum of angles is less than two right angles. Reprint 2025-26 INTRODUCTION TO EUCLID S GEOMETRY 65 For example, the line PQ in Fig. 5.6 falls on lines AB and CD such that the sum of the interior angles | and 2 is less than 180 on the left side of PQ. Therefore, the lines AB and CD will eventually intersect on the left side of PQ. Fig. 5.6 A brief look at the five postulates brings to your notice that Postulate 5 is far more complex than any other postulate. On the other hand, Postulates 1 through 4 are so simple and obvious that these are taken as self-evident truths . However, it is not possible to prove them. So, these statements are accepted without any proof (see Appendix 1). Because of its complexity, the fifth postulate will be given more attention in the next section. Now-a-days, postulates and axioms are terms that are used interchangeably and in the same sense. Postulate is actually a verb. When we say let us postulate , we mean, let us make some statement based on the observed phenomenon in the Universe . Its truth/validity is checked afterwards. If it is true, then it is accepted as a Postulate . A system of axioms is called consistent (see Appendix 1), if it is impossible to deduce from these axioms a statement that contradicts any axiom or previously proved statement. So, when any system of axioms is given, it needs to be ensured that the system is consistent. After Euclid stated his postulates and axioms, he used them to prove other results.