From these two facts, and Euclid s axiom that things which are equal to the same thing are equal to one another, you can conclude that AB = BC = AC. So, A ABC is an equilateral triangle. Note that here Euclid has assumed, without mentioning anywhere, that the two circles drawn with centres A and B will meet each other at a point. Now we prove a theorem, which is frequently used in different results: Reprint 2025-26 INTRODUCTION TO EUCLID S GEOMETRY 67 Theorem 5.1 : Two distinct lines cannot have more than one point in common. Proof : Here we are given two lines / and m. We need to prove that they have only one point in common. For the time being, let us suppose that the two lines intersect in two distinct points, say P and Q. So, you have two lines passing through two distinct points P and Q. But this assumption clashes with the axiom that only one line can pass through two distinct points. So, the assumption that we started with, that two lines can pass through two distinct points is wrong. From this, what can we conclude? We are forced to conclude that two distinct lines cannot have more than one point in common. EXERCISE 5.1 1. Which of the following statements are true and which are false? Give reasons for your answers. (i) Only one line can pass through a single point. (ii) There are an infinite number of lines which pass through two distinct points. (i) A terminated line can be produced indefinitely on both the sides. (iv) Iftwo circles are equal, then their radii are equal. (v) InFig. 5.9, if AB = PQ and PQ = XY, then AB= XY. Fig. 5.9 2. Givea definition for each of the following terms. Are there other terms that need to be defined first? What are they, and how might you define them? (i) parallel lines (ii) perpendicular lines (ii) line segment (iv) radius of a circle (v) square 3. Consider two postulates given below: (i) Given any two distinct points A and B, there exists a third point C which is in between A and B. (i) There exist at least three points that are not on the same line. Do these postulates contain any undefined terms? Are these postulates consistent? Do they follow from Euclid s postulates? Explain. Reprint 2025-26 MATHEMATICS 4. Ifa point C lies between two points A and B such that AC = BC, then prove that AC= 5 AB. Explain by drawing the figure. 5. In Question 4, point C is called a mid-point of line segment AB. Prove that every line segment has one and only one mid-point. 6. InFig.5.10,ifAC=BD, then prove that AB =CD. B D A C Fig. 5.10 7. Why is Axiom 5S, in the list of Euclid s axioms, considered a universal truth ? (Note that the question is not about the fifth postulate.) 5.3 Summary In this chapter, you have