the help of physical models . Starting with his definitions, Euclid assumed certain properties, which were not to be proved. These assumptions are actually obvious universal truths . He divided them into two types: axioms and postulates. He used the term postulate for the assumptions that were specific to geometry. Common notions (often called axioms), on the other hand, were assumptions used throughout mathematics and not specifically linked to geometry. For details about axioms and postulates, refer to Appendix 1. Some of Euclid s axioms, not in his order, are given below : (1) Things which are equal to the same thing are equal to one another. (2) If equals are added to equals, the wholes are equal. (3) If equals are subtracted from equals, the remainders are equal. (4) Things which coincide with one another are equal to one another. (5) The whole is greater than the part. (6) Things which are double of the same things are equal to one another. (7) Things which are halves of the same things are equal to one another. These common notions refer to magnitudes of some kind. The first common notion could be applied to plane figures. For example, if an area of a triangle equals the area of a rectangle and the area of the rectangle equals that of a square, then the area of the triangle also equals the area of the square. Magnitudes of the same kind can be compared and added, but magnitudes of different kinds cannot be compared. For example, a line cannot be compared to a rectangle, nor can an angle be compared to a pentagon. The 4th axiom given above seems to say that if two things are identical (that is, they are the same), then they are equal. In other words, everything equals itself. It is the justification of the principle of superposition. Axiom (5) gives us the definition of greater than . For example, if a quantity B is a part of another quantity A, then A can be written as the sum of B and some third quantity C. Symbolically, A > B means that there is some C such that A = B + C. Reprint 2025-26 64 MATHEMATICS Now let us discuss Euclid s five postulates. They are : Postulate 1 : A straight line may be drawn from any one point to any other point. Note that this postulate tells us that at least one straight line passes through two distinct points, but it does not say that there cannot be more than one such line. However, in his work, Euclid has frequently assumed, without mentioning, that there is a unique line joining two distinct points. We state this result in the form of an axiom as follows: Axiom 5.1 : Given two distinct points, there is a unique line that passes through them. How many lines passing through P also pass through Q (see Fig. 5.4)? Only one, that is, the line PQ. How many lines passing