Universe . Its truth/validity is checked afterwards. If it is true, then it is accepted as a Postulate . A system of axioms is called consistent (see Appendix 1), if it is impossible to deduce from these axioms a statement that contradicts any axiom or previously proved statement. So, when any system of axioms is given, it needs to be ensured that the system is consistent. After Euclid stated his postulates and axioms, he used them to prove other results. Then using these results, he proved some more results by applying deductive reasoning. The statements that were proved are called propositions or theorems. Euclid deduced 465 propositions ina logical chain using his axioms, postulates, definitions and theorems proved earlier in the chain. In the next few chapters on geometry, you will be using these axioms to prove some theorems. Now, let us see in the following examples how Euclid used his axioms and postulates for proving some of the results: Example 1 : If A, B and C are three points on a line, and B lies between A and C (see Fig. 5.7), then prove that AB + BC = AC. en ana A Fig. 5.7 Reprint 2025-26 66 MATHEMATICS Solution : In the figure given above, AC coincides with AB + BC. Also, Euclid s Axiom (4) says that things which coincide with one another are equal to one another. So, it can be deduced that AB + BC= AC Note that in this solution, it has been assumed that there is a unique line passing through two points. Example 2 : Prove that an equilateral triangle can be constructed on any given line segment. Solution : In the statement above, a line segment of any length is given, say AB [see Fig. 5.8(i)]. C C A B A B A B @) ai) (ait) Fig. 5.8 Here, you need to do some construction. Using Euclid s Postulate 3, you can draw a circle with point A as the centre and AB as the radius [see Fig. 5.8(ii)]. Similarly, draw another circle with point B as the centre and BA as the radius. The two circles meet at a point, say C. Now, draw the line segments AC and BC to form A ABC [see Fig. 5.8 (iii)]. So, you have to prove that this triangle is equilateral, i.e., AB =AC = BC. Now, AB = AC, since they are the radii of the same circle (1) Similarly, AB = BC _ (Radii of the same circle) (2) From these two facts, and Euclid s axiom that things which are equal to the same thing are equal to one another, you can conclude that AB = BC = AC. So, A ABC is an equilateral triangle. Note that here Euclid has assumed, without mentioning anywhere, that the two circles drawn with centres A and B will meet each other at a point. Now we prove a theorem, which is frequently used in different results: Reprint 2025-26 INTRODUCTION TO