Ausable, a secret agent, 1s expecting to get a very important report. Another secret agent, Max, threatens him with a pistol, demanding the report. Does Ausable outwit hime 1060CHO3 READ AND FIND OUT How is Ausable different from other secret agents? Who is Fowler and what is his first authentic thrill of the day? AusaBLe did not fit any description of a secret agent Fowler had ever read. Following him down the musty corridor of the gloomy French hotel where Ausable had a room, Fowler felt let down. It was a small room, on the sixth and top floor, and scarcely a setting for a romantic adventure. Ausable was, for one thing, fat. Very fat. And then there was his accent. Though he spoke French and German passably, he had never altogether lost the American accent he had brought to Paris from Boston twenty years ago. You are disappointed, Ausable said wheezily over his shoulder. You were told that I was a secret agent, a spy, dealing in espionage and danger. You wished to meet me because you are a writer, young and romantic. You envisioned mysterious figures in the night, the crack of pistols, drugs in the wine. Instead, you have spent a dull evening in a French music hall with a sloppy fat man who, instead of having messages slipped into his hand by dark-eyed beauties, gets only a prosaic telephone call making an appointment in his room. You have been bored! The fat man chuckled to himself as he unlocked the door of his room and stood aside to let his frustrated guest enter. You are disillusioned, Ausable told him. But take cheer, my young friend. Presently you will see a paper, a quite important paper for Reprint 2025-26 which several men and women have risked their lives, come to me. Some day soon that paper may well affect the course of history. In that thought is drama, is there not? As he spoke, Ausable closed the door behind him. Then he switched on the light. And as the light came on, Fowler had his first authentic thrill of the day. For halfway across the room, a small automatic pistol in his hand, stood a man. Ausable blinked a few times. Max, he wheezed, you gave me quite a start. I thought you were in Berlin. What are you doing here in my room? READ AND FIND OUT How has Max got in? How does Ausable say he got in? Max was slender, a little less than tall, with features that suggested slightly the crafty, pointed countenance of a fox. There was about him aside from the gun nothing especially menacing. The report, he murmured. The report that is being brought to you tonight concerning some new missiles. I thought I would take it from you. It will be safer in my hands than in yours. The Midnight Visibor 18 Reprint 2025-26 Ausable moved to an armchair and sat down heavily. I'm going to raise the devil