door, they will enter anyway. The door is unlocked. And they will not hesitate to shoot. Max s face was black with anger as he backed swiftly towards the window. He swung a leg over the sill. Send them away! he warned. I will wait on the balcony. Send them away or I'll shoot and take my chances! The knocking at the door became louder and a voice was raised. Mr Ausable! Mr Ausable! 16 Footprints without Feat Reprint 2025-26 Keeping his body twisted so that his gun still covered the fat man and his guest, the man at the window grasped the frame with his free hand to support himself. Then he swung his other leg up and over the window-sill. The doorknob turned. Swiftly Max pushed with his left hand to free himself from the sill and drop to the balcony. And then, as he dropped, he screamed once, shrilly. The door opened and a waiter stood there with a tray, a bottle and two glasses. Here is the drink you ordered for when you returned, he said, and set the tray on the table, deftly uncorked the bottle, and left the room. White-faced, Fowler stared after him. But... he stammered, the police... There were no police. Ausable sighed. Only Henry, whom I was expecting. But won't that man out on the balcony...? Fowler began. No, said Ausable, he won t return. You see, my young friend, there is no balcony. ROBERT ARTHUR The Midnight Visitor 17 Reprint 2025-26 GLOSSARY romantic: imaginative; having a fantastic view of reality passably: just well enough; tolerably well espionage: spying sloppy: (here) carelessly dressed prosaic: ordinary chuckled: laughed quietly, without opening his mouth wheezed: spoke breathing noisily and heavily missiles: weapons directed by remote control or automatically shrilly: piercingly; in a high pitch Thank dbortt 1. Ausable did not fit any description of a secret agent Fowler had ever read. What do secret agents in books and films look like, in your opinion? Discuss in groups or in class some stories or movies featuring spies, detectives and secret agents, and compare their appearance with that of Ausable in this story. (You may mention characters from fiction in languages other than English. In English fiction you may have come across Sherlock Holmes, Hercule Poirot, or Miss Marple. Have you watched any movies featuring James Bond?) How does Ausable manage to make Max believe that there is a balcony attached to his room? Look back at his detailed description of it. What makes it a convincing story? Looking back at the story, when do you think Ausable thought up his plan for getting rid of Max? Do you think he had worked out his plan in detail right from the beginning? Or did he make up a plan taking advantage of events as they happened? Talk about 1. In this story, Ausable shows great presence of mind, or the ability to think quickly, and act calmly and wisely, in a situation of danger and