also emerged, which did not accept the authority of the Vedas and developed their own systems. One of them is Buddhism. About two-and-a-half millenniums ago, a young prince named Siddhartha Gautama was born in Lumbini (today in Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:04:37 | chapter7_310125.indd 111 Many stories from the Upanishads tell us the importance of asking questions, whether these questions come from men, women or children. Shvetaketu and the seed of reality (Chhandogya Upanishad) Rishi Uddalaka Aruni sent his son, Shvetaketu, toa gurukula to learn the Vedas. When Shvetaketu returned 12 years later, his father realised he had become very proud of his learning. So Uddalaka tested him with questions on the nature of brahman, which Shvetaketu could not answer. Uddalaka proceeded to explain how brahman, though invisible, is everywhere, just as the seed of a banyan fruit seems empty when you open it, but already contains the future banyan tree; or just as all kinds of different pots can be made out of the same clay. Similarly, everything around us has emerged from the same essence brahman. He concluded his teaching with these words, Everything consists of this subtle essence. ... You are That, Shvetaketu. Nachiketa and his quest (Katha Upanishad) Once, a man was giving away all his possessions in a ritual. As his son Nachiketa kept asking him which god he would be offered to, the father became angry and answered, I give you to Yama that is, to the god of death. Nachiketa, then, proceeded to Yama s world and, after a long wait, met the mighty god. One question was on his mind What Reprint 2025-26 7 India s Cultural Roots 03-02-2025 05:04:38 | Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions Exploring Society: India and Beyond SS chapter7_310125.indd 112 happens after the death of the body? Yama tried to avoid answering, but the boy persisted. Pleased, Yama explained that the dtman, or self, is hidden within all creatures. It is neither born, nor does it die; it is immortal. Having acquired this profound knowledge, Nachiketa returned to his father, who welcomed him joyfully. The debate of Gargi and Yajnavalkya (Brihadaranyaka Upanishad) Once, the wise king Janaka announced a prize for the winner of a philosophical debate. Yajhavalkya, arenowned rishi, came to the king s court and defeated many scholars until Gargl, a rishika, asked him a series of questions on the nature of (f * Reprint 2025-26 the world, and finally on the nature of brahman. At that point, Yajfavalkya asked her to stop asking further questions. Later, however, Gargi resumed her questions and Yajfiavalkya went on to explain how brahman is what makes the world, the seasons, the rivers and everything else possible. 03-02-2025 05:04:40 | Nepal). Depending on the sources they use, scholars have come up with widely different conclusions as regards the precise year of his birth. In Chapter 4, we chose 560 BCE as an approximate year. In any case, it makes no difference to our story here. As the story goes, then,