India and Beyond Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions SS chapter7_310125.indd 120 Although the Vedic, Buddhist and Jain schools had important differences, they also shared some common concepts, such as dharma, karma, rebirth, the search for an end to suffering and ignorance, and many important values. This is the trunk of the tree we started this chapter with. Folk and Tribal Roots The cultural roots we have seen so far are well documented in many texts. India has also had rich oral traditions , that is, teachings or practices transmitted through everyday practice, without written texts (this is the case of the Vedas). Among them are numerous folk traditions, that is, transmitted by common people, and tribal traditions, transmitted by tribes. What is a tribe? There are many definitions for this social entity. Today, anthropologists usually consider a tribe to be a group of families or clans sharing a tradition of common descent, a culture and a language, living as a close-knit community under a chief and holding no private property. Interestingly, ancient India did not have a word for tribe tribes were just different janas that lived in a specific environment, such as forests or mountains. The Constitution of India uses the terms tribes and tribal communities in English, and janjati in Hindi. According to official figures, in 2011 India had 705 tribes spread over most States, amounting to a population of about 104 million people more than the populations of Australia and the United Kingdom together! In the 19" century, anthropologists studying tribes often described them as primitive or inferior to civilised people. With deeper studies of tribal communities and their rich and complex cultures, such biased judgments have been mostly abandoned. Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:04:44 | There has been a constant interaction between folk and tribal traditions, and the leading schools of thought such as those we mentioned in this chapter. Deities, concepts, legends and rituals have been freely exchanged in both directions. For instance, according to tradition, Jagannath, worshipped at Puri (Odisha), was originally a tribal deity; this is also the case with various forms of the mother-goddess worshipped across India. Some tribes, on the other hand, adopted Hindu deities long ago, and possess their own versions of the Mahabharata and the Ramayana this has been well documented from India s northeastern States, all the way to Tamil Nadu. ar | How have such interactions taken place for so long and so naturally? It is, in the end, because folk, tribal and Hindu belief systems have many similar concepts. For instance, in all three, elements of nature such as mountains, rivers, trees, plants and animals, and some stones too, are regarded as sacred, because there is consciousness behind all of them. Indeed, tribes generally worship many deities associated with those natural elements. For the Toda tribals of the Nilgiris of Tamil Nadu, for instance (one of them is pictured in the image on the right), over thirty peaks of this mountain range are residences of a