illustrates the fact that everyone should have a second chance. Reprint 2025-26 7 India s Cultural Roots e 03-02-2025 05:04:44 | LET'S EXPLORE Observe the above panel (from a Jain temple in New Delhi). What is striking about it? What messages does it carry? @ vy THINK ABOUT IT @ In both Buddhism and Jainism, ahimsa means much more than refraining from physical violence against a person or an animal. It also means refraining from violence in thought, such as having ill feelings towards anyone. If we observe ourselves carefully, we may notice such negative thoughts and learn to turn them into positive ones. Sometimes such negative thoughts are even directed at ourselves! In both Buddhism and Jainism, monks, and sometimes nuns too, began travelling across the land to spread their respective teachings far and wide. Some of them created new monasteries in faraway places, while others led ascetic lives in caves cut in the rock. Archaeological findings have revealed many traces of those monasteries, sometimes even the names of the monks who lived in the rock-cut caves and slept on the stone beds! Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions Exploring Society: India and Beyond Reprint 2025-26 | chapter7_310125.indd 118 & 03-02-2025 05:04:44 | Caves cut into the rock at Ellora (Maharashtra) between the 6" and the 10" centuries CE. Some of the caves are Hindu, others are Buddhist and Jain. YW THINK ABOUT IT In English, Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism are often labelled religions . You may notice that we have avoided this term, preferring schools of thought and (later in this chapter) belief systems . This is because there are many aspects to those schools and systems, which we will explore gradually a philosophical aspect, a spiritual aspect, a religious aspect, an ethical aspect, a social aspect, to name a few. Many scholars agree that the word religion is too limiting in the context of the Indian civilisation. There were yet other schools of thought at the time. For example, one of them, known as the Charvaka school (sometimes also Lokayata ), believed that this material world is the only thing that exists, and therefore there can be no life after death. This school does not seem to have gained much popularity and it disappeared with time. We mention it to show that there was a wide diversity of intellectual or spiritual belief systems; people were free to choose what suited them. Reprint 2025-26 chapter7_310125.indd 119 & 7 India s Cultural Roots 03-02-2025 05:04:44 | Exploring Society: India and Beyond Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions SS chapter7_310125.indd 120 Although the Vedic, Buddhist and Jain schools had important differences, they also shared some common concepts, such as dharma, karma, rebirth, the search for an end to suffering and ignorance, and many important values. This is the trunk of the tree we started this chapter with. Folk and Tribal Roots The cultural roots we have seen so far are well documented in many texts. India has also had