many similar concepts. For instance, in all three, elements of nature such as mountains, rivers, trees, plants and animals, and some stones too, are regarded as sacred, because there is consciousness behind all of them. Indeed, tribes generally worship many deities associated with those natural elements. For the Toda tribals of the Nilgiris of Tamil Nadu, for instance (one of them is pictured in the image on the right), over thirty peaks of this mountain range are residences of a god or a goddess; those peaks are so sacred that the Todas avoid pointing to them with a finger. But despite this multiplicity of deities, as with Hinduism, many tribal groups have a concept of a higher divinity or supreme being. For example, several tribes of Arunachal Pradesh worship Donyipolo, a combined form of the Sun and 7 India s Cultural Roots Reprint 2025-26 chapter7_310125.indd 121 & 03-02-2025 050446 | the Moon who later rose to the higher status of a supreme god. This is also the case of the god Khandoba in parts of central India. In eastern India, the Munda and Santhal tribals, among others, worship Singbonga, a supreme deity who created this whole world. There are many more such examples. The Indian sociologist Andr B teille summed up this situation in these words: The thousands of castes and tribes on the Indian religious beliefs and practices since the beginning of C C subcontinent have influenced each other in their Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions Exploring Society: India and Beyond chapter7_310125.indd 122 history and before. That the tribal religions have been influenced by Hinduism is widely accepted, but it is equally true that Hinduism, not only in its formative phase but throughout its evolution, has been influenced by tribal religions. Clearly, the result of this long interaction has been mutual enrichment. In this manner, folk and tribal beliefs and practices also count among India s cultural roots. We will further develop this point in the next chapter. Before we move on ... > The Vedas, India s earliest texts, gave rise to several schools of thought. Vedanta and Yoga are among the best known. > Buddhism and Jainism departed from the authority of the Vedas and laid emphasis on some specific values and practices. > Although these schools had different principles and methods, they also shared some important concepts; they were all looking for the cause of suffering and the means of removing ignorance. > Tribal belief systems and art have interacted for millenniums with Hinduism. There was free borrowing and giving from every side. Tribal belief systems generally regard the land and its features as sacred; they often have, at the same time, a higher concept of divinity. Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:04:45 | Questions, activities and projects 1. If you were Nachiketa, what questions would you like to ask Yama? Write them down in 100-150 words. . Explain a few central ideas of Buddhism. Briefly comment upon them. . Discuss in class the quotation of the