Asia, was @& takes vows, that is, commits enormous, as we will discover later; it is still perceptible himself to follow today. strict rules fora disciplined life. Nun: The female _ A mae , equivalent rie. Bee Be Se et A AE das / ~ AAbhs 0 of a monk. - Es tet, RePr i eee Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions Exploring Society: India and Beyond This stone panel, some 1,800 years old, shows the Buddha teaching. Reprint 2025-26 | chapter7_310125.indd 114 & 03-02-2025 05:04:41 | LET S EXPLORE > Discuss the way the Buddha is depicted in the above panel. > Can you name some states of India or some other countries where Buddhism is a major religion even today? Try to plot these on a world map. Jainism Jainism is another important school of thought that became widespread at the same time, although its roots are said to be much more ancient. Just like Siddhartha Gautama, Prince Vardhamana was born into a royal family in the early 6" century BCE. His birthplace was near the city of Vaishali, in modern-day Bihar. At the age of 30, he decided to leave his home and go in search of spiritual knowledge. He practised an ascetic discipline and, after 12 years, achieved infinite knowledge or supreme wisdom. He became known as Mahavira , or great hero , and started preaching what he had realised. A traditional painting of Mahavira , DON'T MISS OUT The word Jain or jaina comes from jina, meaning conqueror . This does not refer to the conquest of territory or enemies, but to the conquest of ignorance and attachments, so as to reach enlightenment. Jain teachings include ahimsa, anekdantavada and aparigraha. These ideas, shared to a large extent with Buddhism and the Vedantic school of thought, are central 7 India s Cultural Roots Reprint 2025-26 chapter7_310125.indd 115 & 03-02-2025 05:04:42 | Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions Exploring Society: India and Beyond chapter7_310125.indd 116 to Indian culture. The first may be illustrated by this saying of Mahavira: Let us define the last two in simple terms: = Anekdantavada means not just one aspect or perspective. That is, the truth has many aspects and cannot be fully described by any single statement. = Aparigraha means non-possession and advises detachment from material possessions, limiting oneself to what is truly necessary in life. Jainism also insists on the interconnectedness and interdependence of all creatures, from humans to invisible organisms, as they support each other and cannot live without one another. Scientists studying nature, flora and fauna, have again and again confirmed this deep truth. The Jataka tales, which have delighted generations of Indian sguilaren and adults, tell stories of the Buddha s former births and express in simple terms the Buddhist values. a a well-known tale, the Buddha was the king of a large J Ss troop of monkeys. They lived near a huge tree which bore > = = ae a ee . sacle canal teeta mae i