Later, however, Gargi resumed her questions and Yajfiavalkya went on to explain how brahman is what makes the world, the seasons, the rivers and everything else possible. 03-02-2025 05:04:40 | Nepal). Depending on the sources they use, scholars have come up with widely different conclusions as regards the precise year of his birth. In Chapter 4, we chose 560 BCE as an approximate year. In any case, it makes no difference to our story here. As the story goes, then, Siddhartha Gautama grew up living a protected life in the palace. One day, at the age of 29, he asked to be driven through the city in a chariot, and for the Ascetic: first time in his life came across an old man, a sick man, and ome os a dead body. He also saw an ascetic, who appeared to be ina Gre: happy and at peace. Following this experience, Siddhartha discipline to decided to give up his palace life, leaving behind his wife | QD higher and son. Travelling on foot as an ascetic, meeting other ascetics and scholars, he searched for the root cause Attachment: of suffering in human life. After meditating for many [Ne condition of ; j ; having a bond days under a pipal tree at Bodh Gaya (today in Bihar), he with someone attained enlightenment; he realised that avidya (ignorance) or something, , , t and attachment are the source of human suffering and sentimentar conceived a method to remove these two causes. habit. Siddhartha, then, became known as the Buddha , which means the enlightened or awakened one. The Buddha started teaching what he had realised, including the idea of ahimsa, which is generally translated as nonviolence , but originally means non-hurting or non-injuring . He also insisted on a sincere inner discipline. The following saying of his expresses this simply: 7 India s Cultural Roots The Buddha teaching (Ajanta caves) Reprint 2025-26 chapter7_310125.indd 113 & 03-02-2025 05:04:40 | vers]. But one is pure in whom truth and. dharma reside. 3 ~ Conquering oneself is greater than conquering a thousand men on the attlefield a thousand times. E = 3 ee a= Monk: 2 Aman who, giving up the usual life in the world, dedicates The Buddha founded the Sangha, a community of bhikshus himself to or monks (and, later, bhikshunis or nuns) who dedicated religious or .. . : : . spiritual pursuits. themselves to practising and spreading his teachings. His A monk usually influence on India, and indeed the whole of Asia, was @& takes vows, that is, commits enormous, as we will discover later; it is still perceptible himself to follow today. strict rules fora disciplined life. Nun: The female _ A mae , equivalent rie. Bee Be Se et A AE das / ~ AAbhs 0 of a monk. - Es tet, RePr i eee Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions Exploring Society: India and Beyond This stone panel, some 1,800 years old, shows the Buddha teaching. Reprint 2025-26