India s Cultural Roots That which cannot be stolen; that which cannot be confiscated by rulers; ... that which is not a burden as it does not weigh anything; that which, though it is used, only grows every day that is the greatest wealth of all, the wealth of true knowledge. Subhashita (Wise Saying) A rishi (from Hampi, Karnataka) | The Buddha (from Bhutan) | Mahavira (from Bihar) | chapter7_310125.indd 105 Reprint 2025-26 @) 0681CHO7 03702-2025 05:04534 | Spiritual: Concerned with the spirit or soul (atman in Sanskrit and many Indian languages). Spirituality is the search for a deeper or higher dimension beyond our current personality. Seeker: Someone who seeks the truths of this world. This could be a sage, a saint, a yogi, a philosopher, etc. Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions Exploring Society: India and Beyond S chapter7_310125.indd 106 Indian culture, by any estimate, is several millenniums old. Like any ancient tree, it has many roots and many branches. The roots nurture a common trunk. And from the trunk emerge many branches, which are different manifestations of Indian culture, yet united by a common trunk. Some of these branches are about art, literature, science, medicine, religion, the art of governance, martial arts, and so on. There are also schools of thought , by which we mean groups of thinkers or spiritual seekers who share similar ideas about human life, the world, etc. Many archaeologists and scholars have pointed out that some of India s cultural roots go all the way to the Indus or Harappan or Sindhu-Sarasvati civilisation (which we visit in Chapter 6). Later on, over time, hundreds of schools of thought emerged in India. We will see here a few early schools, which have shaped India into a country with a unique personality. By understanding them and their roots, we can understand India, that is Bharat better. The Vedas and Vedic Culture a. What are the Vedas? The word Veda comes from the Sanskrit vid which means knowledge (hence vidyd, for instance). We briefly mentioned the Rig Veda in earlier chapters. In fact, there are four Vedas the Rig Veda, the Yajur Veda, the Sama Veda and the Atharva Veda. They are the most ancient texts of India, and indeed among the most ancient in the world. The Vedas consist of thousands of hymns prayers in the form of poems and songs that were recited orally, not written. Those hymns were composed in the Sapta Sindhava region (which we visit in Chapter 5). It is difficult to say when exactly the Rig Veda, the most ancient of the four, was composed; experts have proposed dates ranging from Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:04:34 | the 5 to the 2"? millennium BCE. So, for anything between UNESCO: 100 and 200 generations, these texts have been committed ee to memory through rigorous training and passed on orally | United Nations with hardly any alterations! Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization . It promotes This meticulous transmission over thousands of years =