mentioned in the Vedic texts, such | Someone who as agriculturist, weaver, potter, builder, carpenter, healer, | US s traditional . practices to dancer, barber, priest, etc. relieve or heal diseases. LET'S EXPLORE Do you know the term for a society where people select their leaders? How do you think people can benefit from such a situation? What could happen if they live under leaders that they did not choose? (Hint: Think back to what you re learning in the theme Governance and Democracy !) Write your thoughts in a paragraph of 100-150 words. c. Vedic schools of thought Vedic culture also developed many rituals (yajfia, often read as yagya ) directed towards various deities (gods or goddesses) for individual or collective benefit and wellbeing. Daily rituals were generally in the form of prayers and offerings to Agni, the deity associated with fire, but those rituals became more and more complex in the course of time. A group of texts known as Upanishads built upon Vedic concepts and introduced new ones, such as rebirth (taking birth again and again) and karma (our actions or their results). According to one school of thought, generally known as Vedanta , everything human life, nature and the universe is one divine essence called brahman (not to be confused with the god Brahma) or sometimes just tat ( that ). Two well-known mantras express this in a simple but profound way: 7 India s Cultural Roots Reprint 2025-26 chapter7_310125.indd 109 & 03-02-2025 05:04:36 | The Upanishads also introduced the concept of atman or Self the divine essence that resides in every being but is ultimately one with brahman. It follows that everything in this world is connected and interdependent. This explains a common prayer that begins with sarve bhavantu sukhinah, or May all creatures be happy , and goes on to wish them all to be free from disease and sorrow. Y THINK ABOUT IT Consciousness: The quality or state of being aware, for instance of something within oneself. Our Cultural Heritage and Knowledge Traditions Exploring Society: India and Beyond chapter7_310125.indd 110 Have you heard or read any other story that conveyed an important message? What values did it teach you? Early in the 1% millennium BCE, several more schools of thought grew out of the Vedas. One of them was Yoga, which developed methods intended to achieve the realisation of brahman in one s consciousness. Together, these schools of thought became the foundations for what we call Hinduism today. Buddhism Other schools of thought also emerged, which did not accept the authority of the Vedas and developed their own systems. One of them is Buddhism. About two-and-a-half millenniums ago, a young prince named Siddhartha Gautama was born in Lumbini (today in Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:04:37 | chapter7_310125.indd 111 Many stories from the Upanishads tell us the importance of asking questions, whether these questions come from men, women or children. Shvetaketu and the seed of reality (Chhandogya Upanishad) Rishi Uddalaka Aruni sent his son, Shvetaketu,