another. Scientists studying nature, flora and fauna, have again and again confirmed this deep truth. The Jataka tales, which have delighted generations of Indian sguilaren and adults, tell stories of the Buddha s former births and express in simple terms the Buddhist values. a a well-known tale, the Buddha was the king of a large J Ss troop of monkeys. They lived near a huge tree which bore > = = ae a ee . sacle canal teeta mae i fruit of divine fragrance and taste. Despite the monkey all a __ king s instructions that no fruit should escape, one day aripe , fruit fell into the stream below. Carried by the current, it was Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:04:43 | chapter7_310125.indd 117 caught in a net and taken to the palace. The king was so enchanted by its taste that he ordered his soldiers to locate the tree it came from. After a long search, they found the tree and the monkeys enjoying the tree s fruits. The soldiers attacked the monkeys. The only way for the monkey-king to save his monkeys was to help them cross the stream, but they could not do so on their own. Being much larger than them, the monkey-king caught hold of a tree on the other bank and let them use his body as a bridge to cross the stream, although he was severely bruised in the process and eventually died. The king, who watched the scene from a distance, was greatly moved by the : A stone panel (at Bharhut in monkey-king s selfless sacrifice. He Madhya Pradesh) depicting the thought about the role of a king with story of the monkey-king respect to his subjects. A Jain story Rohineya was an extraordinarily skilled burglar who evaded all attempts to catch him. On his way to a city, he accidentally heard a few sentences from a sermon that Mahavira was giving about achieving liberation from the ordinary life of ignorance. Reaching the city, Rohineya was recognised and arrested. He pretended to be a simple farmer. A minister devised a clever plan to force him to confess his identity. But Rohineya, remembering Mahavira s words, was able to detect the minister s plan and defeat it. Feeling remorseful, Rohineya approached Mahavira, confessed his crimes, returned the stolen treasures, and asked for forgiveness. He became a monk, realised the illusion he was living in and focused on acquiring higher knowledge. The story illustrates the importance of right action and right thinking, and also illustrates the fact that everyone should have a second chance. Reprint 2025-26 7 India s Cultural Roots e 03-02-2025 05:04:44 | LET'S EXPLORE Observe the above panel (from a Jain temple in New Delhi). What is striking about it? What messages does it carry? @ vy THINK ABOUT IT @ In both Buddhism and Jainism, ahimsa means much more than refraining from physical violence against a person or an animal. It also means refraining from violence in thought, such as