was free borrowing and giving from every side. Tribal belief systems generally regard the land and its features as sacred; they often have, at the same time, a higher concept of divinity. Reprint 2025-26 03-02-2025 05:04:45 | Questions, activities and projects 1. If you were Nachiketa, what questions would you like to ask Yama? Write them down in 100-150 words. . Explain a few central ideas of Buddhism. Briefly comment upon them. . Discuss in class the quotation of the Buddha which begins with Not by water is one made pure, though many people may bathe here [in sacred rivers] to make sure that its meaning has been understood by all. . Explain a few central ideas of Jainism. Briefly comment upon them. . Consider and discuss in class Andr B teille s thought (see page 122). . Make a list of popular gods and goddesses in your region and the festivals they are associated with. . As a class activity, list two or three tribal groups from your region or State. Document some of their art and belief systems. True or false 1. be 3. The Vedic hymns were written on palm-leaf manuscripts. The Vedas are India s oldest texts. The Vedic statement ekam sat vipra bahudha vadanti reflects a belief in the unity of cosmic powers. . Buddhism is older than the Vedas. . Jainism emerged as a branch of Buddhism. . Both Buddhism and Jainism advocated for peaceful coexistence and the avoidance of harm to all living beings. . Tribal belief systems are limited to belief in spirits and minor deities. Class activity 1. Stage a small play with Yama, god of death, surrounded by several Nachiketas asking him questions about life. Reprint 2025-26 chapter7_310125.indd 123 & 7 India s Cultural Roots 03-02-2025 05:04:45 | The banyan tree is an apt illustration for the themes in Chapters 7 and 8, and a fine symbol for Indian civilisation. With its deep root system, massive trunk and branches spreading in all directions, it can extend to a vast area and last for many centuries. It shelters a variety of flora and fauna and encourages its branches, though united at the trunk, to throw fresh roots of their own. Indeed, Hinduism, Buddhism and Jainism regard the banyan tree as sacred. _s