make notes for your speech in writing.) True liberty is freedom from poverty, deprivation and all forms of discrimination. causes of poverty and means of overcoming it e discrimination based on gender, religion, class, etc. constitutionally guaranteed human rights Wot I. Looking at Contrasts Nelson Mandela s writing is marked by balance: many sentences have two parts in balance. Reprint 2025-26 II _ Use the following phrases to complete the sentences given below. (i) they can be taught to love. (iv) but he who conquers that fear. (ii) I was born free. (v) to create such heights of (iii) but the triumph over it. character. 1. It requires such depths of oppression 2. Courage was not the absence of fear 3. The brave man is not he who does not feel afraid 4. If people can learn to hate I was not born with a hunger to be free. . This text repeatedly contrasts the past with the present or the future. We can use coordinated clauses to contrast two views, for emphasis or effect. Given below are sentences carrying one part of the contrast. Find in the text the second part of the contrast, and complete each item. Identify the words which signal the contrast. This has been done for you in the first item. 1. For decades the Union Buildings had been the seat of white supremacy, and now ... 2. Only moments before, the highest generals of the South African defence force and police ... saluted me and pledged their loyalty. ... not so many years before they would not have saluted 3. Although that day neither group knew the lyrics of the anthem ..., they would soon 4. My country is rich in the minerals and gems that lie beneath its soil, 5. The Air Show was not only a display of pinpoint precision and military force, but 6. It was this desire for the freedom of my people ... that transformed into a bold one, that drove __________ to become a criminal, that turned into a man without a home. . Expressing Your Opinion Do you think there is colour prejudice in our own country? Discuss this with your friend and write a paragraph of about 100 to 150 words about Reprint 2025-26 \bby x Zz o = =] on o = 6B ico} = o = iat o i B First Flight iS) lore) this. You have the option of making your paragraph a humorous one. (Read the short verse given below.) When you were born you were pink When you grew up you became white When you are in the sun you are red When you are sick you are yellow When you are angry you are purple When you are shocked you are grey And you have the cheek to call me coloured . Tn This Lesson Wuat WE Have Done Shared Nelson Mandela s moving description of his inauguration as South Africa s first black President, and his thoughts on freedom.