unmindful of conscious of; aware of chevron a pattern in the shape of a V despised had a very low opinion of Zz o = =] on o = 6B ico} = o = iat o i B ~ < na = i a Lo = i overturned forever and replaced by one that recognised the rights and freedoms of all peoples, regardless of the colour of their skin. That day had come about through the unimaginable sacrifices of thousands of my people, people whose suffering and courage can never be counted or repaid. I felt that day, as I have on so many other days, that I was simply the sum of all those African patriots who had gone before me. That long and noble line ended and now began again with me. I was pained that I was not able to thank them and that they were not able to see what their sacrifices had wrought. The policy of apartheid created a deep and lasting wound in my country and my people. All of us will spend many years, if not generations, recovering from that profound hurt. But the decades of oppression and brutality had another, unintended, effect, and that was that it produced the Oliver Tambos, the Walter Sisulus, the Chief Luthulis, the Yusuf Dadoos, the Bram Fischers, the Robert Sobukwes of our time* men of such extraordinary av QS ak 57 | a7 Oliver Tambo Walter Sisulu Chief Luthuli = ~ Ad . Yusuf Dadoo Bram Fischer Robert Sobukwe * These are some prominent names in the struggle against apartheid. wrought (old fashioned, formal word) done, achieved profound deep and strong (For the use of the definite article with proper nouns, see exercise II on page 25) Reprint 2025-26 courage, wisdom and generosity that their like may never be known again. Perhaps it requires such depths of oppression to create such heights of character. My country is rich in the minerals and gems that lie beneath its soil, but I have always known that its greatest wealth is its people, finer and truer than the purest diamonds. It is from these comrades in the struggle that I learned the meaning of courage. Time and again, I have seen men and women risk and give their lives for an idea. I have seen men stand up to attacks and torture without breaking, showing a strength and resilience that defies the imagination. I learned resilience that courage was not the absence of fear, but the the ability to deal triumph over it. The brave man is not he who does yan any kind of ardship and recover not feel afraid, but he who conquers that fear. from its effects No one is born hating another person because of the colour of his skin, or his background, or his religion. People must learn to hate, and if they can learn to hate, they can be taught to love, for love comes more naturally to the human heart than its