deal triumph over it. The brave man is not he who does yan any kind of ardship and recover not feel afraid, but he who conquers that fear. from its effects No one is born hating another person because of the colour of his skin, or his background, or his religion. People must learn to hate, and if they can learn to hate, they can be taught to love, for love comes more naturally to the human heart than its opposite. Even in the grimmest times in prison, when my comrades and I were pushed to our limits, Iwould pushed to our see a glimmer of humanity in one of the guards, !imits perhaps just for a second, but it was enough to noes Or ebiliy to reassure me and keep me going. Man s goodness is begr pain a flame that can be hidden but never extinguished. Oral Comprehension Check 1. What do the military generals do? How has their attitude changed, and why? 2. Why were two national anthems sung? 3. How does Mandela describe the systems of government in his country (i) in the first decade, and (ii) in the final decade, of the twentieth century? 4. What does courage mean to Mandela? 5. Which does he think is natural, to love or to hate? In life, every man has twin obligations obligations to his family, to his parents, to his wife and children; and he has an obligation to his people, his community, his country. In a civil and humane WOpoory o7 TPA buoy PpPpaey OST => oy Reprint 2025-26 First Flight society, each man is able to fulfil those obligations according to his own inclinations and abilities. But in a country like South Africa, it was almost impossible for a man of my birth and colour to fulfil both of those obligations. In South Africa, a man of colour who attempted to live as a human being was punished and isolated. In South Africa, a man who tried to fulfil his duty to his people was inevitably ripped from his family and his home and was forced to live a life apart, a twilight existence of secrecy and rebellion. I did not in the beginning choose to place my people above my family, but in attempting to serve my people, I found that I was prevented from fulfilling my obligations as a son, a brother, a father and a husband. I was not born with a hunger to be free. I was born free free in every way that I could know. Free to run in the fields near my mother s hut, free to swim in the clear stream that ran through my village, free to roast mealies under the stars and ride the broad backs of slow-moving bulls. As long as I obeyed my father and abided by the customs of my tribe, I was not troubled by the laws of man or God. It was only when I began to learn that