D ) Nelson Mandela Long Walk to Freedom Nelson Rolihlahla Mandela 1059CHO2 BeFrore you READ e Apartheid is a political system that separates people according to their race. Can you say which of the three countries named below had such a political system until very recently? () United States of America (ti) South Africa (iii) Australia e Have you heard of Nelson Mandela? Mandela, and his African National Congress, spent a lifetime fighting against apartheid. Mandela had to spend thirty years in prison. Finally, democratic elections were held in South Africa in 1994, and Mandela became the first black President of a new nation. In this extract from his autobiography, Long Walk to Freedom, Mandela speaks about a historic occasion, the inauguration . Can you guess what the occasion might be? Check your guess with this news item (from the BBC) of 10 May 1994. Mandela Becomes South Africa s First Black President Nelson Mandela has become South Africa s first Black President after more than three centuries of White rule. Mr Mandela s African National Congress (ANC) party won 252 of the 400 seats in the first democratic elections of South Africa s history. The inauguration ceremony took place in the Union Buildings amphitheatre in Pretoria today, attended by politicians and dignitaries from more than 140 countries around the world. Never, never again will this beautiful land experience the oppression of one by another, said Nelson Mandela in his address. ... Jubilant scenes on the streets of Pretoria followed the ceremony with blacks, whites and coloureds celebrating together... More than 100,000 South African men, women and children of all races sang and danced with joy. Reprint 2025-26 Activity In Column A are some expressions you will find in the text. Make aguess and match each expression with an appropriate meaning from Column B. A \lby r< =) B @) Arainbow A great ability (almost gathering of unimaginable) to remain different colours unchanged by suffering (not losing and nations hope, goodness or courage) (ii) The seat of white A half-secret life, like a life lived in supremacy the fading light between sunset (iii) Be overwhelmed and darkness witha sense of A sign of human feeling (goodness, history kindness, pity, justice, etc.) (iv) Resilience that A beautiful coming together of defies the various peoples, like the colours in imagination arainbow (v) Aglimmer of The centre of racial superiority humanity Feel deeply emotional, (vi) A twilight remembering and understanding existence all the past events that have led up to the moment TentH May dawned bright and clear. For the past few days I had been pleasantly besieged by dignitaries and world leaders who were coming to pay their respects before the inauguration. The inauguration would be the largest gathering ever of international leaders on South African soil. The ceremonies took place in the lovely sandstone amphitheatre formed by the Union Buildings in Pretoria. For decades this had been the seat of white supremacy, and now it was the site of a rainbow