Article with Names You know that the definite article the is not normally used before proper nouns. Nor do proper nouns usually occur in the plural. (We do not say: *The Nelson Mandela, or *Nelson Mandelas.) But now look at this sentence from the text: ... the decades of oppression and brutality ... produced the Oliver Tambos, the Walter Sisulus, ... of our time. Used in this way with the and/or in the plural, a proper noun carries a special meaning. For example, what do you think the names above mean? Choose the right answer. (a) for example Oliver Tambo, Walter Sisulu, ... (b) many other men like Oliver Tambo, Walter Sisulu .../many men of their type or kind, whose names may not be as well known. Did you choose option (b)? Then you have the right answer! Here are some more examples of the used with proper names. Try to say what these sentences mean. (You may consult a dictionary if you wish. Look at the entry for the .) 1. Mr Singh regularly invites the Amitabh Bachchans and the Shah Rukh Khans to his parties. 2. Many people think that Madhuri Dixit is the Madhubala of our times. 3. History is not only the story of the Alexanders, the Napoleons and the Hitlers, but of ordinary people as well. WOpoory o7 TPA buoy PpPpaey OST = ly Reprint 2025-26 First Flight Ill. Idiomatic Expressions Match the italicised phrases in Column A with the phrase nearest in meaning in Column B. (Hint: First look for the sentence in the text in which the phrase in Column A occurs.) A B . Iwas not unmindful of i) had not forgotten; was aware of the fact the fact ii) was not careful about the fact forgot or was not aware of the fact . when my comrades i) pushed by the guards to the wall and I were pushed to ii) took more than our share of beatings our limits felt that we could not endure the suffering any longer . to reassure me and i) make me go on walking keep me going ii) help me continue to live in hope in this very difficult situation make me remain without complaining . the basic and i) earning enough money to live on honourable freedoms keeping what I earned of...earning my keep,... getting a good salary Speaking 4 In groups, discuss the issues suggested in the box below. Then prepare a speech of about two minutes on the following topic. (First make notes for your speech in writing.) True liberty is freedom from poverty, deprivation and all forms of discrimination. causes of poverty and means of overcoming it e discrimination based on gender, religion, class, etc. constitutionally guaranteed human rights Wot I. Looking at Contrasts Nelson Mandela s writing is marked by balance: many sentences have two parts in balance. Reprint 2025-26 II _ Use the following phrases to complete the sentences given below. (i) they can be taught to love.