May dawned bright and clear. For the past few days I had been pleasantly besieged by dignitaries and world leaders who were coming to pay their respects before the inauguration. The inauguration would be the largest gathering ever of international leaders on South African soil. The ceremonies took place in the lovely sandstone amphitheatre formed by the Union Buildings in Pretoria. For decades this had been the seat of white supremacy, and now it was the site of a rainbow gathering of different colours and nations for the installation of South Africa s first democratic, non-racial government. On that lovely autumn day I was accompanied by my daughter Zenani. On the podium, Mr de Klerk was first sworn in as second deputy president. Then Reprint 2025-26 (to be) besieged by to be surrounded closely by amphitheatre a building without a roof, with many rows of seats rising in steps (typical of ancient Greece and Rome) Zz o = =] on o = 6B ico} = o = iat o i B First Flight ~ oO Thabo Mbeki was sworn in as first deputy president. When it was my turn, I pledged to obey and uphold the Constitution and to devote myself to the wellbeing of the Republic and its people. To the assembled guests and the watching world, I said: Today, all of us do, by our presence here... confer glory and hope to newborn liberty. Out of the experience of an extraordinary human disaster that lasted too long, must be born a society of which all humanity will be proud. We, who were outlaws not so long ago, have today been given the rare privilege to be host to the nations of the world on our own soil. We thank all of our distinguished international guests for having come to take possession with the people of our country of what is, after all, a common victory for justice, for peace, for human dignity. We have, at last, achieved our political emancipation. We pledge ourselves to liberate all our people from the continuing bondage of poverty, deprivation, suffering, gender and other discrimination. Never, never, and never again shall it be that this beautiful land will again experience the oppression of one by another. The sun shall never set on so glorious a human achievement. Let freedom reign. God bless Africa! Oral Comprehension Check confer (a formal word) here, give We, who were outlaws because of its policy of apartheid, many countries had earlier broken off diplomatic relations with South Africa emancipation freedom from restriction deprivation state of not having one's rightful benefits discrimination being treated differently or unfavourably 1. Where did the ceremonies take place? Can you name any public buildings in India that are made of sandstone? 2. Canyou say how 10 May is an autumn day in South Africa? Reprint 2025-26 3. At the beginning of his speech, Mandela mentions an extraordinary human disaster . What does he mean by this? What is the glorious ... human achievement