were born you were pink When you grew up you became white When you are in the sun you are red When you are sick you are yellow When you are angry you are purple When you are shocked you are grey And you have the cheek to call me coloured . Tn This Lesson Wuat WE Have Done Shared Nelson Mandela s moving description of his inauguration as South Africa s first black President, and his thoughts on freedom. What You Can Do Divide your class into three groups and give each group one of the following topics to research: (i) black Americans, and their fight against discrimination, (ii) women, and their fight for equality, (iii) the Vietnamese, and their fight for independence. Choose a student from each group to present a short summary of each topic to the class. Homophones Can you find the words below that are spelt similarly, and sometimes even pronounced similarly, but have very different meanings? Check their pronunciation and meaning in a dictionary. e The bandage was wound around the wound. The soldier decided to desert his dessert in the desert. Reprint 2025-26 A Tiger in the Loo This poem contrasts a tiger in the zoo with the tiger in its natural habitat. The poem moves from the zoo to the jungle, and back again to the zoo. Read the poem silently once, and say which stanzas speak about the tiger in the zoo, and which ones speak about the tiger in the jungle. He stalks in his vivid stripes The few steps of his cage, On pads of velvet quiet, In his quiet rage. He should be lurking in shadow, Sliding through long grass Near the water hole Where plump deer pass. He should be snarling around houses At the jungle s edge, Baring his white fangs, his claws, Terrorising the village! But he s locked in a concrete cell, His strength behind bars, Stalking the length of his cage, Ignoring visitors. He hears the last voice at night, The patrolling cars, And stares with his brilliant eyes At the brilliant stars. LESLIE NORRIS Reprint 2025-26 First Flight 4 Glossary snarls: makes an angry, warning sound Thinking about the Poem 4 1. Read the poem again, and work in pairs or groups to do the following tasks. (i) Find the words that describe the movements and actions of the tiger in the cage and in the wild. Arrange them in two columns. (ii) Find the words that describe the two places, and arrange them in two columns. Now try to share ideas about how the poet uses words and images to contrast the two situations. 2. Notice the use of a word repeated in lines such as these: (i) On pads of velvet quiet, In his quiet rage. (ii) And stares with his brilliant eyes At the brilliant stars. What do you think is the effect of this repetition? 3. Read the following two poems one about a tiger and the other