emancipation freedom from restriction deprivation state of not having one's rightful benefits discrimination being treated differently or unfavourably 1. Where did the ceremonies take place? Can you name any public buildings in India that are made of sandstone? 2. Canyou say how 10 May is an autumn day in South Africa? Reprint 2025-26 3. At the beginning of his speech, Mandela mentions an extraordinary human disaster . What does he mean by this? What is the glorious ... human achievement he speaks of at the end? 4. What does Mandela thank the international leaders for? 5. What ideals does he set out for the future of South Africa? A few moments later we all lifted our eyes in awe as a spectacular array of South African jets, helicopters and troop carriers roared in perfect formation over the Union Buildings. It was not only a display of pinpoint precision and military force, but a demonstration of the military s loyalty to democracy, to a new government that had been freely and fairly elected. Only moments before, the highest generals of the South African defence force and police, their chests bedecked with ribbons and medals from days gone by, saluted me and pledged their loyalty. I was not unmindful of the fact that not so many years before they would not have saluted but arrested me. Finally a chevron of Impala jets left a smoke trail of the black, red, green, blue and gold of the new South African flag. The day was symbolised for me by the playing of our two national anthems, and the vision of whites singing Nkosi Sikelel iAfrika and blacks singing Die Stem , the old anthem of the Republic. Although that day neither group knew the lyrics of the anthem they once despised, they would soon know the words by heart. On the day of the inauguration, I was overwhelmed with a sense of history. In the first decade of the twentieth century, a few years after the bitter Anglo-Boer war and before my own birth, the white-skinned peoples of South Africa patched up their differences and erected a system of racial domination against the dark-skinned peoples of their own land. The structure they created formed the basis of one of the harshest, most inhumane, societies the world has ever known. Now, in the last decade of the twentieth century, and my own eighth decade as a man, that system had been Reprint 2025-26 \lby r< =) spectacular array an impressive display (colourful and attractive) not unmindful of conscious of; aware of chevron a pattern in the shape of a V despised had a very low opinion of Zz o = =] on o = 6B ico} = o = iat o i B ~ < na = i a Lo = i overturned forever and replaced by one that recognised the rights and freedoms of all peoples, regardless of the colour of their skin. That day had come about through the unimaginable sacrifices of thousands