transfer of power to Indians and quit India. On 8 August 1942 in Bombay, the All India Congress Committee endorsed the resolution which called for a non-violent mass struggle on the widest possible scale throughout the country. It was on this occasion that Gandhiji delivered the famous Do or Die speech. The call for Quit India almost brought the state machinery to a standstill in large parts of the country as people voluntarily threw themselves into the thick of the movement. People observed hartals, and demonstrations and processions were accompanied by national songs and slogans. The movement was truly a mass movement which brought into its ambit thousands of ordinary people, namely students, workers and peasants. It also saw the active participation of leaders, namely, Jayprakash Narayan, Aruna Asaf Ali and Ram Manohar Lohia and many women such as Matangini Hazra in Bengal, Kanaklata Barua in Assam and Rama Devi in Odisha. The British responded with much force, yet it took more than a year to suppress the movement. o co) = = cs i Wn o e ~ o za Reprint 2025-26 oc = = oO _ le) Qa = vu Y = [o} YU (J) = ~ ae) = oO oe we) = 1. Explain: a) Why growth of nationalism in the colonies is linked to an anti-colonial movement. b) How the First World War helped in the growth of the National Movement in India. c) Why Indians were outraged by the Rowlatt Act. d) Why Gandhiji decided to withdraw the Non-Cooperation Movement. What is meant by the idea of satyagraha? Write a newspaper report on: a) The Jallianwala Bagh massacre b) The Simon Commission 4. Compare the images of Bharat Mata in this chapter with the image of Germania in Chapter 1. Discuss 1. List all the different social groups which joined the Non-Cooperation Movement of 1921. Then choose any three and write about their hopes and struggles to show why they joined the movement. 2. Discuss the Salt March to make clear why it was an effective symbol of resistance against colonialism. 3. Imagine you are a woman participating in the Civil Disobedience Movement. Explain what the experience meant to your life. 4. Why did political leaders differ sharply over the question of separate electorates? Find out about the anti-colonial movement in Indo-China. Compare and contrast India s national movement with the ways in which Indo-China became independent. Reprint 2025-26