many old women, and mothers with children in their arms. picketed foreign cloth and liquor shops. Many went to jail, In urban areas these women were from high-caste families; in rural areas they came from rich peasant households. Moved by Gandhiji s call, they began to see service to the nation as a sacred duty of women. Yet, this increased public role did not necessarily mean any radical change in the way the position of women was visualised. Gandhiji was convinced that it was the duty of women to look after home Discuss = | and hearth, be good mothers and good wives. And for along time the Congress was reluctant to allow women to hold any position Why did various classes and groups of Indians of authority within the organisation. It was keen only on their petitel sev Un tin Civil Diels sell ins: . Movement? symbolic presence. 3.3 The Limits of Civil Disobedience Notall social groups were moved by the abstract concept of swaraj. One such group was the nation s untouchables , who from around the 1930s had begun to call themselves dalit or oppressed. For o co) = = oC i Wn o e ~ o za long the Congress had ignored the dalits, for fear of offending the sanatanis, the conservative high-caste Hindus. But Mahatma Gandhi declared that swaraj would not come for a hundred years if untouchability was not eliminated. He called the untouchables harijan, Reprint 2025-26 S = = Oo _ s) a = vu g < 1S) (J) = _ S = oO oe Ss i= or the children of God, organised satyagraha to secure them entry into temples, and access to public wells, tanks, roads and schools. He himself cleaned toilets to dignify the work of the bhangi (the sweepers), and persuaded upper castes to change their heart and give up the sin of untouchability . But many dalit leaders were keen on a different political solution to the problems of the community. They began organising themselves, demanding reserved seats in educational institutions, and a separate electorate that would choose dalit members for legislative councils. Political empowerment, they believed, would resolve the problems of their social disabilities. Dalit participation in the Civil Disobedience Movement was therefore limited, particularly in the Maharashtra and Nagpur region where their organisation was quite strong. Dr B.R. Ambedkar, who organised the dalits into the Depressed Classes Association in 1930, clashed with Mahatma Gandhi at the second Round Table Conference by demanding separate electorates for dalits. When the British government conceded Ambedkar s demand, Gandhiji began a fast unto death. He believed that separate electorates for dalits would slow down the process of their integration into society. Ambedkar ultimately accepted Gandhiji s position and the result was the Poona Pact of September 1932. It gave the Depressed Classes (later to be known as the Schedule Castes) reserved seats in provincial and central legislative councils, but they were to be voted in by the general electorate. The dalit