would be over. Yet, when the tribals chanted Gandhiji s name and raised slogans demanding Swatantra Bharat , they were also emotionally relating to an all-India agitation. When they acted in the name of Mahatma Gandhi, or linked their movement to that of the Congtess, they were identifying with a movement which went beyond the limits of their immediate locality. Fig. 5 Chauri Chaura, 1922. At Chauri Chaura in Gorakhpur, a peaceful demonstration in a bazaar turned into a violent clash with the police. Hearing of the incident, Mahatma Gandhi called a halt to the Non-Cooperation Movement. Reprint 2025-26 Oo eo) = = Nationalism ky Towards Civil Disobedience In February 1922, Mahatma Gandhi decided to withdraw the Non-Cooperation Movement. He felt the movement was turning Lala Lajpat Rai was assaulted by the British police ; ; ; ; during a peaceful demonstration against the violent in many places and satyagrahis needed to be properly trained Simon Commission. He succumbed to injuries before they would be ready for mass struggles. Within the Congress, | that were inflicted on him during the demonstration. some leaders were by now tited of mass struggles and wanted to participate in elections to the provincial councils that had been set up by the Government of India Act of 1919. They felt that it was important to oppose British policies within the councils, argue for reform and also demonstrate that these councils were not truly democratic. C. R. Das and Motilal Nehru formed the Swaraj Party within the Congress to argue for a return to council politics. But younger leaders like Jawaharlal Nehru and Subhas Chandra Bose pressed for more radical mass agitation and for full independence. In such a situation of internal debate and dissension two factors again shaped Indian politics towards the late 1920s. The first was the effect of the worldwide economic depression. Agricultural prices began to fall from 1926 and collapsed after 1930. As the demand for agricultural goods fell and exports declined, peasants found it difficult to sell their harvests and pay their revenue. By 1930, the countryside was in turmoil. Against this background the new Tory government in Britain constituted a Statutory Commission under Sir John Simon. Set up in response to the nationalist movement, the commission was to look into the functioning of the constitutional system in India and suggest changes. The problem was that the commission did not have a single Indian member. They were all British. When the Simon Commission arrived in India in 1928, it was greeted with the slogan Go back Simon . All parties, including the Congress and the Muslim League, participated in the demonstrations. In an effort to win them over, the viceroy, Lord Irwin, announced in October 1929, a vague offer - S = = Oo _ s) a = vu g < 1S) (J) = = S = oO oe Ss i= of dominion status for India in an unspecified future, and a Round Table Conference to discuss a Fig. 6 Meeting