prominent industrialists like Purshottamdas Thakurdas and G. D. Birla, the industrialists attacked colonial control over the Indian economy, and supported the Civil Disobedience Movement when it was first launched. They gave financial assistance and refused to buy or sell imported goods. Most businessmen came to see swataj as a time when colonial restrictions on business would no longer exist and trade and industry would flourish without constraints. But after the failure of the Round Table Conference, business groups were no longer uniformly enthusiastic. They were apprehensive of the spread of militant activities, and worried about prolonged disruption of business, as well as of the growing influence of socialism amongst the younger members of the Congress. The industrial working classes did not participate in the Civil Disobedience Movement in large numbers, except in the Nagpur region. As the industrialists came closer to the Congress, workers stayed aloof. But in spite of that, some workers did participate in the Civil Disobedience Movement, selectively adopting some of the ideas of the Gandhian programme, like boycott of foreign goods, as part of their own movements against low wages and poor working conditions. There were strikes by railway workers in 1930 and dockworkers in 1932. In 1930 thousands of workers in Chotanagput tin mines wore Gandhi caps and participated in protest rallies and boycott campaigns. But the Congress was reluctant to include workers demands as part of its programme of struggle. It felt that this would alienate industrialists and divide the anti imperial forces. Another important feature of the Civil Disobedience Movement was the large-scale participation of women. During Gandhiji s salt march, thousands of women came out of their homes to listen to him. They participated in protest marches, manufactured salt, and Reprint 2025-26 Some important dates 1918-19 Distressed UP peasants organised by Baba Ramchandra. April 1919 Gandhian harta/l against Rowlatt Act; Jallianwala Bagh massacre. January 1921 Non-Cooperation and Khilafat movement launched. February 1922 Chauri Chaura; Gandhiji withdraws NonCooperation movement. May 1924 Alluri Sitarama Raju arrested ending a two-year armed tribal struggle. December 1929 Lahore Congress; Congress adopts the demand for Purna Swaraj . Ambedkar establishes Depressed Classes Association. March 1930 Gandhiji begins Civil Disobedience Movement by breaking salt law at Dandi. March 1931 Gandhiji ends Civil Disobedience Movement. December 1931 Second Round Table Conference. Civil Disobedience re-launched. Fig. 9 - Women join nationalist processions. During the national movement, many women, for the first time in their lives, moved out of their homes on to a public arena. Amongst the marchers you can see many old women, and mothers with children in their arms. picketed foreign cloth and liquor shops. Many went to jail, In urban areas these women were from high-caste families; in rural areas they came from rich peasant households. Moved by Gandhiji s call, they began to see service to the nation as a sacred duty of women. Yet, this increased public role did not necessarily mean any radical change in the way the position of women was visualised. Gandhiji was