merchants and traders refused to trade in foreign goods or finance foreign trade. As the boycott movement spread, and people began discarding imported clothes and wearing only Indian ones, production of Indian textile mills and handlooms went up. But this movement in the cities gradually slowed down for a variety of reasons. Khadi cloth was often more expensive than massproduced mill cloth and poor people could not afford to buy it. How then could they boycott mill cloth for too long? Similarly the boycott of British institutions posed a problem. For the movement to be successful, alternative Indian institutions had to be set up so that they could be used in place of the British ones. These were slow to come up. So students and teachers began trickling back to government schools and lawyers joined back work in g overnment coutts. 2.2 Rebellion in the Countryside From the cities, the Non-Cooperation Movement spread to the countryside. It drew into its fold the struggles of peasants and tribals Reprint 2025-26 vA Differing Strands within the Movement - ~ ' Neww AN Picket rm of demonstration or protest people block the entrance to a shop, factory or office The year is 1921. You are a student in a government-controlled school. Design a poster urging school students to answer Gandhiji s call to join the Non-Cooperation Movement. which were developing in different parts of India in the years after the wart. In Awadh, peasants were led by Baba Ramchandra a sanyasi who had earlier been to Fiji as an indentured labourer. The movement here was against ta/ukdars and landlords who demanded from peasants exorbitantly high rents and a variety of other cesses. Peasants had to do begarand work at landlords farms without any payment. As tenants they had no security of tenure, being regularly evicted so that they could acquire no right over the leased land. The peasant movement demanded reduction of revenue, abolition of begar, and social boycott of oppressive landlords. In many places nai dhobi bandhs were organised by panchayats to deprive landlords of the services of even barbers and washermen. In June 1920, Jawaharlal Nehru began going around the villages in Awadh, talking to the villagers, and trying to understand their grievances. By October, the Oudh Kisan Sabha was set up headed by Jawaharlal Nehru, Baba Ramchandra and a few others. Within a month, over 300 branches had been set up in the villages around the region. So when the NonCooperation Movement began the following year, the effort of the Congress was to integrate the Awadh peasant struggle into the wider struggle. The peasant movement, however, developed in forms that the Congress leadership was unhappy with. As the movement spread in 1921, the houses of ta/ukdars and merchants were attacked, bazaars were looted, and grain hoards were taken over. In many places local leaders told peasants that Gandhiji had declared that no taxes were to be paid and land was to be redistributed among the poor. The name of the