in each of the squares are equal. This is written as AF = AB = BE = FE BE = BC = CD = ED So, all the shorter lines are equal! A convention is followed to represent equal sides. It is done by putting a | on the line. Refer to the rough figure. Using this analysis, can you try constructing it? Remember, all that was asked for is a rectangle that can be divided into two identical squares and with no measurements imposed. To draw the rectangle ACDF, one could assign any length to AF. For example, if we assign AF = 4cm, then what must the length of AC be? % Explore: Can the rectangle now be completed? In fact, one could proceed by drawing AF without even measuring its length using a ruler. We could then construct a line perpendicular to AF that is long enough to contain the other side. As, AB = AF, we need to somehow transfer the length of AF Playing with Constructions to get the point B. How do we do it without a ruler? Can it be done using a compass? Observe, how the length of AF is measured using a compass. Use it to mark out the points B and C, and complete the rectangle. %& With this idea, try constructing a rectangle that can be divided into three identical squares. %& Give the lengths of the sides of a rectangle that cannot be divided into e two identical squares; e three identical squares. ee Construct 1. A Square within a Rectangle Construct a rectangle of sides 8 cm and 4 cm. How will you construct a square inside, as shown in the figure, such that the centre of the square is the same as the centre of the rectangle? mi 88cm ~_ | | Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Hint: Draw a rough figure. What will be the sidelength of the square? What will be the distance between the corners of the square and the outer rectangle? 2. Falling Squares Make sure that the squares are aligned Each is a the way they are Square of shown. side 4cm Now, try this. Square of side 3 cm Square of side 5 cm Square of side 7 cm 3. Shadings Construct this. Choose measurements of your choice. Note that the larger 4-sided figure is a square and so are the smaller ones. Playing with Constructions 4. Square with a Hole Observe that the circular hole is the same as the centre of the square. Hint: Think where the centre of the circle should be. 5. Square with more Holes 6. Square with Curves This is a square with 8 cm sidelengths. Hint: Thinkwhere thetip ofthe compass can be placed to get all the 4 arcs to bulge uniformly from each of the sides. Try it out! 8.5 Exploring Diagonals of Rectangles and Squares Consider arectangle PQORS. JoinPRandQS. pp Q These two lines are called the diagonals of the rectangle.