all the sides are equal in length but is not a square? If such a figure exists, can you construct it? Hints A) Eyes (from 8.1 Artwork and Construct above (page no. 215). Part of the construction is shown earlier. Observe it carefully. You will see two horizontal lines drawn lightly. In geometric constructions, one often constructs supporting curves or figures that are not part of the given figure but help in constructing it. A B The technique to draw the upper and the lower curves of the eye is the same as that used in the figure, A Person . Points A and B are the locations where the tip of the compass is placed when drawing the curves of the eye. Note that the upper curve and the lower curve should together form a symmetrical figure. For this to happen, where should these points A and B be placed? Make a good estimate. Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 LOL OOOeOeeeeeren _E:_9$_C0OTOEOOOEOO 0 S00 0 OOOO OOOO E00 00 OO OO 000 0 OE TOOT ese ese 2.) 20 0 000 OOO OOOO OOOO OOOO Sr SS Try to get the eyes as symmetrical and identical as possible. This might need many trials. B) (From Construct above (page no. 211). For the purpose of construction, let us take the side lengths to be of 5 cm. Consider this figure. B We need to identify only one more point to make this a 4-sided figure. That point, let us call it D, should be 5 cm from both B and C. How can such a point be found? Can any of the ideas used in the House problem be used here? m Allthe points ofa circle are at the same distance from its centre. This distance is called the radius of the circle. m Acompass can be used to construct circles and their parts. m A rough diagram can be useful in planning how to construct a given figure. m A rectangle can be constructed given the lengths of its sides or that of one of its sides and a diagonal. CHAPTER 8 SOLUTIONS Playing with Constructions Page no. 188 Section 8.1 -O Think: Imagine marking all the points of 4 cm distance from the point P. How would they look? Ans. : On joining, they are forming a circle. i a Page no. 191 Section 8.1 Figure it out Q.1. What radius should be taken in the compass to get this half circle? What should be the length of AX? Ans. 2 cm. AX = 4 cm. Q.2. Take a central line of a different length and try to draw the wave on it. Ans. central line Q.3. Try to recreate the figure where the waves are smaller than a half circle (as appearing in the neck of the figure A Person ). The challenge here is to get both the waves to be identical. This may be tricky! Ans. Tw Page no. 193 Section 8.2 -O Q. Which