properties. Playing with Constructions 8.3 Constructing Squares and Rectangles Now, let us start constructing squares and rectangles. How would you construct a square with a side of 6 cm? For help, you can see the following figures. A square PQRS of side length 6 cm is constructed. STEP 1 P 6 cm Q Mark a point to draw a perpendicular to PQ through P. STEP 3 Method 1 S Mark S on the perpendicular such that PS = 6 cm using a ruler. 6cm P 6cm Q Method 2 This can also be done using a compass. Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 eee handatudstutsdabatataas| Can you see why PS should be ; 6 cm long? STEP 4 STEP 5 Draw a perpendicular to line If we had used the compass, then the next segment PQ through Q. point can easily be marked using it! 6cm _ How long is the side RS and what are the measures of 7R and /S? P 6cm Q Playing with Constructions fee Construct 1. Draw a rectangle with sides of length 4 cm and 6 cm. After drawing, check if it satisfies both the rectangle properties. 2. Draw a rectangle of sides 2 cm and 10 cm. After drawing, check if it satisfies both the rectangle properties. 3. Is it possible to construct a 4-sided figure in which ! e all the angles are equal to 90 but Ty. e opposite sides are not equal? 8.4 An Exploration in Rectangles Construct a rectangle ABCD with AB = 7 cm and BC = 4cm. Imagine X to be a point that can be moved anywhere along the side AD. Similarly, imagine Y to be a point that can be moved anywhere along the side BC. Note that X can also be placed on the end point A or D. Similarly, Y can also be placed on the end point B or C. A 5 mm Xx 2cm we Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 When do you think they will be the farthest? What does your Math 4 At which positions will the points X and Y be at their closest? intuition say? Discuss with your classmates. Now, verify your guesses by placing the points X and Y on the sides and measure how near or far they are. The distance between X and Y can be obtained by measuring the length of the line XY. How does the minimum distance between the points X and Y compare to the length of AB? Change the positions of X and Y to check if there are other positions where they are at their nearest or farthest. You could construct multiple copies of the rectangle and try out various positions of X and Y. How will you keep track of the lengths XY for different positions of X and Y? Here is one way of doing it. Suppose here are some of the positions of X and Y that you have considered: e When X is 5 mm