the centre of the square. Hint: Think where the centre of the circle should be. 5. Square with more Holes 6. Square with Curves This is a square with 8 cm sidelengths. Hint: Thinkwhere thetip ofthe compass can be placed to get all the 4 arcs to bulge uniformly from each of the sides. Try it out! 8.5 Exploring Diagonals of Rectangles and Squares Consider arectangle PQORS. JoinPRandQS. pp Q These two lines are called the diagonals of the rectangle. Compare the lengths of the diagonals. First predict the answer. Then construct a ~ D4 ~d C Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 a a 4b 4b A A A A A ~~ QO Aw a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a ~~ a a a a ea rectangle marking the points as shown and measure the diagonals. In rectangle PQRS, the right angles at P and R are referred to as opposite angles. The other pair of opposite angles are the right angles at Q and S. Observe that a diagonal divides each of the pair of opposite angles into two smaller angles. In the figure, the diagonal PR divides angle R into two smaller angles which we simply call g and h. The diagonal also divides angle P into c and d. Are g and h equal? Are c and d equal? First predict the answers, and then measure the angles. What do you observe? Identify pairs of angles that are equal. xo Explore How should the rectangle be constructed so that the diagonal divides the opposite angles into equal parts? How will you record your observations? First, identify the parameters that need to be tracked. They are the sides of the rectangle and the 8 angles formed by the two diagonals. Are there any other measurements that you would want to keep track of? a In your experimentation, did you consider the case when all four sides of the rectangle are equal? That is, did you consider the case of a square? See what happens in this special case! angles and sides? Try to frame and discuss them with % What general laws did you observe with respect to the _' Math \ Talk your classmates. How can one be sure if the laws that you have observed will always be true? Playing with Constructions fee Construct 1. Construct a rectangle in which one of the diagonals divides the opposite angles into 60 and 30 . Solution Let us start with a rough diagram. D c = A A B In what order should its parts be drawn? We will briefly sketch a possible order of construction. STEP 1 A B A B AB is drawn with an arbitrary length. What is the next point that can be located? Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 STEP 2 C /\ a A B STEP 3 We know the line on which D lies. Draw a line through A perpendicular to AB.