made the construction easier? Now try constructing the following figures. Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 % Construct 1. A Person How will you draw this? This figure has two components. You might have figured out a way of drawing the first part. For drawing the second part, see this. The challenge here is to find out where to place the tip of the compass and the radius to be taken for drawing this curve. You can fix a radius in the compass and try placing the tip of the Playing with Constructions compass in different locations to see which point works for getting the curve. Use your estimate where to keep the tip. 2. Wavy Wave Construct this. As the length of the central line is not specified, we can take it to be of any length. Let us take AB to be the central line such that the length of AB is 8 cm. We write this as AB = 8 cm. Here, the first wave is drawn as a half circle. < __> ? <<. << 8 cm % Figure it Out 1. What radius should be taken in the compass to get this half circle? What should be the length of AX? 2. Take a central line of a different length and try to draw the wave on it. 3. Try to recreate the figure where the waves aresmallerthana | half circle (as appearing in the neck of the figure, A Person ). The challenge here is to get both the waves to be identical. [) This may be tricky! Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 3. Eyes How do you draw these eyes with a compass? <C3e><e> For a hint, go to the end of the chapter. % Make other artwork of your choice with a ruler and a compass. 8.2 Squares and Rectangles Now, let us look at some basic figures having straight lines in their boundary. iY || Fig. 8.3 What shapes are these? Yes, these are our familiar squares and rectangles. But what makes them squares and rectangles? Consider this rectangle ABCD. The points A, B, Cand D are the corners of the rectangle. Lines AB, BC, CD and DA are its sides. Its angles are ZA, ZB, ZC and ZD. The blue sides AB and CD are called opposite sides, as they lie opposite to Fig. 8.4 each other. Likewise, AD and BC is the other pair of opposite sides. A B Playing with Constructions Recall that, in a rectangle: Ri) The opposite sides are equal in length, and R2) All the angles are 90 . As in the case of rectangles, the corners and sides are defined for a square in the same manner. A square satisfies the following two properties: S1) All the sides are equal, and S2) All the angles are 90 . See the rectangle in Fig. 8.4 and the name given to it: ABCD. This rectangle can also be named in other ways BCDA, CDAB, DABC, ADCB, DCBA,