of X from A Distance of Y from B Length of XY Ans. Distance of X from A Distance of Y from B Length of XY 5 mm 3 cm 7.4cm lcm lcm 7cm 2cm 4cm 7.3 cm [3] Page No. 199 -O Q. Have you checked what happens to the length XY when X and Y are placed at the same distance away from A and B, respectively? For example, as in the cases like these: Distance of X from A Distance of Y from B Length of XY 5mm 5 cm lcm lcm lcm 5 mm 4cm And so on. Ans. Distance of X from A Distance of Y from B Length of XY 5mm 5mm 7 cm lcm lcm 7 cm lcm 5 mm lcm 5 mm 7cm Page no. 199 O Q. In each of these cases, observe i. how the length XY compares to that of AB and ii. the shape of the 4-sided figure ABYX. Ans. i. XY = AB il. ABYX< is a rectangle Os Q. How does the farthest distance between X and Y compare with the length of AC? BD? Ans. The farthest distance between X and Y is equal to AC or BD. Construct Q. Construct a rectangle that can be divided into 3 identical squares as shown in the figure. Ans. Hint: Take the length of the rectangle three times its breadth. Page no. 201 :O Give the lengths of the sides of a rectangle that cannot be divided into two identical squares; three identical squares Ans. e Lengths of sides of a rectangle that cannot be divided into two identical squares: Length = 4 cm and Breadth = 2.5cm (Try for more!) e Length of sides of a rectangle that cannot be divided into three identical squares: Length = 7cm and Breadth = 2cm (Try for other possibilities.) [4] Page no. 201 Q.4. Square with a Hole Ans. The centre of the circle should be at the meeting point of two line segments connecting opposite vertices. Page no. 204 Section 8.5 -O Explore Q. How should the rectangle be constructed so that the diagonal divides the opposite angles into equal parts? Ans. The rectangle should be constructed in such a manner that the two adjacent sides are equal 1.e. the rectangle becomes a square. Page no. 211 Construct Q.1. Construct a rectangle in which one of the diagonals divides the opposite angles into 50 and 40 . Ans. A ArbitraryLength B Q.2. Construct a rectangle in which one of the diagonals divides the opposite angles into 45 and 45 . What do you observe about the sides? Ans. [5] Q.3. Construct a rectangle one of whose sides is 4 cm and the diagonal is of length 8 cm. Ans. |_| LN 4cm p Q Q.4. Construct a rectangle one of whose sides is 3 cm and the diagonal is of length 7 cm. Ans. [6] Page no. 215 Construct Q.1. Construct a bigger house in which all the