sides are equal in length, and R2) All the angles are 90 . As in the case of rectangles, the corners and sides are defined for a square in the same manner. A square satisfies the following two properties: S1) All the sides are equal, and S2) All the angles are 90 . See the rectangle in Fig. 8.4 and the name given to it: ABCD. This rectangle can also be named in other ways BCDA, CDAB, DABC, ADCB, DCBA, CBAD and BADC. So, can a rectangle be named using any combination of the labels around its corners? No! For example, it cannot be named ABDC or ACBD. Can you see what names are allowed and what names are not? In a valid name, the corners occur in an order of travel around the rectangle, starting from any corner. % Which of the following is not a name for this square? 1. PQSR S y 2. SPOR 3. RSPQ 4. QRSP , 0 Rotated Squares and Rectangles Here is a square piece of paper having all its sides equal in length and all angles equal to 90 . It is rotated as shown in the figure. Is it still a square? Let us check if the rotated paper still satisfies the properties of a square. e Are all the sides still equal? Yes. e Are all the angles still 90 ? Yes. Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Rotating a square does not change its lengths and angles. Therefore, this rotated figure satisfies both the properties of a square and so, it is a square. By the same reasoning, a rotated rectangle is still a rectangle. wo Figure it Out 1. Draw the rectangle and four squares configuration (shown in Fig. 8.3) on a dot paper. What did you do to recreate this figure so that the four squares are placed symmetrically around the rectangle? Discuss with your classmates. 2. Identify if there are any squares in this collection. Use measurements if needed. A B C D %e& Think: Is it possible to reason out if the sides are equal or not, and if the angles are right or not without using any measuring instruments in the above figure? Can we do this by only looking at the position of corners in the dot grid? 3. Draw at least 3 rotated squares and rectangles on a dot grid. Draw them such that their corners are on the dots. Verify if the squares and rectangles that you have drawn satisfy their respective properties. Playing with Constructions 8.3 Constructing Squares and Rectangles Now, let us start constructing squares and rectangles. How would you construct a square with a side of 6 cm? For help, you can see the following figures. A square PQRS of side length 6 cm is constructed. STEP 1 P 6 cm Q Mark a point to draw a perpendicular to PQ through P. STEP 3 Method 1 S Mark S on the perpendicular such that PS = 6 cm