start with a rough diagram. D c = A A B In what order should its parts be drawn? We will briefly sketch a possible order of construction. STEP 1 A B A B AB is drawn with an arbitrary length. What is the next point that can be located? Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 STEP 2 C /\ a A B STEP 3 We know the line on which D lies. Draw a line through A perpendicular to AB. C V \ a A B Now ZA is divided into two angles. One measures 60 . Check what the other angle is. There are at least two ways of finding the point D e One uses the fact that all the angles of a rectangle are right angles. e The other uses the fact that opposite sides are equal. Playing with Constructions STEP 4 Method 1 : A Draw a line perpendicular to BC at C to get the point D. Method 2 Using a compass, mark the point D such that AD = BC. Join CD to get the required rectangle. We have seen how to construct rectangles when their sides are given. But what do we do if a side and a diagonal is given? Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 2. Construct a rectangle where one of its sides is 5 cm and the length of a diagonal is 7 cm. Solution A B Let us draw a rough diagram. Let us decide the steps of construction. Which line can be drawn first? D 5cm C STEP 1 The base CD measuring length 5 cm can be easily constructed. Next? STEP 2 Draw a perpendicular to line DC at the point C. Let us call this line LL D 5 cm Cc This is easy as we know that this line is perpendicular to the base. The point B should be somewhere on this line I. %e& How do we spot it? What else do we know about the position of B? We know that it is at a distance of 7 cm from the point D. Playing with Constructions One of the ways of marking B is by taking a ruler and trying to move it around to get a point on line / that is 7 cm from point D. However, this requires trial and error. There is another efficient method which doesn t involve trial and error. Forthis,insteadoftryingtogetthatonerequiredpointofdistance 7 cm from D, let us explore a way of getting all the points of distance 7 cm from D. We know what this shape is! STEP 3 Method 1 Construct a circle of radius 7 cm with point D as the centre. Can you spot the point B here? Remember that it is 7 cm away from point D and on the line l. Consider the point at which the circle and the line intersect. What is its distance from point D? If needed, check your figure. What do you observe? The point where the