Lif] | | a | PLAYING WITH Oreo CONSTRUCTIONS & Lif] oA 0674CHOS 8.1 Artwork Observe the following figures and try drawing them freehand. Fig. 8.1 Reprint 2025-26 Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Now, arm yourself with a ruler and a compass. Let us explore if we can draw these figures with these tools and get familiar with a compass. Observe the way a compass is made. What can one draw with the compass? Explore! Do you know what curves are? They are any shapes that can be drawn on paper with a pencil, and include straight lines, circles and other figures as shown below: OY Mark a point P in your notebook. Then, mark as many points as possible, in different directions, that are 4 cm away from P. % Think: Imagine marking all the points of 4 cm distance from the point P. How would they look? Try to draw it and verify if it is correct by taking some points on the curve and checking if their distances from P are indeed 4 cm. Explore, if you have not already done so, and see if a compass can be used for this a purpose. SS ao You can start by marking a few points a of distance 4 cm from P using the compass. a How can this be done? pt---- qo 0 Playing with Constructions You will have to open up the compass against a ruler (see Fig. 8.2) such that the distance between the tip of the compass and the pencil is 4cm. % Now, try to get the full curve. Hint: Keep the point of the compass fixed moving only the pencil. What is the shape of the curve? It is a circle! Take a point on the circle. What will be its distance from P equal to 4cm, less than 4 cm or greater than 4 cm? Similarly, what will be the distance between P and another point on the circle? As shown in the figure, the point P is called the centre of the circle and the distance between the centre and any point on the circle is called the radius of the circle. yet irra |! a Wa ner |! nt 012 3 4 5 6 7 Litihttibistethibnlttaibttt, Fig. 8.2 Having explored the use of a compass, go ahead and recreate the images in Fig. 8.1. Can you make the figures look as good as the figures shown there? Try again if you want to! Also, has the use of instruments made the construction easier? Now try constructing the following figures. Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 % Construct 1. A Person How will you draw this? This figure has two components. You might have figured out a way of drawing the first part. For drawing the second part, see this. The challenge here is to find out where to place the tip of the compass and the radius to be taken for drawing this curve. You can fix a radius in