This construction can be further simplified. How? If you have guessed that this can be done by the use of compass, you are right! Go ahead and explore how the point A can be located without trial and error. There is a similarity between the problem of finding point A in this problem and point B at step 3 of the second solved example of the previous section (see page 209). STEP 2 5 cm Tt +>- @_|\_ _5 cm - - > Draw a curve that has all its points of 5 cm from the point B; the circle centred at B should be with 5 cm radius. Does this help in spotting the point A? Construct and explore in the figure. The point A can be located by finding the correct point on the circle that is of distance 5 cm from the point C. Again, this can be done using a ruler. But can we use a compass for this? Playing with Constructions STEP 3 Method 1 Take a radius of 5 cm in the compass and with C as the centre, draw a circle. w Sr +>- @_\ _5 cm -- > Are you able to spot the point A? Check the figure in your notebook. What do you observe? See the point at which both the circles intersect. How far is it from the point B? How far is it from C? Thus, this is the point A! Think Was it necessary to draw two full circles to get the point A? We only needed part of both the circles. Method 2 So the point A could have been obtained just by drawing arcs of radius 5 cm from points B and C. Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 << 5 cm _> Join A to B and A to C by straight lines. Having obtained point A, what remains is the construction of the remaining arc. How do we do it? Can we use the fact that A is of distance 5 cm from both B and C? STEP 4 Take 5 cm radius in the compass and from A, draw the arc touching B and C as shown in the figure. The house is ready! Playing with Constructions es Construct Construct a bigger house in which all the sides are of length 7 cm. 2. Trytorecreate A Person , Wavy Wave , and Eyes from the section Artwork , using ideas involved in the House construction. 3. Is there a 4-sided figure in which all the sides are equal in length but is not a square? If such a figure exists, can you construct it? Hints A) Eyes (from 8.1 Artwork and Construct above (page no. 215). Part of the construction is shown earlier. Observe it carefully. You will see two horizontal lines drawn lightly. In geometric constructions, one often constructs supporting curves or figures that are not part of the given figure but help in constructing it. A B The technique to draw