7 cm from D. We know what this shape is! STEP 3 Method 1 Construct a circle of radius 7 cm with point D as the centre. Can you spot the point B here? Remember that it is 7 cm away from point D and on the line l. Consider the point at which the circle and the line intersect. What is its distance from point D? If needed, check your figure. What do you observe? The point where the circle intersects the line / is the required point B. Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Method 2 To locate the point B, was it necessary to draw the entire circle? We can see that only the arc near the line lis needed. So, the third step can also be done as shown in the figure below. ~ Having marked the three points of the rectangle, we only need to complete it. Recall that we were in a similar situation in the previous problem also. We saw two methods of completing the rectangle from here. We could follow any one of those methods. STEP 4 Construct perpendiculars to DC and BC passing through D and B, respectively. The point where these lines intersect is the fourth point A. Check if ABCD is indeed a rectangle satisfying properties R1 and R2. Playing with Constructions es Construct 1. Construct a rectangle in which one of the diagonals divides the opposite angles into 50 and 40 . 2. Construct a rectangle in which one of the diagonals divides the opposite angles into 45 and 45 . What do you observe about the sides? 3. Construct a rectangle one of whose sides is 4 cm and the diagonal is of length 8 cm. 4. Construct a rectangle one of whose sides is 3 cm and the diagonal is of length 7 cm. 8.6 Points Equidistant from Two Given Points ek Construct A House Recreate this figure. Note that all the lines forming the border of the house are of length 5 cm. Solution The first task is to identify in what sequence the lines and curve will have to be drawn. STEP 1 B Cc 5 cm 5 cm 1cm N D E Ganita Prakash | Grade 6 Can you complete the figure? Try! We need to locate the point A that is of distance 5 cm from the points B and C. You might have realised that this can be done using a ruler. However, this leads to a lot of trial and error. This construction can be further simplified. How? If you have guessed that this can be done by the use of compass, you are right! Go ahead and explore how the point A can be located without trial and error. There is a similarity between the problem of finding point A in this problem and point B at step 3 of the second solved example of the previous section (see page 209). STEP 2 5 cm Tt +>- @_|\_ _5 cm